



Network Working Group                                          L. Feeney
Internet-Draft                                        Uppsala University
Intended status: Informational                                  V. Fodor
Expires: May 3, 2018                                                 KTH
                                                        October 30, 2017


          Inter-network Coexistence in the Internet of Things
                  draft-feeney-t2trg-inter-network-01

Abstract

   The breadth of IoT applications implies that there will be many
   diverse, administratively independent networks operating in the same
   physical location.  In many cases, these networks will use unlicensed
   spectrum, due to its low cost and ease of deployment.  However, this
   spectrum is becoming increasingly crowded.  IoT networks will
   therefore be subject to wireless interference, both from similar
   networks and from networks that use the wireless channel in very
   different ways.

   High-density, heterogeneous wireless environments present formidable
   challenges for network coexistence.  The PHY and MAC layers are
   primarily responsible for defining how radios use the channel.  But
   higher layer protocols are also a party to adverse interactions
   between networks.  To date, there have been few performance studies
   that fully reflect this aspect of the future IoT operating
   environment, particularly with respect to protocol behavior and
   network-scale interactions.

   This document describes key challenges for coexistence and highlights
   some recent research results showing the impact of protocol level
   interactions on network performance.  It identifies two opportunities
   for the IRTF T2TRG community.  The first is to define best practices
   for performance evaluation and protocol design in the context of
   network coexistence.  The second is to investigate the use of higher
   layer protocols to actively participate in managing network
   coexistence.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 3, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  IoT interaction challenges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Independence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Resource limitations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.4.1.  Radio and PHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.4.2.  Network structures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.4.3.  Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Interaction behaviors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1.  WiFi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.2.  IEEE 802.15.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  MAC layer interactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Network coexistence in the IRTF/IETF context  . . . . . . . .  10
     4.1.  Protocol evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.2.  Mitigation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16






Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


1.  Introduction

   An IoT application is a set of wireless devices that act together to
   perform some sensing and control function.  Most applications also
   provide a user interface, such as a mobile app or cloud-based
   service.  In general, each application is deployed independently of
   any other applications that may be operating in the area and forms
   its own separate, cryptographically isolated network.

   An enormous range of IoT applications are expected to become
   pervasive in daily life.  Networks will be installed in public
   spaces, businesses, and residences by a wide range of individual,
   commercial, and government actors.  As a result, there will be many
   diverse, administratively independent networks operating in the same
   physical location.  For example, a future home environment may
   include IoT applications for security, heating and cooling, elder
   care, air quality monitoring, personal health and fitness, smart home
   appliances, structural monitoring, lighting, utilities, and
   entertainment.

   Many of these networks will use unlicensed spectrum due to low cost
   and simplicity of deployment for both the user and developer.  In
   unlicensed spectrum, there is no authority that has a management
   relationship with (or even knows about) all of the potentially
   interfering networks that can be present in some location.  This
   means that there is no entity that can coordinate networks' use of
   the shared wireless channel.  Networks will therefore experience
   interference caused by transmissions from devices belonging to other
   networks.

   The PHY and MAC layers have primary responsibility for ensuring that
   devices share the channel efficiently, while spectrum regulations
   limit devices' output power and overall channel utilization.  But the
   MAC layer can only explicitly coordinate devices within a single
   network.  It provides only limited protection from other networks,
   which may have very different transmission footprints over time,
   spectrum or physical space.

   Network coexistence is mainly evaluated in terms of PHY layer and
   radio hardware resilience to interference.  This is generally based
   on analytic modeling of the probability of successful packet
   reception for varying SNIR conditions and on carefully controlled
   measurements of interacting RF waveforms.  (See [NIST] for a
   discussion of relevant issues and [SUM11] for an example of such an
   analysis for IEEE 802.15.4g.)

   Analytic modeling of interactions between MAC layers is much harder,
   because the MAC itself plays an active role in transmission timing



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   and parameters.  Interfering networks are therefore usually modeled
   as increasing the intensity of some statistical process representing
   noise or loss.  Other studies are based on simulation or testbed
   measurements of simple scenarios.  The research literature contains a
   number of such studies, especially for IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.15.4.
   (See [SURVEY] and [SURVEY2] for an overview.)

   But there are very few studies that evaluate complex, heterogeneous
   interference scenarios, particularly with regard to protocol behavior
   and network-scale interactions.  Most existing solutions rely on low
   IoT traffic loads and careful channel selection to achieve adequate
   performance.  But recent work [WETZ17] demonstrates that real world
   instances of IoT interference require considerable effort to
   diagnose.

   This document explores key challenges for network coexistence in
   future IoT environments and presents some recent research results.
   These suggest that protocol level interactions can significantly
   affect network performance, even when the channel is not heavily
   loaded.  Higher layer protocols will therefore need to be aware of
   the potential impact of inter-network interference and avoid
   contributing to adverse interactions.  We argue that network
   coexistence in future IoT environments is not yet well understood and
   identify possible T2TRG roles in addressing this issue.

2.  IoT interaction challenges

   Widespread deployment of diverse IoT applications presents four main
   challenges: 1) scale 2) lack of a trust relationship between
   independently deployed networks 3) resource limitations, especially
   battery capacity 4) diversity of application requirements and channel
   utilization behavior.

2.1.  Scale

   As IoT becomes pervasive, there will be many independent networks
   operating in any given location.  Devices will experience high levels
   of both homogeneous and heterogeneous radio interference.

   Since networks use different kinds of radios and have different
   wireless coverage areas, their topologies will overlap with each
   other in complex ways.  Interference will therefore affect not only
   individual wireless links, but also protocols operating at network
   scale.

   Interaction scenarios will also be highly dynamic, with mobility and
   user activity leading to frequent changes in the set of interfering
   devices.



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


2.2.  Independence

   In unlicensed spectrum, there is not necessarily any basis for a
   trust relationship between networks.  Networks with overlapping
   wireless coverage may well have been deployed by unrelated actors.
   There is no single authority that has an administrative relationship
   with all of the potentially interfering networks in any given
   location.  This means that there is no entity that all networks can
   trust to coordinate their access to the shared channel.

   Devices within any one network will be able to authenticate
   themselves to each other and their own administrator (usually a non-
   expert user).  But the network itself may not have any meaningful
   external identity.  Even if two networks can exchange information,
   there is no obvious way for each network to determine whether the
   other is trustworthy with respect to some coexistence mechanism.

2.3.  Resource limitations

   IoT networks are severely resource constrained in many respects,
   including channel capacity, energy, hardware capabilities and cost.

   The large number of devices sharing the wireless channel naturally
   limits the capacity available to each device.  In addition, many
   devices use low bit-rate radios, which further reduces the
   communication capacity.  (Note, however, that adverse interactions
   between networks can occur even in cases where the channel is only
   lightly used.)

   For energy-harvesting and battery-powered devices, maximizing
   lifetime is essential.  Protocol design is dominated by the need to
   minimize device activity and especially by the need to keep the
   energy-hungry radio turned off as much as possible, while still
   ensuring needed connectivity.  Even sensing the channel conditions is
   an expensive operation.  This limits networks' ability to observe and
   adapt to the behavior of their neighbors.

   Finally, for many IoT applications, devices must be low cost and
   easily deployed and managed by non-expert users.  They often have
   very limited memory and CPU resources.  These factors constrain the
   design space and limit the complexity of proposed solutions.

2.4.  Diversity

   Even networks that use the same radio hardware and protocols will
   interfere with each other.  But the diversity of IoT radios,
   protocols and applications creates additional challenges.  Even
   characterizing the space of possible interactions may be challenging:



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   Protocols can be anything from freely available, to consortia-driven
   standards such as ZigBee or WirelessHART, to completely proprietary.

   This diversity is driven by the diversity of IoT applications.
   Applications will differ significantly in their devices'
   communication range and the overall network coverage area.  They will
   vary in the number of devices and traffic load.  They will have
   different requirements for latency and reliability.  And they will
   use different energy sources and have different requirements on
   energy efficiency and lifetime.  To meet these requirements,
   applications will use a wide variety of radios, protocols and network
   structures.

2.4.1.  Radio and PHY

   Different radio technologies divide the spectrum into channels
   differently: In the 2.4GHz unlicensed band, for example, IEEE 802.11
   has up to 14 overlapping channels, while IEEE 802.15.4 and
   BluetoothLE have 16 and 40 non-overlapping ones.  Radios also use a
   variety of modulation techniques at the PHY layer to define how data
   is encoded on the channel as RF energy.

   This means that there are many different ways that RF energy is
   distributed over time and spectrum.  As a result, it may not be
   possible for channel sensing mechanisms to reliably detect the
   presence of potentially interfering transmissions or identify the
   source of interference and packet loss.

   Each PHY layer makes different tradeoffs between transmit power,
   communication range, bit-rate, bandwidth, energy consumption and
   resilience.  In sub-GHz spectrum, for example, IEEE 802.15.4g/Wi-SUN
   (smart utility network) provides 50-200 kbps bit-rates with ranges of
   > 1000m.  Very low power EnOcean devices provide similar bit-rates,
   but ranges of < 100m.  By contrast, LoRa provides bit-rates of at
   most a few kbps, but can obtain 10km of range.  Differences in bit-
   rate and frame size mean that packet transmit times can range from <
   10 ms to > 200 ms.  Radios operating in 2.4GHz, such as IEEE
   802.15.4, IEEE 802.11 and Bluetooth, show similar diversity.

2.4.2.  Network structures

   Along with different kinds of radios, different kinds of network
   structures can be used to meet application requirements for density
   and coverage area.  The most common structure is the star topology,
   where all devices communicate directly with a controller.  Networks
   can also cover larger areas or achieve higher reliability by using
   multi-hop forwarding over various topologies, such as trees or
   directed acyclic graphs, cluster trees, and meshes.



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   These structures affect how transmissions within a network are
   correlated with each other in time and space, such as forwarding a
   frame across a mesh.  It can also affect interactions between
   networks, particularly networks whose radios have very different
   coverage areas.  For example, a long-range device belonging to one
   network may be located in the midst of a mesh of short-range devices
   belonging to another network.

2.4.3.  Protocols

   The MAC layer defines how senders coordinate their transmissions
   within a network.  Like the PHY layer, different MAC layers create
   different distributions of RF energy in time and (for channel hopping
   protocols) spectrum.

   CSMA-based (channel sensing and backoff) protocols can provide some
   protection from external transmissions, since they defer to any
   ongoing transmission that they detect.  Conflicts due to hidden
   terminals can occur even within a single network, but differences
   between radio technologies and network structures may exacerbate the
   problem.  In addition, MAC timing parameters, such as backoff times,
   are generally proportional to bit-rate and frame transmit times.
   Timing incompatibilities between interfering senders can reduce the
   effectiveness of backoff and retransmissions in heterogeneous
   environments.

   TDMA-based (transmission schedule) protocols can be more efficient in
   their use of the channel and energy than CSMA protocols.  But because
   networks construct their transmission schedules independently, they
   may allocate transmission slots that conflict with each other.  Since
   senders rely on their assigned schedule, such conflicts can be
   costly.

   Minimizing energy consumption is often the absolute priority for IoT
   design.  It is necessary to keep the radio turned off as much as
   possible, while still ensuring connectivity.  As with MAC protocols
   (with which they are sometimes integrated), there are a variety of
   approaches to power saving.  With synchronous methods, devices wake
   up according to a schedule that ensures that senders and receivers
   are awake at the same time (as in IEEE 802.15.4 PANs or TSCH).
   Asynchronous methods allow devices to coordinate their wake up
   schedules on-demand (as in ContikiMAC).

   Coordinating the duty cycles of a sender and receiver imposes strict
   timing constraints on the radio operations.  As with the PHY and MAC,
   each power save protocol creates its own distribution of RF energy
   over time.  Depending on application requirements and tradeoffs for




Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   latency and battery lifetime, this could be on timescale of < 1s to >
   1000s.

   IoT networks usually use IP(v6), but there is also considerable
   diversity in higher layer protocols, both open and proprietary.
   Routing protocols make different tradeoffs between latency,
   reliability, energy efficiency and overhead, depending on the
   application requirements.  The operation of the routing protocol also
   affects the distribution of RF energy in physical space, as frames
   are forwarded toward a root or across a mesh.  The routing protocol
   may also react to the presence of interference by attempting to re-
   route its traffic.

   Higher layer protocols are largely abstracted away from the behavior
   of individual wireless links.  They use a variety of mechanisms to
   maintain communication performance under conditions of loss and
   delay, including retransmissions, multi-path communication, and
   application-specific adaptations.

   Finally, the variety of transport, transfer and application protocols
   used in IoT networks reflects the diversity of use cases: The RESTful
   model is central for IoT applications based on web services
   [I-D.keranen-t2trg-rest-iot].  Wireless sensing applications often
   use in-network data processing and aggregation.  Industrial IoT
   applications emphasize low latency and reliability.  Wide-area IoT
   networks collect small amounts of data from a very large number of
   devices.

3.  Interaction behaviors

   Radios using the same spectrum can differ by two orders of magnitude
   in terms of communication range, bit-rate, bandwidth and transmit
   power.  Different PHY and MAC layers create different distributions
   of RF energy over time, spectrum, and physical space.  The variety of
   possible interactions between them may lead to patterns of loss and
   delay that are difficult for higher layer protocols to predict or
   manage.  In addition, higher layer protocols for power saving,
   routing and data communication create their own distributions of
   network activity over time and space.  Interactions between networks
   therefore occur at multiple scales.  This suggests that inter-network
   interactions are a potential issue at all layers of the protocol
   stack.

   How will sub-GHz LPWAN networks such as LoRa and SigFox, whose base
   stations cover wide areas, interact with possibly large numbers of
   smaller networks using IEEE 802.15.4g/WiSUN or EnOCean radios?  What
   happens if two or more independent networks using CoAP over RPL over
   6LowPAN (or 6TiSCH) are operating in the same room?  What happens if



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   a beacon-enabled PAN (or a ZigBee or ContikiMAC network) is thrown
   into the mix?  And some BluetoothLE?  Especially in a WiFi heavy
   environment, the value of channel hopping for interference mitigation
   in IEEE 802.15.4 networks may be limited.

   To date, there have been very few studies that examine network
   performance under realistic - dense, heterogeneous - interference
   scenarios.  Some existing observations and results are noted here.

3.1.  WiFi

   Interference between WiFi networks is widely observed, especially in
   2.4GHz spectrum in dense residential and urban areas, where there are
   many independently deployed networks and large amounts of traffic.

   WiFi presents a strongly homogeneous interference environment.  WiFi
   networks consist of an AP and associated devices that communicate
   directly with their AP.  WiFi also uses a CSMA-based MAC, which means
   that senders to defer to any ongoing WiFi transmission, regardless of
   its source.  Traffic is dominated by media streaming, which is
   supported by adaptive mechanisms at the client and server, as well as
   throughout the protocol stack.

   Despite these simplifying factors, poor WiFi performance is a problem
   in dense urban and residential areas, even noted by the general
   public.  This does not bode well for the much large number of
   heterogeneous networks deployed in the future IoT environment.

3.2.  IEEE 802.15.4

   A common scenario in 2.4GHz spectrum will involve high-power, high-
   traffic WiFi networks impacting networks based on low power, low bit-
   rate radios, such as IEEE 802.15.4.  The research literature includes
   a range of mitigation strategies directed to specific cases.  (See
   [SURVEY] and [SURVEY2] for an overview.)

   Practical existing solutions are mostly based on IEEE 802.15.4
   devices identifying and using the least interfered channels, either
   statically or by channel hopping.  But in areas where there is a lot
   of WiFi traffic, there may be very few such channels.  WiFi
   conventionally uses non-overlapping WiFi channels 1, 6, and 11,
   leaving just three minimally interfered IEEE 802.15.4 channels.  As a
   result, low power IoT networks operating in these areas may be
   crowded into a very small number of "good" channels.







Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


3.3.  MAC layer interactions

   Recent research suggests that protocol level interactions can lead to
   severe performance degradation, even when the channel is not heavily
   loaded.  While these studies focus on various IEEE 802.15.4 MAC
   layers, the results suggest broader implications for protocol design.

   [F3G15] and [FF16] show that IEEE 802.15.4 beacon-enabled PANs can
   experience severe disruptions due to protocol level interactions.
   This includes behaviors such as short-term oscillations in throughput
   and extended periods of disconnectivity - even when the channel
   itself is only lightly loaded.  Similarly, [YTB17] shows that
   interfering IEEE 802.15.4 6TiSCH-based networks experience packet
   loss and extended blackout periods, as well as increased energy
   consumption.  Such outages are likely to affect the operation of
   higher layer protocols.

   These behaviors appear to be due to a combination of timing
   rigidities in the MAC protocol, periodicity in the radio duty cycle,
   and clock drift between networks.  More generally, battery
   constraints force devices to spend most of their time with their
   radios turned off.  Senders and receivers therefore need some way to
   coordinate their radio wake up times so that they can exchange
   packets.  These mechanisms often depend heavily on careful timing of
   radio operations, instead of (or in addition to) explicit control
   traffic.  This timing dependence makes networks more sensitive to
   disruption than might be expected from just considering overall
   channel utilization and collision probabilities.  In addition, clock
   drift results in networks' synchronizing and desynchronizing with
   each other, which creates dynamic effects.

4.  Network coexistence in the IRTF/IETF context

   Network coexistence remains an open research problem, particularly
   with respect to protocol behavior and network-scale interactions.  We
   identify several areas of relevance for IETF/IRTF activities.  In
   particular, we highlight a role for T2TRG in 1) developing and
   advocating best practices for protocol design and performance
   evaluation and 2) speculative research into the possibility of higher
   layer protocols actively contributing to network coexistence.

4.1.  Protocol evaluation

   To date, there have been few studies that fully reflect the
   complexity of the future IoT operating environment.  In practice,
   there is also a lack of testbed and simulation tools that support the
   necessary scale and diversity of protocols and hardware to facilitate




Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   such work.  The community therefore does not yet have a good
   understanding of performance and reliability of IoT protocols.

   Performance evaluation of IoT protocols should consider whether they
   will perform acceptably in the presence of diverse networks operating
   in the same spectrum.  In the IETF/IRTF context, this includes
   adaptation done by 6lo, 6TiSCH and LPWAN groups, as well as routing,
   transfer and application protocols, such as RPL and CoAP.  Moreover,
   networks using IETF protocols will share spectrum with networks using
   protocols from a variety of other open and proprietary sources.  It
   will be important to develop methodologies for investigating these
   interactions as well.

   T2TRG can contribute to the development of and advocacy for best
   practices for protocol design and performance evaluation.

4.2.  Mitigation strategies

   Network coexistence is likely to rely primarily on improving
   resilience to interference in the PHY and MAC layer, as well as
   higher layer protocols.  More speculatively, there may be
   opportunities for higher layer protocols to actively participate in
   interference mitigation, by sharing information about their operation
   and even by explicit coordination between networks.

   When two networks use the same PHY layer, it is possible for frames
   transmitted by devices in one network to be successfully received by
   devices in other networks.  These frames cannot be authenticated and
   are usually discarded at the MAC layer.  But they might provide a way
   for networks to exchange signaling information that can be handled as
   IP packets at the network layer, even if they have very different
   protocol stacks otherwise.  Such a mechanism could allow devices to
   describe their expected channel utilization patterns, for example.

   Alternatively, many applications have some form of connectivity to
   the network infrastructure, often as part of the user interface.
   This might be a way to provide access to additional resources or to
   establish a trust relationship.  A coordination mechanism could be
   based on information exchange via some trusted cloud-based service,
   for example.  The inspiration here is from cognitive radio solutions
   where secondary users obtain information about activity of primary
   users from trusted sources.

   However, this is very much an open research area and there are
   substantial challenges in developing such mechanisms:

   1) There is an enormous diversity of radios, channel access methods
   and utilization patterns that might need to be described.  It is not



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   clear what information should be signaled or what actions a receiver
   should take in response.

   2) Battery lifetime, channel capacity, and device CPU and memory
   resources continue to be significant limitations.  In particular, the
   radio duty cycle is highly constrained, limiting both sensing and
   communication.

   3) Any cooperative mechanism must operate effectively in the absence
   of any administrative or trust relationship between networks.
   Alternatively, there must be some way to establish an appropriate
   level of trust.  This presents a significant challenge to the
   practical implementation of cooperative mechanisms proposed in the
   literature.  (See Security Considerations below.)

   4) The privacy implications of networks sharing information about
   their activity must be carefully considered.  (See Security
   Considerations.)

   Despite the challenges, this topic seems particularly amenable to
   standards and interoperability-oriented approaches enabled by IRTF
   T2TRG.  There may be synergy with IRTF T2TRG work in IoT semantic
   interoperability: Can IoT networks describe not only the 'things'
   they connect, but also themselves?  There may also be synergy with
   IETF activities (PLUS) in making signaling information available
   within encrypted flows.

5.  Security Considerations

   An overview of security challenges in IoT environments is given in
   [I-D.irtf-t2trg-iot-seccons].  The current document focuses on
   coexistence between independently administrated networks operating in
   the same location.  The biggest security challenge for managing
   network interactions is that such networks do not necessarily have
   any basis for a trust relationship.

   Regulations concerning unlicensed spectrum only control radio
   behaviors such as transmit power and channel utilization.  They do
   not mandate the use of any specific protocol, nor is it possible to
   enforce that a network participates correctly in some particular
   coexistence mechanism.

   Most wireless protocols adapt their behavior to channel conditions to
   some extent, such as CSMA backoff or channel blacklisting.  But the
   more a network changes its behavior in response to small amounts of
   information from an untrusted source, the more leverage an attacker
   has to disrupt it.  Similarly, the more information about its future
   behavior a network provides to an untrusted destination, the easier



Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   it is for an attacker to disrupt it.  The risk is further exacerbated
   by the high energy cost of listening to the channel to directly
   observe the behavior of other networks.

   Any proposed solution will therefore need to be resilient to the
   possibility of incompatible, oblivious, selfish, or even hostile
   networks when designing a coexistence mechanism.  This is especially
   true for methods in which two networks actively coordinate their use
   of the shared channel.  At a minimum, participating in information
   exchange should not substantially increase vulnerability to
   disruption in the case of a malicious (or merely incompatible) actor.

   In addition, networks that try to be friendly toward each other may
   disclose substantial information about their operation.  There are
   privacy issues associated with IoT networks making such information
   visible, because of their close coupling with human activity.
   Particularly for health-related applications, even being able to
   identify the type of application or its level of activity may reveal
   sensitive data.  Ideally, it should be possible for a network to both
   obfuscate its communication patterns (if needed) and act
   cooperatively.

   One maxim that may be useful in designing the set of information that
   a network discloses as a matter of course with the intention of
   facilitating coexistence is that the information disclosed should not
   provide more insight than that information an attacker might have
   gained by simply observing the network for a while.  But note that
   simply disclosing that information in an accessible way still changes
   the economy of surveillance -- the objective is that it also changes
   the economy of coexistence, and these effects need to be carefully
   weighed against each other.

6.  Conclusion

   The future IoT operating environment will contain many diverse,
   administratively independent networks sharing unlicensed wireless
   spectrum.  Ensuring network coexistence is essential for avoiding the
   "tragedy of the commons" and enabling practical deployment of IoT
   solutions.

   Network coexistence is and will continue to be largely the domain of
   spectrum regulation and of the PHY and MAC layers.  But the operation
   of protocols throughout the network stack affects the distribution of
   RF energy over time, spectrum and physical space at many different
   scales.  This suggests that higher layer protocols are also a party
   to adverse interactions between networks.





Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   The community currently lacks a good understanding of the impact of
   inter-network interference, particularly with regard to protocol
   behavior and network-scale interactions.  Recent results suggest that
   inter-network interactions can significantly affect performance, even
   when the channel itself is not overloaded.  Periodic behaviors and
   timing-sensitive energy saving mechanisms appear to be key factors,
   though more research is needed.

   These issues are relevant to IETF/IRTF, most obviously with respect
   to the performance of protocols such as 6LowPAN, 6TiSCH, RPL, and
   CoAP.  We also identify two topics as especially relevant to T2TRG:

   1) Performance evaluation and protocol design should reflect the
   complexity and heterogeneity of future IoT environments.  The
   community could benefit substantially from the development and
   documentation of best practices in this regard.

   2) There may be a role for network coexistence mechanisms based on
   information sharing or explicit coordination between networks.  This
   topic seems particularly amenable to standards and interoperability
   oriented approaches.  However, there are substantial research
   challenges.

7.  Informative References

   [F3G15]    Feeney, L., Frey, M., Fodor, V., and M. Gunes, "Modes of
              inter-network interaction in beacon-enabled IEEE 802.15.4
              networks", 2015 14th Annual Mediterranean Ad Hoc
              Networking Workshop (MED-HOC-NET),
              DOI 10.1109/medhocnet.2015.7173294, June 2015.

   [FF16]     Feeney, L. and V. Fodor, "Reliability in co-located
              802.15.4 personal area networks", Proceedings of the 6th
              ACM International Workshop on Pervasive Wireless
              Healthcare - MobiHealth '16, DOI 10.1145/2944921.2944923,
              2016.

   [I-D.irtf-t2trg-iot-seccons]
              Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., and M. Sethi, "State-of-
              the-Art and Challenges for the Internet of Things
              Security", draft-irtf-t2trg-iot-seccons-08 (work in
              progress), October 2017.

   [I-D.keranen-t2trg-rest-iot]
              Keranen, A., Kovatsch, M., and K. Hartke, "RESTful Design
              for Internet of Things Systems", draft-keranen-t2trg-rest-
              iot-05 (work in progress), September 2017.




Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


   [NIST]     Koepke, G., Young, W., Ladbury, J., and J. Coder,
              "Interference and Coexistence of Wireless Systems in
              Critical Infrastructure", National Institute of Standards
              and Technology report, DOI 10.6028/nist.tn.1885, July
              2015.

   [SUM11]    Sum, C., Kojima, F., and H. Harada, "Coexistence of
              homogeneous and heterogeneous systems for IEEE 802.15.4g
              smart utility networks", 2011 IEEE International Symposium
              on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN),
              DOI 10.1109/dyspan.2011.5936241, May 2011.

   [SURVEY]   Han, Y., Ekici, E., Kremo, H., and O. Altintas, "Spectrum
              sharing methods for the coexistence of multiple RF
              systems: A survey", Ad Hoc Networks Vol. 53, pp. 53-78,
              DOI 10.1016/j.adhoc.2016.09.009, December 2016.

   [SURVEY2]  Baccour, N., Puccinelli, D., Voigt, T., Koubaa, A., Noda,
              C., Fotouhi, H., Alves, M., Youssef, H., Zuniga, M.,
              Boano, C., and K. Roemer, "External Radio Interference",
              SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer Engineering pp.
              21-63, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-00774-8_2, 2013.

   [TCG316]   Tinnirello, I., Croce, D., Galioto, N., Garlisi, D., and
              F. Giuliano, "Cross-Technology WiFi/ZigBee Communications:
              Dealing With Channel Insertions and Deletions", IEEE
              Communications Letters Vol. 20, pp. 2300-2303,
              DOI 10.1109/lcomm.2016.2603978, November 2016.

   [WETZ17]   Wetzker, U., Splitt, I., Zimmerling, M., Boano, C., and K.
              Romer, "Troubleshooting Wireless Coexistence Problems in
              the Industrial Internet of Things", 2016 IEEE Intl
              Conference on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE)
              and IEEE Intl Conference on Embedded and Ubiquitous
              Computing (EUC) and 15th Intl Symposium on Distributed
              Computing and Applications for Business
              Engineering (DCABES), DOI 10.1109/cse-euc-dcabes.2016.167,
              August 2016.

   [YTB17]    Ben Yaala, S., Theoleyre, F., and R. Bouallegue,
              "Cooperative resynchronization to improve the reliability
              of colocated IEEE&#8239;802.15.4 -TSCH networks in dense
              deployments", Ad Hoc Networks Vol. 64, pp. 112-126,
              DOI 10.1016/j.adhoc.2017.07.002, September 2017.







Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          inter-network coexistence           October 2017


Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Michael Frey, Charalampos Orfanidis,
   Martin Jacobsson, and Per Gunningberg for their valuable
   collaboration in simulation and measurement studies of inter-network
   interference.  We would also like to thank Carsten Bormann for his
   support and encouragement in preparing this document, particularly
   the discussion of security considerations.

Authors' Addresses

   Laura Marie Feeney
   Uppsala University
   Box 337
   Uppsala  SE-751 05
   Sweden

   Email: lmfeeney@it.uu.se


   Viktoria Fodor
   KTH
   Osquldas vaeg 10
   Stockholm  SE-100 44
   Sweden

   Email: vjfodor@kth.se
























Feeney & Fodor             Expires May 3, 2018                 [Page 16]
