

Network Working Group                              J.L. Le Roux (Editor) 
Internet Draft                                            France Telecom 
Category: Informational                  
Expires: March 2006                      
                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                            October 2005 
 
 
        Requirements for Path Computation Element (PCE) Discovery 
 
               draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document presents a set of requirements for a Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) discovery mechanism that would allow a Path Computation 
   Client (PCC) to discover dynamically and automatically a set of PCEs 
   along with certain information relevant for PCE selection. It is 
   intended that solutions that specify procedures and protocol(s) or 
   extensions to existing protocol(s) for such PCE discovery satisfy 
   these requirements.  
 
 
 
Conventions used in this document 
 
Le Roux et al.       Requirements for PCE Discovery             [Page 1] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Contributors................................................2 
   2.      Terminology.................................................3 
   3.      Introduction................................................3 
   4.      Problem Statement and Requirements overview.................4 
   4.1.    Problem Statement...........................................4 
   4.2.    Requirements overview.......................................5 
   5.      Example of application scenario.............................6 
   6.      Detailed Requirements.......................................7 
   6.1.    PCE Information to be disclosed.............................7 
   6.1.1.  General PCE Information (Mandatory support).................7 
   6.1.1.1.  Discovery of PCE Location.................................7 
   6.1.1.2.  Discovery of PCE domain(s) and inter-domain functions.....7 
   6.1.2.  Detailed PCE Information (Optional support).................8 
   6.1.2.1.  Discovery of PCE Capabilities.............................8 
   6.1.2.2.  Discovery of Alternate PCEs...............................9 
   6.2.    Scope of PCE Discovery......................................9 
   6.3.    PCE Information Synchronization............................10 
   6.4.    Detecting PCE Liveliness...................................10 
   6.5.    Security Requirements......................................10 
   6.6.    Extensibility..............................................11 
   6.7.    Scalability................................................11 
   6.8.    Operational orders of magnitudes...........................11 
   7.      Security Considerations....................................12 
   8.      Acknowledgments............................................12 
   9.      References.................................................12 
   10.     Authors' Addresses:........................................12 
   11.     Intellectual Property Statement............................13 
    
    
1. Contributors 
    
   The following are the authors that contributed to the present 
   document: 
 
   Jean-Louis Le Roux (France Telecom)  
   Paul Mabey (Qwest Communications) 
   Eiji Oki (NTT) 
   Richard Rabbat (Fujitsu) 
   Ting Wo Chung (Bell Canada) 
   Raymond Zhang (BT Infonet) 
    
    
 


 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 2] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


2. Terminology 
 
   Terminology used in this document  
    
      LSR: Label Switch Router 
    
      TE-LSP: Traffic Engineered Label Switched Path 
 
      PCE: Path Computation Element: an entity (component, application,  
      or network node) that is capable of computing a network path or  
      route based on a network graph, and applying computational  
      constraints. 
 
      PCC: Path Computation Client: any client application requesting a  
      path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.  
        
      IGP Area: OSPF Area or ISIS level/area 
    
      ABR: IGP Area Border Router (OSPF ABR or ISIS L1L2 router)  
    
      AS: Autonomous System 
    
      ASBR: AS Border Router 
 
      Intra-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path does not cross IGP area  
      boundaries.  
       
      Inter-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits through 
      two or more IGP areas. 
        
      Inter-AS MPLS TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits     
      through two or more ASes or sub-ASes (BGP confederations).  
    
      Domain: any collection of network elements within a common sphere    
      of address management or path computational responsibility.   
      Examples of domains include IGP areas and Autonomous Systems.  
 
3. Introduction 
 
   The PCE Architecture [PCE-ARCH] defines a Path Computation Element 
   (PCE) as an entity capable of computing TE-LSPs paths based on a 
   network graph, and applying computational constraints. A PCE serves 
   path computation requests sent by Path Computation Clients (PCC).  
   A PCC is a client application requesting a path computation to be 
   performed by a PCE. This can be, for instance, an LSR requesting a 
   path for a TE-LSP for which it is the head-end, or a PCE requesting a 
   path computation of another PCE (inter-PCE communication). The 
   communication between a PCC and a PCE requires a client-server 
   protocol whose generic requirements are listed in [PCE-COM-REQ].  
 
   There are several motivations for the adoption of a PCE-based 
   architecture to perform a path computation. They are listed in [PCE-
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 3] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


   ARCH]. This includes applications such as CPU intensive path 
   computation, inter-domain path computation and backup path 
   computation. 
 
   The PCE architecture requires, of course, that a PCC be aware of the 
   location of one or more PCEs in its domain, and also potentially of 
   some PCEs in other domains, e.g. in case of inter-domain path 
   computation.  
 
   In that context it would be highly desirable to define a mechanism 
   for automatic and dynamic PCE discovery, which would allow PCCs to 
   automatically discover a set of PCEs, including information required 
   for PCE selection, and to dynamically detect new PCEs or any 
   modification of PCE's information. This includes the discovery by a 
   PCC of a set of one or more PCEs in its domain, and potentially in 
   some other domains. The latter is a desirable function in the case of 
   inter-domain path computation for example.  
 
   This document lists a set of functional requirements for such an 
   automatic and dynamic PCE discovery mechanism. Section 4 points out 
   the problem statement. Section 5 illustrates an application scenario. 
   Finally section 6 addresses detailed requirements. 
    
   It is intended that solutions that specify procedures and protocol(s) 
   or protocol(s) extensions for such PCE discovery satisfy these 
   requirements. There is no intent either to specify solution-specific 
   requirements or to make any assumption on the protocol(s) that could 
   be used for the discovery. 
    
   Note that requirements listed in this document apply equally to PCEs 
   that are capable of computing paths in MPLS-TE-enabled networks and 
   PCEs that are capable of computing paths in GMPLS-enabled networks 
   (and PCEs capable of both). 
    
   It is also important to note that the notion of a PCC encompasses a 
   PCE acting as PCC when requesting a path computation of another PCE 
   (inter-PCE communication). Hence, this document does not make the 
   distinction between PCE discovery by PCCs and PCE discovery by PCEs. 
 
4. Problem Statement and Requirements overview 
    
4.1. Problem Statement 
 
   A routing domain may in practice be comprised of multiple PCEs: 
        -The path computation load may be balanced among a set of PCEs  
         to improve scalability;    
        -For the purpose of redundancy, primary and backup PCEs may be  
         used; 
        -PCEs may have distinct path computation capabilities (multi- 
         constrained path computation, backup path computation...);  
        -In an inter-domain context there can be several PCEs with  
         distinct inter-domain functions (inter-area,  
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 4] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


         inter-AS, inter-layer), each PCE being responsible for path  
         computation in one or more domains. 
    
   As an example, in a multi-area network made of one backbone area and 
   N peripheral areas, and where inter-area MPLS-TE path computation 
   relies on multiple-PCE path computation with ABRs acting as PCEs, the 
   backbone area would comprise at least N PCEs. In existing multi-area 
   networks, N can be quite large (e.g. beyond fifty). 
     
   In order to allow for effective PCE selection by PCCs and efficient 
   load balancing of requests, a PCC has to know the location of PCEs in 
   its domain, along with some information relevant to PCE selection, 
   and also potentially of some PCEs in other domains, for inter-domain 
   path computation purpose. 
   Such PCE information could be learnt through manual configuration, on 
   each PCC, of the set of PCEs along with their capabilities. Such 
   manual configuration approach may be sufficient, and even desired in 
   some particular situations, but it obviously faces several 
   limitations: 
        -This may imply a substantial configuration overhead (see the  
         above example with N PCEs); 
        -This would not allow a PCC to dynamically detect that a new  
         PCE is available, that an existing PCE is no longer available,  
         or that there is a change in the PCE's information. 
         
   Furthermore, as with any manual configuration approach, this may lead 
   to undesirable configuration errors. 
    
   Hence, an automated PCE discovery mechanism allowing a PCC to 
   dynamically discover a set of PCEs is highly desirable. 
    
4.2. Requirements overview 
     
   A PCE discovery mechanism that satisfies the requirements set forth 
   in this document MUST allow a PCC to automatically discover the 
   location of one or more PCEs in its domain and also, potentially, of 
   PCEs in other domains, of interest for inter-domain path computation 
   purpose.  
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to discover the set of one 
   or more domains under the path computation responsibility of a PCE. 
   It MUST also allow the discovery of the potential inter-domain 
   function(s) of a PCE (inter-area, inter-AS, inter-layer…).  
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow PCCs to dynamically discover 
   that a new PCE has appeared or that there is a change in PCE's 
   information. It MUST also allow PCCs to dynamically discover that a 
   PCE is no longer available.  
    
   The PCE discovery MUST be secure. In particular, key consideration 
   MUST be given in terms of how to establish a trust model for PCE 
   discovery. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 5] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


 
   OPTIONALLY a PCE discovery mechanism MAY be used so as to disclose a    
   set of detailed PCE capabilities. 
 
5. Example of application scenario 
    
   <----------------AS1-------------------->           <----AS2---                    
    Area 1           Area 0        Area 2 
  R1---------R3-----R5-------R6-----------R9----------R11----R13      
  |          |               |             |           | 
  |          |               |             |           | 
  R2---------R4-----R7-------R8-----------R10---------R12----R14               
       | 
       |      
       -- 
      |S1| 
       --                                            
 
                          Figure 1 
    
   Figure 1 above illustrates a multi-area/AS network with several PCEs: 
   -The ABR R3 is a PCE that can take part in inter area path 
   computation. It can compute paths in area 1 and area 0; 
   -The ABR R6 is a PCE that can take part in inter-area path 
   computation. It can compute paths in area 0 and area2; 
   -The ASBR R9 is a PCE that can take part in inter-AS path 
   computation, responsible for path computation in AS1 towards AS2; 
   -The ASBR R12 is a PCE that can take part in inter-AS path 
   computation, responsible for path computation in AS2 towards AS1; 
   -The server S1 is a PCE that can be used to compute diverse paths and 
   backup paths in area 1. 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism will allow: 
   -each LSR in areas 1 and 0 to dynamically discover R3, as a PCE for 
   inter-area path computation as well as its path computation domains: 
   area1 and area0; 
   -each LSR in areas 0 and 2 to dynamically discover R6, as a PCE for 
   inter-area path computation, as well as its path computation domains: 
   area2 and area0; 
   -each LSR in AS1 and some PCEs in AS2 to dynamically discover R9 as a 
   PCE for inter-AS path computation in AS1 towards AS2; 
   -each LSR in AS2 and some PCEs in AS1 to dynamically discover R12 as 
   a PCE for inter-AS path computation in AS2 towards AS1; 
   -each LSR in area 1 to dynamically discover S1, as a PCE for diverse 
   path computation and backup path computation in area1.  
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 6] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


6. Detailed Requirements 
 
6.1. PCE Information to be disclosed 
    
   We distinguish two levels of PCE information to be disclosed by the 
   PCE discovery mechanism: 
       -General information, whose disclosure MUST be supported by the  
        PCE discovery mechanism. 
       -Detailed information, whose disclosure MAY be supported by the  
        PCE discovery mechanism. 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow disclosing general PCE 
   information that will allow PCCs to select appropriate PCEs. This 
   comprises discovery of PCE location, PCE domain(s) and potential PCE 
   inter-domain function(s). 
        
   The PCE discovery mechanism MAY also allow disclosing detailed PCE 
   information. This comprises discovery of PCE path computation 
   capabilities and alternate PCEs. This information is not strictly 
   speaking part of PCE discovery; this is additional information that 
   can facilitate the selection of a PCE. Support of this information is 
   optional in the context of the PCE discovery mechanism itself. This 
   does not mean that this is optional in the PCE architecture. Such 
   information could also be obtained by other mechanisms, such as for 
   instance the PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
    
6.1.1. General PCE Information (Mandatory support) 
 
6.1.1.1. Discovery of PCE Location 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering, for a given PCE, 
   the IPv4 and/or IPv6 address to be used to reach the PCE. This 
   address will typically be a loop-back address that is always 
   reachable, if there is any connectivity to the PCE. 
   This address will be used by PCCs to communicate with a PCE, thanks 
   to a PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
    
6.1.1.2. Discovery of PCE domain(s) and inter-domain functions 
    
   Inter-domain path computation is a key application of the PCE 
   architecture.  This can rely on a multiple-PCE path computation, 
   where PCEs in each domain compute a part of the end-to-end path and 
   collaborate with each other to find the end-to-end-path. This can 
   also rely on a single-PCE path computation where a PCE has visibility 
   inside multiple domains and can compute an inter-domain path. 
    
   Hence the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering the set of 
   one or more domains under the path computation responsibility of a 
   PCE, i.e. where a PCE has visibility and can compute paths. These 
   domains can be identified using a domain identifier: For instance, an 
   IGP area can be identified by the Area ID (OSPF or ISIS), and an AS 
   can be identified by the AS number.  
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 7] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


 
   Also the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering the potential 
   inter-domain function(s) of a PCE, i.e. if a PCE can be used to 
   compute or to take part in the computation of end-to-end paths across 
   domains. The inter-domain functions include: inter-area, inter-AS or 
   inter-layer path computation. Note that these functions are not 
   mutually exclusive.  
   Note that the inter-domain functions differ from the set of domains 
   under control of a PCE. For instance a PCE may have visisbility 
   limited to a single domain, but may be able to take part into the 
   computation of inter-domain paths, by collaborating with PCEs in 
   other domains. 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanisms MUST also allow discovering the set of 
   one or more domain(s) towards which a PCE can compute paths. For 
   instance in an inter-AS path computation context, there may be 
   several PCEs in an AS, each one responsible for taking part in the 
   computation of inter-AS path towards a set of one or more destination 
   ASes, and a PCC must discover the destination ASes each PCE is 
   responsible for. 
    
6.1.2. Detailed PCE Information (Optional support) 
 
6.1.2.1. Discovery of PCE Capabilities 
    
   In the case where there are several PCEs with distinct capabilities 
   available, a PCC has to select one or more appropriate PCEs.  
    
   For that purpose the PCE discovery mechanism MAY be used so as to 
   disclose some PCE capabilities.  
    
   For the sake of illustration this could include for instance some 
   path computation related PCE capabilities: 
        -The capability to compute MPLS-TE and/or GMPLS paths; 
        -The type of link and path constraints supported: e.g.  
         bandwidth, affinities, delay; 
        -The objective functions supported: e.g. shortest constrained  
         path, shortest bounded delay path; 
        -The capability to compute multiple paths in a synchronized  
         manner: e.g. diverse path computation, load balanced paths  
         computation; 
        -Some GMPLS specific capabilities: e.g. the supported interface  
         switching capabilities, the support for multi-layer  
         path computation; 
 
   And this could also include some specific PCE capabilities: 
        -The capability to handle request prioritization; 
        -The capability to authenticate PCCs and to be authenticated. 
        -The maximum number of path computation requests per message 
        -The PCE computation power (static parameters to be used for  
         weighted load balancing of requests) 
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 8] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


   Such information regarding PCE capabilities could then be used by a 
   PCC to select an appropriate PCE from a list of candidate PCEs. 
    
   Note that the exact definition and description of PCE capabilities is 
   out of the scope of this document. It is expected that this will be 
   described in one or more separate document(s) which may be 
   application specific. 
    
   It is paramount that dynamic discovery of PCE capabilities MUST NOT  
   generate an excessive amount of information and SHOULD be limited to  
   a small set of generic capabilities.  
   If required, the exhaustive discovery of all detailed PCE 
   capabilities could be ensured by means of the PCC-PCE communication 
   protocol. 
   Actually a tradeoff should be found between capability discovery by 
   the PCE discovery mechanism and by the PCC-PCE communication 
   protocol. One of the objectives of the PCE discovery mechanism is to 
   help PCCs to select appropriate PCEs and limit the likelihood of PCC-
   PCE session rejections that may occur in case a PCE cannot support a 
   given capability.  
    
6.1.2.2. Discovery of Alternate PCEs 
    
   In the case of a PCE failure, a PCC has to select another PCE, if one 
   is available. It could be useful in various situations, to indicate a 
   set of one or more alternate PCEs that can be selected in case a 
   given PCE fails.  
   Hence the PCE Discovery mechanism MAY allow the discovery, for a 
   given PCE, of the location of one or more assigned alternate PCEs. 
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MAY also allow the discovery, for a given 
   PCE, of the set of one ore more PCEs for which it acts as alternate 
   PCE. 
 
6.2. Scope of PCE Discovery  
 
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow the control of the scope of 
   the PCE information discovery (IGP Area, AS, set of AS) on a per PCE 
   basis. In other words it MUST allow to control to which PCC or group 
   of PCCs the information related to a PCE may be disclosed. 
    
   The choice for the discovery scope of a given PCE MUST include the 
   followings: 
 
        -All PCCs in a single IGP area 
    
        -All PCCs in a set of adjacent IGP areas 
    
        -All PCCs in a single AS 
    
        -All PCCs in a set of ASes 
 

 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 9] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


        -A set of one or more PCCs in a set of one or more ASes 
 
   Particularly this also implies that the PCE Discovery mechanism MUST 
   allow for the discovery of PCE information across IGP areas and 
   across AS boundaries. 
    
   Note that it MUST be possible to deactivate PCE discovery on a per 
   PCE basis. 
 
6.3. PCE Information Synchronization 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to detect any change in 
   the information related to a PCE. This includes both general 
   information (e.g. PCE domain(s) modification), and detailed 
   information if supported (e.g. capability modification).  
   In addition it MUST be possible to dynamically detect new PCEs. 
    
   The PCE Discovery Mechanism SHOULD allow such detection under 60 
   seconds. 
    
   Note that PCE information is relatively static and is expected to be 
   fairly stable and not to change frequently.  
 
 6.4. Detecting PCE Liveliness  
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to detect when a PCE is 
   no longer alive or is deactivated. This allows a PCC to rapidly 
   switch to another PCE (for instance a predefined alternate PCE), and 
   thus minimizes path computation service disruption. 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism SHOULD allow such detection under 60 
   seconds. 
    
   Note that such detection could also be ensured by the PCC-PCE 
   communication protocol (see [PCE-COM-REQ]). 
 
6.5. Security Requirements 
 
   The three major threats related to PCE discovery mechanisms are: 
        -Impersonation of PCE 
        -Interception of PCE discovery information 
        -Falsification of PCE discovery information 
        -Information disclosure to non-authorized PCCs. 
 
   Hence mechanisms MUST be defined to ensure authentication, integrity  
   and privacy of PCE discovery information: 
        -There MUST be a mechanism to authenticate discovery information 
        -There MUST be a mechanism to verify discovery information  
         integrity 
        -There MUST be a mechanism to encrypt discovery information 
        -There MUST be a mechanism to restrict the scope of discovery to  

 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 10] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


         a set of authorized PCCs. In particular, the identity of any  
         PCE MUST only be learnt by authorized PCCs (see also 6.2).  
         
   This is of particular importance in an inter-AS context, where PCE 
   discovery may increase the vulnerability to attacks and the 
   consequences of these attacks. 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST deliver the operational security 
   objectives where required. The overall security objectives of 
   privacy, authentication, and integrity may take on varying level of 
   importance. These objectives MAY be met by other established means 
   and protocols. 
 
   Also, key consideration MUST be given in terms of how to establish a 
   trust model for PCE discovery. The PCE discovery mechanism MUST 
   explicitly support a specific set of one ore more trust model(s). 
 
6.6. Extensibility 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be flexible and extensible so as to 
   easily allow for the inclusion of some additional PCE information 
   that could be defined in the future. 
 
6.7. Scalability 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be designed to scale well with an 
   increase of any of the following parameters: 
        -Number of PCCs discovering a given PCE; 
        -Number of PCEs to be discovered by a given PCC; 
        -Number of domains in the discovery scope; 
         
   Particularly, in case routing protocols (IGP, BGP) are extended to 
   support PCE discovery, the extensions MUST NOT cause a degradation in 
   routing protocol performance. The same applies to a signaling 
   solution that could serve for this discovery. 
    
6.8. Operational orders of magnitudes 
    
   This section gives minimum order of magnitude estimates of what the 
   PCE discovery mechanism should support 
    
   Number of PCCs discovering a given PCE: 1000  
   Number of PCEs to be discovered by a given PCC: 100 (e.g. inter-area 
   case with ABRs acting as PCE). 
   Number of IGP areas in the discovery scope: 100 
   Number of ASes in the discovery scope: 100 
    
   Information disclosed in the PCE discovery mechanism is relatively 
   static. Changes in PCE information may occur as result of PCE 
   configuration updates, PCE deployment/activation or PCE 
   deactivation/suppression, and should not occur as a result of the PCE 
   activity itself. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 11] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


   Hence, this information is quite stable and will not change 
   frequently. 
 
 
7. Security Considerations 
    
   This document is a requirement document and hence does not raise by 
   itself any particular security issue. 
    
   A set of security requirements that MUST be addressed when 
   considering the design and deployment of a PCE Discovery mechanism 
   have been identified in section 6.5. 
    
8. Acknowledgments 
 
   We would like to thank Benoit Fondeviole, Thomas Morin, Emile 
   Stephan, Jean-Philippe Vasseur, Dean Cheng, Adrian Farrel, Renhai 
   Zhang, Mohamed Boucadair, Eric Gray, Igor Bryskin, Dimitri 
   Papadimitriou, Arthi Ayyangar and Andrew Dolganow for their useful 
   comments and suggestions. 
 
9. References 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC3667] Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 
   3667, February 2004. 
 
   [RFC3668] Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
   Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004. 
 
   [PCE-ARCH] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture, work in 
   progress. 
    
   [PCE-COM-REQ] Ash, J., Le Roux, J.L., " PCE Communication Protocol 
   Generic Requirements", draft-ietf-pce-comm-protocol-gen-reqs, work in 
   progress.  
 
10. Authors' Addresses:  
     
   Jean-Louis Le Roux  
   France Telecom  
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin  
   22307 Lannion Cedex  
   FRANCE 
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
     
    
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 12] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


   Paul Mabey 
   Qwest Communications 
   950 17th Street, 
   Denver, CO 80202,  
   USA 
   Email: pmabey@qwest.com 
    
   Eiji Oki 
   NTT 
   Midori-cho 3-9-11 
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585,  
   JAPAN 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Richard Rabbat 
   Fujitsu Laboratories of America 
   1240 East Arques Ave, MS 345 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94085 
   USA 
   Email: richard@us.fujitsu.com 
    
   Ting Wo Chung 
   Bell Canada 
   181 Bay Street, Suite 350 
   Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2T3 
   CANADA,  
   Email: ting_wo.chung@bell.ca 
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   BT Infonet 
   2160 E. Grand Ave. 
   El Segundo, CA 90025 
   USA 
   Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com 
 
11. Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 13] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-02.txt     October 2005 


    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at  
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
 
 



























 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 14] 
