



PKIX Working Group                               S. Santesson (AddTrust)
INTERNET-DRAFT                             R. Housley (RSA Laboratories)
Expires August 2002                                        February 2002

                Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure

                    Logotypes in X.509 certificates

                   <draft-ietf-pkix-logotypes-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document contains an initial outline of a standard for attaching
   logotypes to certificates. The draft includes background discussions
   around different aspects of problems and solutions, forming a
   starting point for the creation of a complete standard.

   Please send comments on this document to the ietf-pkix@imc.org
   mailing list.










Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


                             Table of Contents

   1 Introduction .................................................    3
    1.1 Are human recognition concepts relevant ...................    4
    1.2 Combination of verification techiques .....................    5
   2 Different types of logotypes in certificates..................    5
   3 Technical solutions ..........................................    6
    3.1 General             .......................................    6
    3.2 Type of certificates ......................................    7
    3.3 Logotype placement ........................................    8
     3.3.1 Qualifier ..............................................    8
     3.3.2 Issuer and Subject Alt Names ...........................    8
     3.3.3 New extension ..........................................    9
     3.3.4 Conclusion .............................................   10
   4 Use in Clients ...............................................   10
   5 Security considerations ......................................   10
   6 References ...................................................   12
   7 Intellectual Property Right ..................................   12

   Appendices

   A. ASN.1 definitions ...........................................   13
   B. Author Addresses ............................................   13
   C. Full Copyright Statement ....................................   13



























Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


1 Introduction

   The basic function of a certificate is to bind a public key to the
   identity of an entity (subject). From a strictly technical viewpoint,
   this goal could be achieved by  signing the identity of the subject
   together with its public key. However, the art of PKI has developed
   certificates far beyond this functionality in order to meet the needs
   from modern global networks and heterogeneous IT structures.

   One driver of the evolution from simple certificate formats to more
   complex structures is the need to distinguish between different
   certificate concepts, such as assurance level, policies, appropriate
   key usage, and name form constraints. Before a relying party can make
   an informed decision whether a particular certificate is trustworthy
   and relevant for its intended usage, a certificate may be examined
   from several different perspectives.

   Systematic processing is necessary to determine whether a particular
   certificate meets the predefined prerequisites for an intended usage.
   Even though the information objects in certificates are appropriate
   and effective for machine processing, they are poor instruments for a
   corresponding human trust and recognition process.

   The human prefers to structure information into categories and
   symbols. Most humans associate complex structures of reality with
   easy recognizable logotypes and marks. Humans tend to trust things
   that they recognize from previous experiences.  Humans may examine
   information to confirm their initial reaction. Very few consumers
   actually read all terms and conditions they accept when accepting a
   service, instead they most commonly act in trust based on previous
   experience and recognition.

   A big part of this process is branding. Service providers and product
   vendors invest a lot of money and resources into creating a strong
   relation between positive user experiences and easily recognizable
   trademarks and logotypes.

   Branding is also pervasive in identification instruments, including
   identification cards, passports,  driver's licenses, credit cards,
   gasoline cards, and loyalty cards. Identification instruments are
   intended identify the holder as a particular person or as member of
   community.  The community may represent the subscribers of a service
   or any other group. Identification instruments, in physical form,
   commonly use logotypes and symbols, solely to enhance human
   recognition and trust in the identification instrument itself.

   Since certificates play an equivalent role in electronic exchanges,
   we examine the inclusion of logotypes in certificates.



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


 1.1 Are human recognition concepts relevant?

   The answer depends the manner in which certiciates are used. Are
   certificates visible or invisible to human users?  Will the
   certificates be used in open environments?

   If certificates are to be used in open environments and in
   applications that brings the user in conscious contact with the
   result of a certificate-based identification process, then human
   recognition is highly relevant, and it may be a necessity.

   Examples of sucha applications include:

   - Web server identification where a user identifies the owner of the
     web site.

   - Peer e-mail exchange in B2B, B2C, and private communications.

   - Exchange of medical records, and system for medical prescriptions.

   - Unstructured e-business applications (i.e. non-EDI applications).

   Most applications provide the human user with an opportunity to view
   the results of a successful certificate-based identification process.
   When the user takes the steps necessary to view these results, the
   user is presented with a view of a certificate. This solution has
   however two major problems.

   1) The function to view a certificate is often rather hard to find
      for a non-technical user.

   2) The presentation of the certificate is rather technical and not
      user friendly. Further it contains no graphic symbols and
      logotypes to enhance human recognition.

   Many investigations have shown that users of today's applications do
   not take the steps necessary to view certificates. This could be due
   to poor user interfaces. However, many applications are structured to
   hide certificates from users.  The application designers do not want
   to expose certificates to users at all.

 1.2 Combination of verification techiques

   Can the concepts of systematic certification path verification and
   human recognition be combined in any sensible manner?

   Systematic certification path verification determines whether the
   end-entity certificate can be verified according to defined policy.



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   The systematic processing provides assurance that the certificate is
   a valid document.  It does not indicate whether the subject is
   entitled to any particular information, or whether the subject ought
   to be trusted to perform a particular service. These are access
   control function decisions. Some access control decisions may be made
   by a systematic process, but others, depending on the application
   context, involve the human user.

   In some situations, the human user is the sole handler of the post
   certification path verification access control decisions. In the end,
   the human will decide whether or not to accept an executable email
   attachment, to release personal information, or follow the
   instructions displayed by a web browser. As we have seen, this
   decision will often be based on recognition and previous experience.

   The  distinction between systematic processing and human processing
   is rather straightforward. They can be complementary. While the
   systematic process is focused on certification path construction and
   verification, the human acceptance process is focused on recognition
   and related previous experience.

   There are some situations where systematic processing and human
   processing interfer with each other.  These issues are discussed in
   the Security Considerations section.

 1.3 Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [STDWORDS].

2 Different types of logotypes in certificates

   This draft suggests standardization of 3 logotype types.

     1) Concept logotype
     2) Issuer organization logotype
     3) Subject organization logotype

   The concept logotype - is the general mark for a service concept for
   entity identification and certificate issuance. Many issuers may use
   the concept logotypes to co-brand with a global concept in order to
   gain global recognition of its local service provision. This type of
   concept branding is very common in credit card business where local
   independent card issuers issue cards within a globally branded
   concept (such as VISA and MasterCard).

   Issuer organization logotype - is a logotype representing the



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   organization identified as part of the issuer name in the
   certificate.

   Subject organization logotype - is a logotype representing the
   organization identified in the subject name in the certificate.

3 Technical solution

 3.1 General

   There is no need to significantly increase the size of the
   certificate by including logotype image data in a certificate.
   Rather, a URI identifying the location to the logotype image and a
   one-way hash of the referenced data is included in the certificate.

   Applications may enhance processing and off-line functionality by
   cashing logotype data.

   The URI defines the file format for the logotype image.

   The solution explicitly identifies the one-way hash function
   employed.

   The general structure for logotype data is:

      LogotypeData ::= SEQUENCE {
          typeOfLogotype       TypeOfLogotype,
          hashAlgorithm        AlgorithmIdentifier,
          logotypeDataHash     OCTET STRING,
          logotypeDataUri      IA5String OPTIONAL }

      TypeOflogotype ::= CHOICE {
          predefinedLogotypeType    PredefinedLogotypeType,
          logotypeTypeID            OBJECT IDENTIFIER }

      PredefinedLogotypeType ::= INTEGER {
          subject-organization-logotype(0),
          issuer-organization-logotype(1)
          concept-logotype(2) }

   The predefined logotype types are:

   subject-organization-logotype, if used, SHALL be used to include a
   logotype of the subject organization. The logotype SHALL be
   consistent with, and require the presence of, an organization name
   stored in the organization attribute in the subject field.

   issuer-organization-logotype, if used, SHALL be used to include a



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   logotype of the issuer organization. The logotype SHALL be consistent
   with, and require the presence of, an organization name stored in the
   organization attribute in the issuer field.

   Concept-logotype, if used, SHALL be used to include a logotype
   representing the concept under which the issuer claims to issue this
   certificate.

   A concept may be shared within a network of certification authority
   (CA) services, provided by one or several independent CA
   organizations.

   The relationship between the subject organization and the subject
   organization logotype and the relationship between the issuer and
   either the issuer organization logotype or the concept logotype, are
   relationships claimed by the issuer. The policy under which the
   issuer checks these logotypes is outside the scope of this standard.

   Any URI pointing to a file containing the logotype data SHALL include
   a file extension defining the image file format (i.e. .GIF, .TIF,
   .TIFF, .JPG, .JPEG,  etc.).

 3.2 Type of certificates

   Logotypes according to the present model may be used in 3 types of
   certificates:

     - Self-signed CA certificates (root certificates)
     - Intermediate CA certificates
     - End-entity certificates

   A reason to constrain inclusion of logotypes to end-entity
   certificates would be to exclude the aspect of logotypes from path
   processing issues, where a path validating service would want to
   check consistency of logotypes in a certification path.

   However, as discussed above, logotypes are not aimed to be part of
   certification path validation or any type of systematic processing
   since its sole purpose is to enhance display of a single particular
   certificate to a user regardless of its position or function in a
   certification path.

   Logotypes should not be an active component in path processing, and
   logotypes should be allowed in all types of certificates, at the
   discretion of the CA.

 3.3 Logotype placement




Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   So far, there have been 3 solutions discussed regarding the placement
   of the logotype data in certificates.

     - Inclusion in a policy qualifier
     - Inclusion in Issuer and Subject Alternative names extensions
     - Inclusion in a separate private extension

  3.3.1 Qualifier

   This solution would include logotype data as a newly defined policy
   qualifier.

   Pros:

   - This solution provides a mechanism to directly control the use and
     display of logotypes under a particular policy

   Cons:

   - Current practice and standards (RFC 2459) recommends against use of
     qualifiers

   - This is generally considered to be a major hack and stretch of
     semantics, since this type of data doesn't qualify a policy in any
     way.

  3.3.2 Issuer and Subject Alt Names

   This solution would use the other name form to include;

     - issuer and concept logotypes in the issuer alt name extension;
       and,
     - subject organization logo in the subject alt name extension.

   Pros:

   - This mechanism could possibly enable cross certifying CAs to deny
     any subordinate CA the right to include logotypes in descending end
     entity certificates by listing the logotypes name form in
     excludedSubtrees.

   Cons:

   - Logotypes are not a name form and should not be treated as a
     displayable name.

   - It is generally understood that it should be possible to apply
     general name constraint mechanisms (as described in RFC 2459 as



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


     well as son-of-2459) to names in the subject and issuer alt name
     extension. This is not possible to do with logotypes since it is
     not a name form.

   - This split storage of logotype data into 2 different locations,
     which may make life worse for applications with no interest in
     logotypes.

   - It is generally agreed that inclusion of logotype data by no means
     should be regarded as critical data. This may interfere with the
     criticality policy of the alt name extensions, especially if the
     certificate has no attributes in the subject field, forcing the
     subject alt name to be set to critical.

   - This usage would possibly interfere with the resolution between
     IETF and ITU-T regarding use of permitted subtrees.

   - Since this solution may break current implementations it would
     possibly block adoption of logotypes.

  3.3.3 New extension

      logotypeInfo  EXTENSION ::= {
             SYNTAX             LogotypeSyntax
             IDENTIFIED BY      id-pe-logotypeInfo }

         id-pe-logotypeInfo OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::= {id-pe XX}

         LogotypeSyntax ::= SEQUENCE OF LogotypeData

   Pros:

   - This is the cleanest solution.

   - Do not impact on legacy implementations.

   Cons:

   - This solution activates the issue whether this extension may be
     abused by a CA who include logotypes (in EE certificates) that
     violates the intention of a name constraints set by a chaining CA.
     This issue is addressed in the security consideration section
     below.

  3.3.4 Conclusion

   We must not destroy current structures. We must not create problems
   and confusion.



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                  [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   Only the private extension solution satisfies both of these desires.
   Therefore, the private extension should be selected.

4 Use in Clients

   All PKI implementations require relying party software to have some
   mechanism to determine whether a trusted CA issues a particular
   certificate. This is an issue for certification path validation,
   including consistent policy and name checking.

   After a certificatin path is successfully validated, the replying
   party must trust the information that the CA includes in the
   certificate, including any certificate extensions. The client
   software can choose to make use of such information, or the client
   software can ignore it. Current standards do not provide any
   mechanism for cross-certifying CAs to constrain subordinate CAs from
   including private extensions (see security considerations).

   Consequently, if relying party software accepts a CA, then it should
   be prepared to (unquestioningly) display the associated logos to its
   human user, given that it is configured to do so.

5 Security considerations

   Logotypes are even worse than names regarding the possibility to
   securely and accurately define what is, and what is not, a legitimate
   logotype of an organization. There is a whole legal structure around
   this issue that doesn't need repetition in this document.

   As logotypes are hard (and sometimes expensive) to verify, this
   increases the possibility of errors related to falsely assigning
   wrong logotypes to organizations.

   This is not a new issue for electronic identification instruments.
   It is already dealt with in numerous of similar situations in the
   physical world, including physical employee identification cards.
   Secondly, there are situations where identification of logotypes is
   rather simple and straightforward, such as logotypes for well-known
   industries and institutes. These issues should not stop those service
   providers who want to issue logotypes from doing so, where relevant.

   There is a new problem related to electronic identification
   instruments in the form of certificates. Certification paths may
   impose constraints that are systematically checked during
   certification path processing, which, in theory, may be violated by
   logotypes.

   Certification path processing does not, should not, and will never be



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                 [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   able to control the inclusion of logotype data in certificates. That
   is, a parent CA may constraint subordinate CAs to only issue
   certificates to end-entities within a limited name space. A
   potentially bad CA may comply with this name constraint and still
   include a subject organization logotype. The the parent CA has no
   means of preventing logotype data inclusion since there is no
   mechanism to prevent subordinate CAs from including new extensions.

   This is not unique to the logotype extension. No technical means are
   provides for constraining subordinate CAs to a particular certificate
   profile.

   The controls available to a parent CA to protect itself from rogue
   subordinate CAs are nontechnical. They include:

   - Contractual agreements of suitable behaviour, including
     terms of liability and severance pay in case of material
     breach.

   - Control mechanisms and procedures to monitor and
     follow-up behaviour of subordinate CAs.

   - Use of certificate policies to declare assurance level
     of logotype data as well as to guide applications on how
     to treat and display logotypes.

   - Use of revocation functions to revoke any misbehaving CA.

   This issue cannot be given an easy and absolute technical solution.
   Maybe the correct response is to surrender to the fact that involved
   parties must settle some aspects of PKI outside the scope of
   technical controls, and to clearly identify and communicate the
   associated risks.

6 References

   [STDWORDS] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [RFC 2459] R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and D.Solo, "Internet X.509
   Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and CRL Profile", January
   1999.

7 Intellectual Property Rights

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                 [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain ageneral license or permission for the use of such proprietary
   rights by implementors or users of this specification can be obtained
   from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.



































Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                 [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


APPENDICES

A. ASN.1 definitions

   TBD

B. Author Addresses

   Stefan Santesson
   AddTrust AB
   P.O. Box 465
   S-201 24 Malmoe
   Sweden
   stefan@addtrust.com


   Russell Housley
   RSA Laboratories
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   rhousley@rsasecurity.com



C.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  In addition,
   the ASN.1 modules presented in Appendices A and B may be used in
   whole or in part without inclusion of the copyright notice.
   However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such
   as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
   Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the
   purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
   procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process
   shall be followed, or as required to translate it into languages
   other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS



Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                 [Page 13]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates       February 2002


   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.














































Santesson, Housley        Expires: August 2002                 [Page 14]
