



ICN Research Group                                               J. Hong
Internet-Draft                                                    T. You
Intended status: Informational                                      ETRI
Expires: September 10, 2020                                     V. Kafle
                                                                    NICT
                                                          March 09, 2020


   Architectural Considerations of ICN using Name Resolution Service
               draft-irtf-icnrg-nrsarch-considerations-04

Abstract

   This document discusses architectural considerations and implications
   of Information-Centric Networking (ICN) related to the usage of the
   Name Resolution Service (NRS).  It describes how ICN architectures
   may change and what implications are introduced within the ICN
   routing system when NRS is integrated into an ICN architecture.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 10, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Implications of NRS in ICN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  ICN Architectural Considerations for NRS  . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Name mapping records registration, resolution, and update   5
     5.2.  Protocols and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.3.  Routing System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   Information-Centric Networking (ICN) is an approach to evolve the
   Internet infrastructure to directly access Named Data Objects (NDOs)
   by its name, i.e., the name of NDO is directly used to route the
   request to the data object.  Such name-based routing in ICN has
   inherent challenges in supporting globally scalable routing system,
   producer mobility, and off-path caching.  In order to address these
   challenges, the Name Resolution Service (NRS) has been integrated
   into several ICN project's proposals and literature [Afanasyev]
   [Zhang2] [Ravindran] [SAIL] [MF] [Bayhan].

   This document describes how ICN architectures may change and what
   implications are introduced within the ICN routing system when NRS is
   integrated into an ICN architecture.  It also discusses ICN
   architectural considerations for an NRS.  In other words, the scope
   of this document includes considerations in the view of the ICN
   architecture and routing system when NRS is integrated into ICN.  The
   discussion of NRS itself is provided in the NRS design guidelines
   [NRSguidelines] document.

2.  Terminology

   o  Name Resolution Service (NRS): NRS in ICN is defined as the
      service that provides the name resolution function for translating
      an object name into some other information such as a locator, a
      off-path-cache pointer, or an alias name for forwarding the object




Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


      request [NRSguidelines].  The NRS is a service maintained by a
      distributed mapping database system.

   o  NRS server: The NRS consists of the distributed NRS servers
      storing the mapping records in database.  NRS servers store and
      maintain the mapping records that keep the mappings of name to
      some other information that is used for forwarding content
      request.

   o  NRS resolver: The client side of the NRS is called an NRS
      resolver.  The resolver is responsible for initiating the name
      resolution request queries that ultimately lead to a name
      resolution of the target data objects.  NRS resolvers can be
      located in the consumer (or client) nodes and ICN routers.  NRS
      resolver may also cache the mapping records obtained through the
      name resolution for later usage.

   o  Name registration: In order to create the NRS, the content names
      and their mapping records must be registered in the NRS system by
      a publisher who has an access to at least one authoritative NRS
      server or by a producer who generates named data objects.  The
      mapping information is the mapping of a name to some information
      such as another names and locators, which are used for forwarding
      the content request.  Thus, a publisher or producer creates an NRS
      registration request and send to an NRS server.  On registration,
      the NRS server stores the mapping record in the database and sends
      an ACK back to the producer or publisher.

   o  Name resolution: Name resolution is the main process of the NRS.
      It is performed by an NRS resolver which can be deployed on a
      consumer node or an ICN router.  When the required valid name
      mapping record (whose lifetime has not expired yet) has not been
      stored in the cache of an NRS resolver, it sends a name resolution
      request toward the NRS server.  The NRS server searches the
      content name in its mapping record database, retrieves and sends
      the mapping record in the name resolution response message to the
      NRS resolver.

   o  NRS node: In ICN architecture, NRS servers are also referred to as
      NRS nodes that maintain the name records.

   o  NRS client: A node that uses the NRS is called NRS client.  The
      nodes that initiate the name registration, resolution, or update
      procedure are NRS clients.  That is, NRS resolver, ICN client
      nodes, ICN routers, or producers are NRS clients.






Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


3.  Background

   The name-based routing in ICN has inherent challenges in supporting a
   globally scalable routing system, producer mobility, and off-path
   caching.  In order to address these challenges, an NRS has been
   integrated into several ICN project's proposals and literature as
   follows:

   o  Routing scalability : In ICN, application names identifying
      contents are used directly for packet delivery, so ICN routers run
      a name-based routing protocol to build name-based routing and
      forwarding tables.  Similar to the scalability challenge of IP
      routing, if non-aggregatable name prefixes are injected into the
      Default Route Free Zone (DFZ) of ICN, they would be driving the
      growth of the DFZ routing table size.  Thus, integrating an NRS
      with ICN can be an approach to keep the routing table size under
      control, where the NRS resolves name prefixes which do not exist
      in the DFZ forwarding table into globally routable prefixes such
      as one proposed in NDN [Afanasyev].  Another approach dealing with
      routing scalability is the Multi-level Distributed Hash
      Table (MDHT) used in NetInf [Dannewitz].  It provides name-based
      anycast routing that can support a non-hierarchical namespace and
      can be adopted on a global scale [Dannewitz2].

   o  Producer mobility : In ICN, if a producer moves into a different
      name domain that uses a different name prefix, the request for a
      content produced by the moving producer with the origin name would
      be hardly forwarded to the moving producer's new location.
      Especially, in a hierarchical name scheme, producer mobility
      support is much harder than in a flat name scheme since the
      routing tables in broader area need to be updated according to the
      producer movement.  Therefore, various ICN architectures such as
      NetInf [Dannewitz] and MobilityFirst [MF] have adopted NRS to
      tackle the issues of producer's location change.

   o  Off-path caching : In-network caching is an inherent feature of an
      ICN architecture.  Caching approaches can be categorized into on-
      path caching and off-path caching, according to the location of
      caches in relation to the forwarding path from the original
      content store to a consumer.  Off-path caching, also referred as
      content replication or content storing, aims at replicating
      content in various locations within a network in order to increase
      the availability of contents, where the caching locations may not
      be lying along the content forwarding path.  Thus, finding off-
      path cached contents is not trivial in name-based routing of ICN.
      In order to support off-path caches, the locations of replicas are
      usually advertised into a name-based routing system or into NRS as
      described in [Bayhan].



Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


   This document discusses architectural considerations and implications
   of ICN when the NRS is integrated into ICN to solve such challenges
   of the name-based routing in ICN.

4.  Implications of NRS in ICN

   The majority of ICN projects use the name-based routing which omits
   the name resolution.  So, NRS would not be mandatory part in an ICN
   architecture.  The integration of NRS would change the ICN
   architecture at least with respect to procedures, latency, and
   security, as discussed below:

   o  Procedure : When the NRS is adopted into an ICN architecture, the
      procedure of the name resolution has to be integrated into ICN
      overall procedures.  For NRS integration, there are certain things
      that have to be decided such as where and how the name resolution
      task is performed.

   o  Latency : When the NRS is adopted into an ICN architecture, the
      additional latency of the name resolution obviously occurs in the
      routing and forwarding system.  Although the latency of the name
      resolution is added, the total latency could be minimized if the
      nearest copies or off-path caches can be located by the NRS lookup
      procedure.  Additionally, there might be a trade-off between the
      name resolution latency and inter-domain traffic reduction.
      Finding a nearest cache holding the content would reduce the
      content discovery as well as delivery latency.

   o  Security : When the NRS is adopted into an ICN architecture,
      security threats may increase.  Protection of the NRS system
      against attacks such as Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) and
      authentication of name mapping records and related signaling
      messages would be challenging.

5.  ICN Architectural Considerations for NRS

   This section discusses the various items that have to be considered
   from the point of view of ICN architecture when ICN integrates the
   NRS system in its architecture.  These items are related with the
   name mapping records registration, resolution, and update, protocols
   and messages, and integration with the routing system.

5.1.  Name mapping records registration, resolution, and update

   When the NRS is integrated in an ICN architecture, the functions
   related with the registration, resolution and update of name mapping
   records have to be considered.  The NRS nodes maintain the name
   mapping records and may exist in an overlay network over the ICN



Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


   routers, that is, they communicate to each other through ICN routers.
   Figure 1 shows the NRS nodes and NRS clients connected through an
   underlying network.  The NRS nodes exist in a distributed manner so
   that an NRS node is always available closer to an NRS client and
   communication latency for the name registration and resolution
   performed by the NRS client remains very low.  The name registration,
   name resolution and name record update procedures are briefly
   discussed below.


                   +------------+             +------------+
                   |  NRS Node  |             |  NRS Node  |
                   +------------+             +------------+
                         |                          |
                         |                          |
      +------------+     |                          |     +------------+
      | NRS Client |--------------------------------------| NRS Client |
      +------------+         underlying network           +------------+


    Figure 1: NRS nodes and NRS clients connected through an underlying
                                  network

   o  Name registration: Name registration is performed by the producer
      (as an NRS client) when it creates a new content.  When a producer
      creates a content and assigns a name from its name prefix space to
      the content, the producer performs the name registration in an NRS
      node.  Name registration may be performed by an ICN router when it
      does off-path caching or cooperative caching since involving an
      NRS may be a good idea for off-path caching.  The ICN routers with
      forwarder caches do not require to invoke NRS registration
      procedure because they lie on the path to the content store or
      producer.  They will be hit when a future request is forwarded to
      the content producer by an ICN router lying toward the ICN client
      node.  However, the ICN routers performing off-path caching of the
      content require to invoke the name registration procedure so that
      other ICN routers can know about the off-path cache locations
      through the name resolution.  As a content gets cached in many
      off-path ICN routers, all of them may register the same content
      names in the same NRS node multiple times.  In this case, the NRS
      node adds the new location of the content to the name record
      together with the previous locations.  In this way, each of the
      name records stored in the NRS node may contain multiple locations
      of the content.

   o  Name resolution: Name resolution is performed by NRS client to
      obtain the name record from an NRS node by sending a name
      resolution request message and getting the response containing the



Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


      record.  Regarding the name-based ICN routing context, the name
      resolution will be mostly performed by an ICN router that does not
      contain the name in its FIB table.  The name resolution may also
      be performed by the consumer (in case the consumer is multihomed)
      to make decision to forward the content request in a better
      direction so that it obtains the content from the nearest cache.
      If the consumer is single homed, it may not perform the name
      resolution.  It creates the content request packet containing the
      content name and forwards to the nearest ICN router.  The ICN
      router checks its FIB table to see where to forward the content
      request.  If the ICN router fails to know the requested content
      reachable, it performs name resolution to obtain the name mapping
      record and adds to FIB table.  The ICN router may also perform
      name resolution even before the arrival of the content request
      time to use the name mapping record to configure the FIB table.

   o  Name record update: Name record update is carried out when a
      content name mapping record changes, e.g. the content is not
      available in one or more of previous locations.  The name record
      update may take place explicitly by the exchange of name record
      update message or implicitly when a timeout occurs and a name
      record is deemed to be invalid.  The explicit update is possible
      when each record is accompanied by its lifetime value.

5.2.  Protocols and Semantics

   In order to develop an NRS system within a local ICN network domain
   or global ICN network domain, new protocols and semantics should be
   designed to manage and resolve names among different name spaces.

   One way of implementing an NRS is by extending the basic ICN TLV
   format and semantics [RFC8609] [RFC8569].  For instance, name
   resolution and response messages can be implemented by defining new
   type fields in the Interest and Content Object messages [CCNxNRS].
   By leveraging the existing ICN Interest and Content Object packets
   for name resolution and registration, the NRS system can be deployed
   with a minimum implication of ICN architecture changes.  However,
   because of confining to the basic ICN protocol and semantics, the NRS
   system may not be able to support more flexible and scalable designs.

   On the other hand, an NRS system can be designed newly with its own
   protocol and semantics like an independent NRS system described in
   [Hong].  For instance, the NRS protocol and messages can be
   implemented by using a RESTful API and the NRS can be operated as an
   application protocol independently from a basic ICN architecture.






Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


5.3.  Routing System

   The NRS helps in reducing the routing complexity of ICN architecture
   than the pure name-based routing by helping the routing system to
   update the routing table on demand through the help of name records
   obtained from the NRS.  The routing system has to be considered to
   make name resolution requests and process the information such as a
   locator, a off-path-cache pointer, or an alias name, obtained from
   the name resolution.

   No matter what kind of infomation is obtained from the name
   resolution, as long as it is in the form of a name, the content
   request message in the routing system may be reformatted with the
   obtained information.  In this case, the content name requested
   originally by a consumer needs to be involved in the reformatted
   content request to check the integrity of the requested content.  In
   other words, the infomation obtained from the name resolution is used
   to forward the content request and the original content name
   requested by a consumer is used to identify the content.  Otherwise,
   the resolve information is used to build the routing table.

   The infomation obtained from the name resolution may not be in the
   form of a name.  For example, it may identify the tunnel endpoints by
   IP address and is used to construct a tunnel to forward the content
   request.

6.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations related to this document.

7.  Security Considerations

   When NRS is integrated into an ICN architecture, security threats may
   increase in various aspects as discussed below:

   o  Name Space Management: In order to deploy an NRS in ICN
      architecture, ICN name spaces, which may be assigned by
      authoritative entities, should be securely mapped to the content
      publishers and securely managed by them.  According to the ICN
      research challenges [RFC7927], a new name space can also provide
      an integrity verification function to authenticate its publisher.
      The verification for mapping among different name spaces should be
      securely required.

   o  NRS System: NRS enables the deployment of new entities (e.g.  NRS
      servers) to build distributed and scalable NRS systems.  Thus, the
      entities, e.g., NRS server maintaining a mapping database, could
      be a single point of failure receiving malicious requests from



Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


      innumerable adversaries like Denial of Service or Distributed
      Denial of service attacks.  In addition, the NRS clients should
      also trust on the NRS nodes in other network domains and
      communication between them should be protected securely to prevent
      the malicious entities from participating in this communication.

   o  NRS Protocols and Messages: In an NRS system, additional messages
      related to the name registration, name resolution, and name record
      update can spill over to unauthorized networks, increaing the
      number of more security threats.  An adversary can also manipulate
      these messages by hijacking them to create false messages.  A lot
      of problems similar to the security issues of an IP network can
      affect the overall ICN architecture.  Therefore, security
      mechanisms such as accessibility, authentication, etc.,
      [NRSguidelines] for the NRS system should be considered to protect
      not only the NRS system, but also the ICN architecture.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7927]  Kutscher, D., Ed., Eum, S., Pentikousis, K., Psaras, I.,
              Corujo, D., Saucez, D., Schmidt, T., and M. Waehlisch,
              "Information-Centric Networking (ICN) Research
              Challenges", RFC 7927, DOI 10.17487/RFC7927, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7927>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [Afanasyev]
              Afanasyev, A. et al., "SNAMP: Secure Namespace Mapping to
              Scale NDN Forwarding", IEEE Global Internet Symposium ,
              April 2015.

   [Zhang2]   Zhang, Y., "A Survey of Mobility Support in Named Data
              Networking", NAMED-ORIENTED MOBILITY: ARCHITECTURES,
              ALGORITHMS, AND APPLICATIONS(NOM) , 2016.

   [Ravindran]
              Ravindran, R. et al., "Forwarding-Label support in CCN
              Protocol", draft-ravi-icnrg-ccn-forwarding-label-01 , July
              2017.




Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


   [SAIL]     "FP7 SAIL project.", http://www.sail-project.eu/ .

   [MF]       "NSF Mobility First project.",
              http://mobilityfirst.winlab.rutgers.edu/ .

   [Bayhan]   Bayhan, S. et al., "On Content Indexing for Off-Path
              Caching in Information-Centric Networks", ACM ICN ,
              September 2016.

   [RFC8569]  Mosko, M., Solis, I., and C. Wood, "Content-Centric
              Networking (CCNx) Semantics",
              https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8569 , July 2019.

   [RFC8609]  Mosko, M., Solis, I., and C. Wood, "CCNx Messages in TLV
              Format", https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8609 , July
              2019.

   [CCNxNRS]  Hong, J. et al., "CCNx Extension for Name Resolution
              Service", draft-hong-icnrg-ccnx-nrs-02 , July 2018.

   [Hong]     Hong, J., Chun, W., and H. Jung, "Demonstrating a Scalable
              Name Resolution System for Information-Centric
              Networking", ACM ICN , September 2015.

   [NRSguidelines]
              Hong, J. et al., "Design Guidelines for Name Resolution
              Service in ICN", draft-irtf-icnrg-nrs-requirements-03 ,
              November 2019.

   [Dannewitz]
              Dannewitz, C. et al., "Network of Information (NetInf)-An
              information centric networking architecture", Computer
              Communications vol. 36, no. 7, April 2013.

   [Dannewitz2]
              Dannewitz, C., DAmbrosio, M., and V. Vercellone,
              "Hierarchical DHT-based name resolution for Information-
              Centric Networks", Computer Communications vol. 36, no. 7,
              April 2013.

Authors' Addresses










Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Arch Considerations of ICN using NRS        March 2020


   Jungha Hong
   ETRI
   218 Gajeong-ro, Yuseung-Gu
   Daejeon  34129
   Korea

   Email: jhong@etri.re.kr


   Tae-Wan You
   ETRI
   218 Gajeong-ro, Yuseung-Gu
   Daejeon  34129
   Korea

   Email: twyou@etri.re.kr


   Ved Kafle
   NICT
   4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi
   Koganei, Tokyo  184-8795
   Japan

   Email: kafle@nict.go.jp


























Hong, et al.           Expires September 10, 2020              [Page 11]
