
XCON WG                                                   P. Koskelainen
Internet-Draft                                              H. Khartabil
Expires: February 10, 2005                                         Nokia
                                                         August 12, 2004


          Requirements for Conference Policy Control Protocol
                      draft-ietf-xcon-cpcp-reqs-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 10, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The conference policy server allows clients to manipulate and
   interact with the conference policy.  One mechanism to manipulate the
   policy is to use conference policy control protocol (CPCP).  This
   document gives the requirements for CPCP.








Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Integration with Floor Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Conference Policy Data Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  CPCP Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1   Conference creation, termination and joining . . . . . . .  8
     6.2   Manipulating general conference attributes . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3   Authentication and Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.4   Application and media manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.5   ACL manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.6   Floor control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.7   Inviting and ejecting users  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.8   User Privileges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.9   General Protocol Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 17




























Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


1.  Introduction

   The conferencing framework document [3] describes the overall
   architecture, terminology, and protocol components needed for multi-
   party conferencing.  It defines a logical function called a
   conference policy server which can store and manipulate rules
   associated with participation in a conference.  These rules include
   directives on the lifespan of the conference, who can and cannot join
   the conference, definitions of roles available in the conference and
   the responsibilities associated with those roles.

   The conference policy is represented by a URI.  There is a unique
   conference policy for each conference.  The conference policy URI
   points to a conference policy server which can manipulate that
   conference policy.

   Note that CPCP is not the only mechanism to manipulate conference
   policy, but other mechanisms exists as well, such as a Web interface.

   This document is based on the definition and description of
   conference policy and the Conference Policy Control Protocol (CPCP)
   in the Conferencing framework document [3], with the functionality of
   CPCP being independent of SIP.  Moreover, [6] give useful background
   information about conferencing and floor control.



























Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


2.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.














































Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


3.  Terminology

   This document uses the definitions from [3].

   Additional definitions:
      ACL
         Access control list (ACL) defines users who can join a
         conference.  Users may have allow, blocked or pending status in
         the list.  Each conference has its own ACL.
      Floor control
         Floor control is a mechanism that enables applications or users
         to gain safe and mutually exclusive or non-exclusive access to
         the shared object or resource in a conference.
      Privilege
         A privilege is a right to perform a manipulation operation in a
         conference.  It is user permission such as the right to modify
         ACL or expel users.


































Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


4.  Integration with Floor Control

   Floor control is an optional feature often used by conferencing
   applications.  It enables applications or users to gain safe and
   mutually exclusive or non-exclusive input access to a shared object
   or resource.  We define a floor as the temporary permission for a
   conference participant to access or manipulate a specific shared
   resource or group of resources.

   We assume that the ability of users to create floors is governed by
   the conference policy.  Conference user may use floor control
   protocol (see e.g.  [5]) or some other mechanism to request floors.

   The conference policy also defines the floor control policy (e.g.
   moderator-controlled or server grants the floor randomly) and the
   floor moderator, if the floor policy is moderator-controlled.

   The privileged user in a conference (such as the creator) can remove
   the floor at any time by modifying the conference policy (so that the
   resources are no longer floor- controlled), or change the floor
   chair.

   The floor moderator just controls the access to the floor, according
   to the floor policy, defined by the conference policy at a time when
   the floor is created.


























Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


5.  Conference Policy Data Model

   Conference policy data is relatively static.  It is not updated
   frequently as e.g.  participant list is not part of the conference
   policy.  Users with sufficient privileges are able to manipulate
   conference policy.  For example, a user with sufficient privileges
   may manipulate conference's access control list by adding a user into
   the ACL allowed list.











































Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


6.  CPCP Requirements

   This section describes requirements for the conference policy control
   protocol (CPCP).

6.1  Conference creation, termination and joining

   REQ-A1: It MUST be possible to create a new conference addressable by
   a URI.

   REQ-A2: It MUST be possible to associate policy attributes to a
   conference URI.

   REQ-A3: It MUST be possible to reserve a conference URI for future
   use with or without associating policy attributes to it.

   REQ-A4: It MUST be possible for a privileged user to read conference
   policy for a given conference URI, during and before joining the
   conference.

   REQ-A5: It MUST be possible to delete existing conference policy.
   This results in terminating the conference, deleting conference URI
   and releasing all resources associated with it.

   REQ-A6: It MUST be possible to anonymously participate in a
   conference.

   REQ-A7: It MUST NOT be possible for a user to authenticate himself as
   an anonymous user.

   Note: A conference focus must not accept users to authenticate
   themselves with a username "anonymous" (like in Digest
   authentication).

   REQ-A8: It MUST be possible to assign multiple conference URIs to a
   conference, one for each session signaling protocol scheme that the
   conference server supports.

   REQ-A9: It MUST be possible to define the time when media mixing may
   start ("don't-mix-before-time") and stop ("cannot-continue-after")
   operating in the conference.

   REQ-A10: It MUST be possible to define the time after which users are
   allowed to join the conference.

   REQ-A11: It MUST be possible to define the time after which new users
   are not allowed to join the conference anymore.




Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


   REQ-A12: It MUST be possible to define the time when users or
   resources on the dial-out list are invited to join the conference.

   REQ-A13: It MUST be possible define whether the conference can be
   extended.  Note: This does not guarantee that resources are
   available.

   REQ-A14: It MUST be possible to indicate key participants.

   REQ-A15a: It MUST be possible to define when media mixing starts
   based on the latter of the mixing start time, and the time the first
   participant arrives.

   REQ X15b: It MUST be possible to define when media mixing starts
   based on the latter of the mixing start time, and the time the first
   key participant arrives.

   REQ-A16a: It MUST be possible to define when media mixing stops based
   on the earlier of the mixing stop time, and the time the last
   participant leaves the conference.

   REQ-A16b: It MUST be possible to define when media mixing stops based
   on the earlier of the mixing stop time, and the time the last key
   participant leaves.

   REQ-A16c: It MUST be possible to define when media mixing stops based
   on the time only.

   REQ-A17: It MUST be possible to define that the users and resources
   on the dial-out list are invited only after first key participant has
   joined.

   Note: This parameter, if set, overrides the time defined by REQ-A12.

6.2  Manipulating general conference attributes

   REQ-B1: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete a conference
   Subject.

   REQ-B2: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference URI
   display name.

   REQ-B3: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference
   creator information (as is seen e.g.  in SDP o line).

   REQ-B4: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference URI
   link for more information (as used e.g.  in SDP u line).




Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005            [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


   REQ-B5: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference host
   contact information (as used e.g.  in SDP e and p lines).

   REQ-B6: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete short
   conference session description (as used e.g.  in SDP i line).  This
   can be per session or per media.

   REQ-B7: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete the parameter
   for max number of conference participants.  This defines the maximum
   number of participants present at the same time.

   REQ-B8: It MUST be possible to hide conference related information
   from non-privileged users.

   Note: This defines the level of visibility of the basic conference
   information (e.g.  visible only to participants).  This feature may
   be needed e.g.  in search operations.

   REQ-B9: It MUST be possible to set, modify and delete conference
   Keywords.

   Note: (This may be useful e.g.  for search engines).

6.3  Authentication and Security

   REQ-C1: It MUST be possible to define appropriate authentication for
   joining users.

6.4  Application and media manipulation

   REQ-D1: It MAY be possible to define media policy within conference
   policy.

   REQ-D2: It MUST be possible to define the media types for the
   conference.

   Note: This means MIME main types, such as audio and video.  The
   conference server can use this information e.g when placing m lines
   in SIP/SDP dial-outs.

6.5  ACL manipulation

   REQ-E1: It MUST be possible to define which users are not allowed to
   join the conference.

   REQ-E2: It MUST be possible to define which users are not allowed to
   join a conference in a single operation.




Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


   REQ-E3: It MUST be possible to define which users are allowed to join
   the conference.

   REQ-E4: It MUST be possible to define which users are allowed to join
   a conference in a single operation.

   REQ-E5: It MUST be possible to define which users are places into
   pending list, waiting for further approval e.g.  from moderator.

   REQ-E6: It MUST be possible to use wildcards in ACL.

   REQ-E7: ACL conflicts MUST be solved in a well-defined way (e.g.
   what if user appears both in blocked list and in allowed list) e.g.
   by mandating the order in which ACL definitions are evaluated (e.g.
   most specific expression first).

   REQ-E8: Conference MUST have default policy for those users that no
   matching rule is found in ACL.

   REQ-E9: It MUST be possible to allow and disallow anonymous
   membership in a conference.

6.6  Floor control

   REQ-F1: It MUST be possible to define whether floor control is in use
   or not.

   REQ-F2: It MUST be possible to define the algorithm to be used in
   granting the floor.

   Note: Example algorithms might be e.g.  moderator-controlled, FCFS,
   random.

   REQ-F3: It MUST be possible to define how many users can have the
   floor at the same time.

   REQ-F4: It MUST be possible to have one floor for one or more media
   types.

   REQ-F5: It MUST be possible to have multiple floors in a conference.

   REQ-F6: It MUST be possible to define whether a floor is
   moderator-controlled or not.

   REQ-F7: If the floor is moderator-controlled, it MUST be possible to
   assign and replace the floor moderator.





Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


6.7  Inviting and ejecting users

   REQ-G1: It MUST be possible to define a dial-out list of users that
   the conference focus invites.

   REQ-G2: It MUST be possible to set a dial-out list in a single
   operation.

   REQ-G3: It MUST be possible to expel users from a currently occurring
   conference.

   REQ-G4: It MUST be possible to expel many users in a single
   operation.

   REQ-G5: It MUST be possible to define list of users who the focus
   should refer to the conference (so that the referred users will dial
   in the conference).

   REQ-G6: It MUST be possible to set the list of referred users in a
   single operation.

6.8  User Privileges

   REQ-H1: It MUST be possible to give a privilege to a user.

   REQ-H2: It MUST be possible to give privileges to many users in a
   single operation.

   REQ-H3: It MUST be possible to remove a privilege from a user.

   REQ-H4: It MUST be possible to remove privileges from many users in a
   single operation.

   REQ-H5: It MUST be possible to define users who are allowed to
   subscribe to the conference event package [4].

   REQ-H6: It MUST be only be possible for a users with sufficient
   privileges to manipulate conference policy.

   Note: For example, the creator of the conference may manipulate
   conference policy.

6.9  General Protocol Requirements

   REQ-CP-1: Protocol behaviour:  CPCP protocol MUST be a reliable
   client-server protocol.  Hence, it MUST have a positive response
   indicating that the request has been received, or error response if
   an error has occurred.



Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


   REQ-CP-2: Manipulations of the policy collection MUST exhibit the
   ACID property; that is, they MUST be atomic, be consistent, durable,
   and operate independently.

   REQ-CP-3: It MUST be possible for the server to authenticate the
   client.

   REQ-CP-4: It MUST be possible for the client to authenticate the
   server.

   REQ-CP-5: It MUST be possible for message integrity to be ensured
   between the client and the server.

   REQ-CP-6: It MUST be possible for privacy to be ensured between the
   client and server.




































Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Eric Burger, Keith Drage, Brian
   Rosen, Xiaotao Wu, Henning Schulzrinne, Simo Veikkolainen, Mary
   Barnes and IETF conferencing design team for their feedback.














































Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


8.  References

8.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCD 14, March 1997.

   [2]  Rosenberg et al., J., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC
        3261, June 2002.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the Session
        Initiation Protocol",
        draft-rosenberg-sipping-conferencing-framework-01 (work in
        progress), February 2003.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event
        Package for Conference State",
        draft-ietf-sipping-conference-package-03 (work in progress),
        February 2004.

8.2  Informative References

   [5]  Wu, X., Schulzrinne, H. and P. Koskelainen, "Use of SIP and SOAP
        for conference floor control", draft-wu-sipping-floor-control-04
        (work in progress), January 2003.

   [6]  Koskelainen, P., Schulzrinne, H. and X. Wu, "A sip-based
        conference control framework", Nossdav'2002 Miami Beach, May
        2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Petri Koskelainen
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 100 (Visiokatu 1)
   Tampere  FIN-33721
   Finland

   EMail: petri.koskelainen@nokia.com











Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


   Hisham Khartabil
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 321
   Helsinki  FIN-00045
   Finland

   EMail: hisham.khartabil@nokia.com












































Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  CPCP-req                     August 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Koskelainen & Khartabil    Expires February 10, 2005           [Page 17]

