

 Internet Draft                                              Sam X. Sun 
 Document: draft-sun-handle-system-10.txt                          CNRI 
 Expires: March 2003                                       Larry Lannom 
                                                                   CNRI 
                                                         September 2002 
  
  
                           Handle System Overview 
      
 Status of this Memo  
     
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
         
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 
         
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
    progress."  
         
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
         
 Abstract  
     
    This document provides an overview of the Handle System in terms of 
    its namespace and service architecture, as well as its relationship 
    to other Internet services such as DNS, LDAP/X.500, and URN. The 
    Handle System is a general-purpose global name service that allows 
    secured name resolution and administration over the public 
    Internet. The Handle System manages handles, which are unique names 
    for digital objects and other Internet resources.  
   
 Table of Contents 
     
    1. Introduction..................................................2 
    2. Handle Namespace..............................................5 
    3. Handle System Architecture....................................6 
    4. Handle System Service and its Security........................9 
    5. The Handle System and other Internet Services................10 
    5.1 Domain Name Service (DNS)...................................11 
    5.2 Directory Services (X.500/LDAP).............................11 
    5.3 Uniform Resource Names (URN)................................12 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 1] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    6. Security Considerations......................................13 
    6.1 General Security Practice...................................13 
    6.2 Privacy Protection..........................................14 
    6.3 Caching and Proxy...........................................14 
    6.4 Mirroring...................................................15 
    6.5 Denial of Service (DoS).....................................15 
    7. History of the Handle System.................................15 
    8. Acknowledgement..............................................15 
    References and Bibliography.....................................16 
    Author's Addresses..............................................17 
        
 1. Introduction  
         
    This document provides an overview of the Handle System, a 
    distributed information system designed to provide an efficient, 
    extensible, and secured global name service for use on networks 
    such as the Internet. The Handle System includes an open protocol, 
    a namespace, and a reference implementation of the protocol. The 
    protocol enables a distributed computer system to store names, or 
    handles, of digital resources and resolve those handles into the 
    information necessary to locate, access, and otherwise make use of 
    the resources. These associated values can be changed as needed to 
    reflect the current state of the identified resource without 
    changing the handle. This allows the name of the item to persist 
    over changes of location and other current state information. Each 
    handle may have its own administrator(s) and administration can be 
    done in a distributed environment. The Handle System supports 
    secured handle resolution. Security service such as data 
    confidentiality, service integrity, and non-repudiation are 
    provided upon client's request. 
      
    The Handle System provides a confederated name service that allows 
    any existing local namespace to join the global handle namespace by  
    obtaining a unique handle system naming authority. Local names and 
    their value-binding(s) remain intact after joining the Handle 
    System. Any handle request to the local namespace may be processed 
    by a service interface speaking the handle system protocol. 
    Combined with the unique naming authority, any local name is 
    guaranteed unique under the global handle namespace.   
     
    There are several services that are in use today to provide name 
    service for Internet resources. Among these the Domain Name System 
    (DNS) [2,3] is the most widely used. DNS is designed "to provide a 
    mechanism for naming resources in such a way that the names are 
    mappable into IP addresses and are usable in different hosts, 
    networks, protocol families, internets, and administrative 
    organizations" [3]. The growth of the Internet has raised demands 
    for various extensions to DNS. There are also attempts to use DNS 
    as a general-purpose resource naming system. However, the 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 2] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    importance of DNS in basic network routing has led to great caution 
    in implementing any DNS extension or overloading the DNS for 
    general-purpose resource naming. An additional factor which argues 
    against using DNS as a general-purpose naming service is the DNS 
    administrative model. DNS names are typically managed by the 
    network administrator(s) at the DNS zone level. There is no 
    provision for per-name administrative structure and no facilities 
    for anyone other than the network administrator to create or manage 
    DNS names. This is appropriate for domain name administration but 
    less so for general-purpose resource naming.  
     
    The Handle System has been designed from the start to serve as a 
    general-purpose naming service. It is designed to accommodate very 
    large numbers of entities and to allow distributed administration 
    over the public Internet. The handle system data model allows 
    access control to be defined at the level of each handle data. Each 
    handle can further define its own set of administrators that are 
    independent from the network or host administrator. 
  
    Traditional URLs (Uniform Resource Locators) [4] allow certain 
    Internet resources to be named as a combination of a DNS name and 
    local name. The local name may be a local file path, or a reference 
    to some local service (e.g. a cgi-bin script). This combination of 
    DNS name and local name provides a flexible administrative model 
    for naming and managing individual Internet resources. However, the 
    URL practice also has some key limitations. Most URL schemes (e.g., 
    http) are defined for resolution only. Any URL administration has 
    to be done either at the local host, or via some other network 
    service such as NFS. Using a URL as a name typically ties the 
    Internet resource to its current network location. For example, a 
    URL will be tied to its local file path when the file path is part 
    of the URL. When the resource moves from one location to another 
    for whatever reason, the URL breaks.  
     
    The Handle System is designed to overcome these limitations and to 
    add significant functionality. Specifically, the Handle System is 
    designed with the following objectives: 
     
       . Uniqueness: Every handle is globally unique within the Handle 
         System.  
     
       . Persistence: A handle is not derived in any way from the 
         entity that it names, but is assigned to it independently. 
         While an existing name, or even a mnemonic, may be included in 
         a handle for convenience, the only operational connection 
         between a handle and the entity it names is maintained within 
         the Handle System. This of course does not guarantee 
         persistence, which is a function of administrative care. But 
         it does allow the same name to persist over changes of 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 3] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
         location, ownership, and other state conditions. For example, 
         when a named resource moves from one location to another, the 
         handle may be kept valid by updating its value in the Handle 
         System to reflect the new location. 
     
       . Multiple Instances: A single handle can refer to multiple 
         instances of a resource, at different and possibly changing 
         locations in a network. Applications can take advantage of 
         this to increase performance and reliability. For example, a 
         network service may define multiple entry points for its 
         service with a single handle so as to distribute the service 
         load. 
     
       . Extensible Namespace: Existing local namespaces may join the 
         handle namespace by acquiring a unique handle naming 
         authority. This allows local namespaces to be introduced into 
         a global context while avoiding conflict with existing 
         namespaces. Use of naming authorities also allows delegation 
         of service, both resolution and administration, to a local 
         handle service.  
     
       . International Support: The handle namespace is based on 
         Unicode 3.0 [1], which includes most of the characters 
         currently used around the world. This allows handles to be 
         used in any native environment. The handle protocol mandates 
         UTF-8 [5] as the encoding used for handles.  
     
       . Distributed Service Model: The Handle System defines a 
         hierarchical service model such that any local handle 
         namespace may be serviced either by a corresponding local 
         handle service or by the global service or by both. The global 
         service, known as the Global Handle Registry, can be used to 
         dispatch any handle service request to the responsible local 
         handle service. The distributed service model allows 
         replication of any given service into multiple service sites 
         and each service site may further distribute its service into 
         a cluster of individual servers. (Note that local here refers 
         only to namespace and administrative concerns. A local handle 
         service could in fact have many service sites distributed 
         across the Internet.) 
     
       . Secured Name Service: The handle system allows secured name 
         resolution and administration over the public Internet. The 
         handle system protocol defines standard mechanisms for both 
         client and server authentication, as well as service 
         authorization. It also provides security options to assure 
         service integrity and data confidentiality.  
      

  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 4] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
       . Distributed Administration Service: Each handle may define its 
         own administrator(s) or administrator group(s). Ownership of 
         each handle is defined in terms of its administrator or 
         administrator groups. This, combined with the handle system 
         authentication protocol, allows any handle to be managed 
         securely over the public network by its administrator at any 
         network location. 
     
       . Efficient Resolution Service: The handle protocol is designed 
         to allow highly efficient name resolution performance. To 
         avoid resolution being affected by computationally costly 
         administration service, separate service interfaces (i.e., 
         server processes and their associated communication ports) for 
         handle name resolution and administration may be defined by 
         any handle service.  
  
    This document provides an overview of the handle namespace and 
    service architecture. It also compares the Handle System with other 
    existing Internet services, protocols, and specifications (e.g., 
    DNS [2, 3], URLs [4], X.500/LDAP [6,7,8], and URN [9,10]). Details 
    of the handle system data and service model, as well as its 
    communication protocol, are specified in separate documents. They 
    can be found under the handle system website at 
    http://www.handle.net. 
      
 2. Handle Namespace 
         
    Every handle consists of two parts: its naming authority, otherwise 
    known as its prefix, and a unique local name under the naming 
    authority, otherwise known as its suffix: 
     
      <Handle> ::= <Handle Naming Authority> "/" <Handle Local Name> 
     
    The naming authority and local name are separated by the ASCII 
    character "/". The collection of local names under a naming 
    authority defines the local handle namespace for that naming 
    authority. Any local name must be unique under its local namespace. 
    The uniqueness of a naming authority and a local name under that 
    authority ensures that any handle is globally unique within the 
    context of the Handle System.  
     
    For example, "10.1045/january99-bearman" is a handle for an article 
    published in D-Lib magazine [12]. Its naming authority is "10.1045" 
    and its local name is "january99-bearman". The handle namespace can 
    be considered as superset of many local namespaces, with each local 
    namespace having a unique naming authority under the Handle System. 
    The naming authority identifies the administrative unit of 
    creation, although not necessarily continuing administration, of 
    the associated handles. Each naming authority is guaranteed to be 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 5] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    globally unique within the Handle System. Any existing local 
    namespace can join the global handle namespace by obtaining a 
    unique naming authority so that any local name under the namespace 
    can be globally referenced as a combination of the naming authority 
    and the local name as shown above.  
  
    Naming authorities under the Handle System are defined in a 
    hierarchical fashion resembling a tree structure. Each node and 
    leaf of the tree is given a label that corresponds to a naming 
    authority segment. The parent node presents the parent naming 
    authority of its child nodes. Unlike DNS, handle naming authorities 
    are constructed left to right, concatenating the labels from the 
    root of the tree to the node that represents the naming authority. 
    Each label is separated by the octet used for ASCII character "." 
    (0x2E). For example, a naming authority for the National Digital 
    Library Program ("ndlp") at the Library of Congress ("loc") is 
    defined as "loc.ndlp". 
     
    Each naming authority may have many child naming authorities 
    registered underneath. Any child naming authority can only be 
    registered by its parent after its parent naming authority is 
    registered. However, there is no intrinsic administrative 
    relationship between the namespaces represented by the parent and 
    child naming authorities. The parent namespace and its child 
    namespaces may be served by different handle services, and they may 
    or may not share any administration privileges between each other.  
  
    Handles may consist of any printable characters from the Universal 
    Character Set (UCS-2) of ISO/IEC 10646, which is the exact 
    character set defined by Unicode v2.0 [1]. The UCS-2 character set 
    encompasses most characters used in every major language written 
    today. To allow compatibility with most of the existing systems and 
    prevent ambiguity among different encoding, the handle system 
    protocol mandates UTF-8 to be the only encoding used for handles. 
    The UTF-8 encoding preserves any ASCII encoded names so as to allow 
    maximum compatibility to existing systems without causing naming 
    conflict. Some encoding issues over the global namespace and the 
    choice of UTF-8 encoding are discussed in [13]. 
     
    By default, handles are case sensitive. However, a handle service 
    may define its namespace so that ASCII characters within any handle 
    under the namespace are case insensitive. 
         
 3. Handle System Architecture  
         
    The Handle System defines a hierarchical service model. The top 
    level consists of a single global service, known as the Global 
    Handle Registry (GHR). The lower level consists of all other handle 
    services, generically known as Local Handle Services (LHS).  
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 6] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
     
    The Global Handle Registry can be used to manage any handle 
    namespace. It is unique from any other handle services only in that 
    it provides the service used to manage naming authorities, all of 
    which are managed as handles. The naming authority handle provides 
    information that clients can use to access and utilize the local 
    handle service for handles under the naming authority. 
  
    Local Handle Services are intended to be hosted by organizations 
    with administrative responsibility for handles under certain naming 
    authority. A Local Handle Service may be responsible for any number 
    of local handle namespaces, each of which identified by a unique 
    naming authority. The Local Handle Service and its responsible set 
    of local handle namespaces must be registered under the Global 
    Handle Registry. 
     
    One important aspect of the Handle System is its distributed 
    architecture. The Handle System as a whole consists of a number of 
    individual handle services. Each of these service may consist of 
    one or more service sites. Each of these service site is a complete 
    replication of each other, at least for handle resolution. 
    Additionally, a service site may also consist of one or more handle 
    servers. Handle requests directed at the service site may be evenly 
    distributed into these handle servers. The Handle System may 
    consist of any number of handle services. There are no design 
    limits on the number of sites which make up each service. Neither 
    there are any limits on the number of servers that make up each 
    site. Replication among any service sites does not require that 
    each site contains the same number of servers. In other words, 
    while each site will have the same replicated set of handles, each 
    site may allocate that set of handles across a different number of 
    servers. This distributed approach is intended to aid scalability 
    to accommodate any large-scale of operation and to mitigate 
    problems of single point failure.  
     
    Figure 3.1 illustrates a potential handle service that consists of 
    two service sites: one located at the US East coast and the other 
    at the US West coast. The East coast service site consists of four 
    server computers. The West coast service site, with more powerful 
    computers deployed, decides two servers will suffice. The number of 
    service sites for any handle service, as well as the number of 
    servers that are used by any service site, may be added or removed 
    dynamically depending on the service requirement. 
     
     
     
     
     
     
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 7] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
        -------------------------              ------------------  
       |  ---------   ---------  |            |  -----    -----  | 
       | |         | |         | |            | |  S  |  |  S  | | 
       | | server1 | | server2 | |            | |  E  |  |  E  | | 
       | |         | |         | |            | |  R  |  |  R  | | 
       |  ---------   ---------  |            | |  V  |  |  V  | | 
       |  ---------   ---------  |            | |  E  |  |  E  | | 
       | |         | |         | |            | |  R  |  |  R  | | 
       | | Server3 | | Server4 | |            | |     |  |     | | 
       | |         | |         | |            | |  1  |  |  2  | | 
       |  ---------   ---------  |            |  -----    -----  | 
        -------------------------               ------------------ 
      
          Handle Service Site 1                Handle Service Site 2 
             (US East Coast)                     (US West Coast) 
          
        Fig. 3.1: Handle service configured with two service sites 
  
    Each handle service manages a distinct sub-namespace under the 
    Handle System. Namespaces under different handle services may not 
    overlap. The sub-namespace typically consists of handles under a 
    number of naming authorities. The handle service is called the 
    "home" service of these naming authorities and is the only one that 
    provides resolution and administration service for handles under 
    these naming authorities. Before resolving a handle, a client has 
    to determine the "home" service of the handle in question. The 
    "home" service of each handle is the "home" service of its naming 
    authority and is registered at the Global Handle Registry. Clients 
    can find the "home" service for each handle by querying the naming 
    authority handle at the Global Handle Registry. 
     
    The Global Handle Registry maintains naming authority handles. Each 
    naming authority handle maintains the service information that 
    describes the "home" service of the naming authority. The service 
    information lists the service sites of the handle service, as well 
    as the interface to each handle server within each site. To find 
    the "home" service for any handle, a client can query the Global 
    Handle Registry for the service information associated to the 
    corresponding naming authority handle. The service information 
    provides the necessary information for clients to communicate with 
    the "home" service.  
     
    Figure 3.2 shows an example of a typical handle resolution process. 
    In this case, the "home" service is a Local Handle Service. The 
    client is trying to resolve the handle "cnri.dlib/july95-arms" and 
    has to find its "home" service from the Global Handle Registry. The 
    "home" service can be found by sending a query to the Global Handle 
    Registry for the naming authority handle for "cnri.lib". The Global 
    Handle Registry returns the service information of the Local Handle 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 8] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    Service that is responsible for handles under the naming authority 
    "cnri.dlib". The service information allows the client to 
    communicate with the Local Handle Service to resolve the handle 
    "cnri.dlib/july95-arms". 
     
       ------------------------  
      |                        |    4. Result of client request 
      | Client with global     |  <-------------------------------. 
      |  service information   |                                  | 
      |                        |  ----------------------------.   | 
       ------------------------     3. Request to responsible |   | 
                 |   ^                 Local Handle Service   |   | 
     1. Client   |   |                                        |   | 
     query for   |   |                                        |   | 
     naming      |   | 2. Service information                 |   | 
     authority   |   |    for "cnri.dlib"                     V   | 
     "cnri.dlib" |   |                          ----------------------  
                 |   |                         |                      | 
                 V   |                         | Local Handle Service | 
            ---------------                    | responsible for the  | 
           |               |                   | naming authority     |  
           | Global Handle |                   | "cnri.dlib"          | 
           |   Registry    |                   |                      | 
           |               |                    ---------------------- 
            ---------------  
     
               Fig. 3.2: Handle resolution starting with global 
  
    To improve resolution performance, any client may choose to cache 
    the service information returned from the Global Handle Registry 
    and use it for subsequent queries. A separate handle caching 
    server, either stand-alone or as a piece of a general caching 
    mechanism, may also be used to provide shared caching within a 
    local community. Given a cached resolution result, subsequent 
    queries of the same handle may be answered locally without 
    contacting any handle service. Given cached service information, 
    clients can send their requests directly to the Local Handle 
    Service without contacting the Global Handle Registry.    
         
 4. Handle System Service and its Security  
     
    The Handle System provides handle resolution and administration 
    service over the public Internet. Each handle can be assigned with 
    a set of values. Clients use the handle resolution service to 
    resolve any handle into its set of values. Each value has a data 
    type and a unique value index. Clients can query for specific 
    handle values based on data type or value index. 
     

  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                 [Page 9] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    The handle administration service answers requests from clients to 
    manage handles. These include adding handles, deleting handles or 
    updating their values. It also manages naming authorities via 
    naming authority handles. Each handle can define its own 
    administrator(s) and each administrator can be granted a certain 
    set of permissions. The handle system authentication protocol 
    authenticates the handle administrator before fulfilling any 
    administrative request. 
     
    The Handle System provides security services such as client and 
    server authentication, data confidentiality and integrity, as well 
    as service non-repudiation. By default, handle resolution service 
    does not require any client authentication. However, resolution 
    request for confidential data assigned to any handle (by its 
    administrator), as well as any administration request (e.g. adding 
    or deleting handle values) require authentication of the client for 
    proper authorization. When authentication is required, the handle 
    server will issue a challenge to the requesting client before 
    carrying out the client's request. To satisfy the authentication 
    requirement, the client must send back the correct response that 
    identifies itself as the administrator. The handle server will 
    respond to the initial request only after successful authentication 
    of the client. Handle clients may choose to use either secret key 
    or public key cryptography for authentication. Authentication under 
    Handle System can also be carried out via third party 
    authentication services. To ensure data integrity, clients may 
    request digitally signed responses from any handle server. They may 
    also set up a secured communication session with the handle server 
    so that any exchanged information can be encrypted (for data 
    confidentiality) using the session key.  
     
    The Handle System provides service options for secured information 
    exchange between client and server. This does not guarantee the 
    truthfulness of handle values. Incorrect values assigned to any 
    handle by its administrator may very well mislead clients. On the 
    other hand, a handle value may contain references to other handle 
    values to provide additional credentials. For example, a handle 
    value R (e.g., a claim) may contain a reference to some other 
    handle value that contains the digital signature (from a creditable 
    source) upon the value R. Clients who trust the signature could 
    then trust the handle value R. 
     
     
 5. The Handle System and other Internet Services  
     
    There are a number of existing and proposed Internet identifier 
    services or specifications that by design or intent cover some of 
    the functionalities proposed for the Handle System. This section 
    briefly reviews them in relationship to the Handle System.     
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 10] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
     
 5.1 Domain Name Service (DNS)  
         
    The Domain Name Service, or DNS, was originally designed and is 
    heavily used for mapping domain names into IP Addresses for network 
    routing purposes. RFC1034 [2] and RFC1035 [3] provide detailed 
    descriptions of its design and implementation. The growth of the 
    Internet has increased demands for various extensions to DNS, even 
    its possible use as a general purpose resource naming system. 
    However, any such use has the potential to slow down the network 
    address translation and/or affect its effectiveness in network 
    routing. DNS implementations typically do not scale well when large 
    amount of data is associated with any particular DNS name. It is 
    generally considered inadequate to use DNS for naming any kind of 
    resources over the Internet. 
     
    An additional factor that argues against using DNS as a general-
    purpose naming service is the DNS administrative model. DNS names 
    are typically managed by the network administrator(s) at the DNS 
    zone level. There is with no provision for a per-name 
    administrative structure. No facilities are provided for anyone 
    other than network administrators to create or manage DNS names. 
    This is appropriate for domain name administration but less so for 
    general-purpose name administration.  
     
    The Handle System differs from DNS in its distributed 
    administration and service model, as well as its security features. 
    The handle system protocol comprise security options to assure 
    confidentiality and integrity during data transmission. Each handle 
    under the Handle System may define its own administrator that is 
    independent from the server administrator. The handle system 
    protocol allows any handle administrator to manage its handles 
    securely over the public network. Additionally, the Handle System 
    service model allows any of its service sites to dynamically 
    configure its service distribution among a cluster of servers to 
    accommodate increased service requests. This also allows less 
    powerful computers to be used together to support any huge number 
    of handles. 
   
 5.2 Directory Services (X.500/LDAP) 
         
    X.500 [6] is the OSI Directory Standard defined by ISO and the ITU. 
    It is designed "to provide a white pages service that would return 
    either the telephone numbers or X.400 O/R addresses of people", and 
    is "concerned mainly with providing the name server service for 
    Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) applications" [7]. X.500 defines 
    a hierarchical data and information model with a set of protocols 
    to allow global name lookup and search. The protocol, however, has 
    proved difficult to implement and there has been difficulty in 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 11] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    getting "client access integrated into existing products" [14]. 
    LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) [8] has overcome many 
    of these difficulties by making the protocol simpler, and easier to 
    implement. Some concern remains, however, that as LDAP is emerging 
    from a local directory access protocol (LDAP v2) into a distributed 
    service protocol (LDAP v3), it faces many issues not addressed in 
    its original design, resulting in new complications. 
     
    The fundamental difference between a name resolution service such 
    as the Handle System and a directory service such as LDAP is search 
    capability. The added functionality of being able to search a 
    directory service necessarily carries with it added complexity, 
    thus affects its efficiency. A pure name service, such as the 
    Handle System, can be designed solely around efficient resolution 
    of known items without addressing functions and data structures 
    required for discovery of unknown items based on incomplete 
    criteria. 
     
    Directory services such as LDAP or WHOIS++ [15,16] may be used in 
    tandem with the Handle System to provide reverse lookup service. 
    Existing corporate directory services, for example, could provide 
    interfaces to both services. The handle system interface would 
    provide a highly efficient name resolution service. The directory 
    service interface would provide extended search capability. Handles 
    could also be used in LDAP service referral. For example, a LDAP 
    service may be referenced as a handle. Doing so will make the 
    reference persistent overtime, independent from location change.  
     
 5.3 Uniform Resource Names (URN) 
         
    The IETF URN Working Group [11] has defined a syntax, possible 
    resolution mechanisms, and namespace registration procedure for a 
    resource identifier intended to cover a large array of existing and 
    potential namespaces. Namespaces are to be registered and assigned 
    unique Namespace Ids (NIDs). Any resolution services associated 
    with these namespaces require further registration with a 
    Resolution Discovery System (RDS) which clients could use to begin, 
    or discover, the appropriate resolution mechanisms. 
     
    The objectives and some of the approaches of the URN and Handle 
    System efforts have enough in common that some observers might 
    think that they are in contention. This is not the case. The URN 
    effort is explicitly designed to accommodate multiple identifier 
    namespaces and resolution systems. The Handle System is one such 
    case. It has a very specific data and service model, along with a 
    protocol that supports both handle resolution and administration. 
    URNs and the Handle System may interact in variety of ways. The 
    most obvious of which is that the Handle System could be registered 
    as a URN namespace. In other words, handles under the Handle System 
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 12] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    could be referenced as a type of URN. On the other hand, it would 
    also be possible to use the Handle System as a type of RDS for 
    other URN namespaces. The success of either system however, is not 
    dependent upon the success of the other. 
       
 6. Security Considerations 
         
    This section is meant to inform people of security limitations of 
    the Handle System, as well as precautions that should be taken by 
    application developers, service providers, and handle system 
    clients. Specific security considerations regarding the handle 
    system protocol [21] or its data and service model [22] are 
    addressed in separate documents. 
     
 6.1 General Security Practice 
         
    The security of the Handle System depends on both client and server 
    host security at every step in the transaction. It assumes the 
    client host has not been tampered with and that client software 
    will reliably convey the received data to the client. The client of 
    any handle service must also assume that any handle servers 
    involved have not been compromised. To trust the Global Handle 
    Registry is to believe that the Global Handle Registry will 
    rightfully direct the client request to the responsible Local 
    Handle Service. To trust a Local Handle Service is to believe that 
    the Local Handle Service will correctly return the data that was 
    assigned to the handle by its administrator. A Local Handle Service 
    typically supports a set of naming authorities. Thus, trusting a 
    Local Handle Service would imply trusting those naming authorities.  
     
    The handle system service integrity depends heavily on the 
    integrity of the global service information. Invalid global service 
    information may mislead clients into inappropriate Local Handle 
    Services. It may also allow attackers to forge server signatures. 
    The Global Handle Registry must take extreme caution in protecting 
    the global service information and the public key pair used to sign 
    the global service information. Client applications should only 
    accept the global service information from the Global Handle 
    Registry. They should check its integrity upon each update.  
  
    For efficiency reasons, handle servers will not generate or return 
    digital signature for every service response unless specifically 
    requested by clients. To assure data integrity, clients must 
    explicitly ask the server to return the digital signature. To 
    protect sensitive data from exposure, clients may establish a 
    communication session with the server and ask the server to encrypt 
    any data using the session key. 
     

  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 13] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
 6.2 Privacy Protection 
     
    By default, most handle data stored in the Handle System is 
    publicly accessible unless otherwise specified by the handle 
    administrator. Handle administrators must pay attention when adding 
    handle values that contain private information. They may choose to 
    mark these handle values readable only by the handle 
    administrator(s), or to store these handle values encrypted, so 
    that these values can only be readable within a controlled set of 
    audience. 
     
    Log files generated by the handle server are another vulnerable 
    point where client privacy may be under attack. Operators of handle 
    servers must protect such information carefully. 
     
 6.3 Caching and Proxy 
     
    Besides performance gains and other value-added services, both the 
    proxy and caching server present themselves as men-in-the-middle, 
    and as such are vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks. It is 
    important to know that proxy and caching servers are not part of 
    any handle service. They are clients of the Handle System. Service 
    responses from proxy and caching servers cannot be authenticated 
    via handle system protocol. The trust between the client and its 
    proxy and caching server has to be setup independently. 
     
    By using the proxy and caching server, clients assume that the 
    server will submit their request and relay any response from the 
    Handle System, without mishandling any of the contents. They also 
    assume that the server will protect any sensitive information on 
    their behalf. 
     
    Proxy and caching server operators should protect the systems on 
    which such servers are running as they would protect any system 
    that contains or transports sensitive information. In particular, 
    log information gathered at proxies often contain highly sensitive 
    personal information, and/or information about organizations. Such 
    information should be carefully guarded, and appropriate guidelines 
    for their use developed and followed. 
     
    Caching servers provide additional potential vulnerabilities 
    because the contents of the cache represents an attractive target 
    for malicious exploitation. Potential attacks on the cache can 
    reveal private data for a handle user, or information still kept 
    after a user believes that they have been removed from the network. 
    Therefore, cache contents should be protected as sensitive 
    information. 
     

  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 14] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
 6.4 Mirroring 
     
    Handle system clients should be aware of possible delays in content 
    replication among mirroring sites. They should consider sending 
    their request to the primary service site for any time-sensitive 
    data. Selection of mirroring sites by service administrator must be 
    done carefully. Each mirroring site must follow the same security 
    procedures in order to ensure the service integrity. Software tools 
    may be applied to ensure data consistency among mirroring sites. 
     
 6.5 Denial of Service (DoS) 
      
    As with any public service, the Handle System is subject to denial 
    of service attack. No general solutions are available to protect 
    against such attack in today's technology. Server implementations 
    may be developed to be aware of such attack and notify its 
    administrator when it happens. Stateless cookies [19, 20] are one 
    means to mitigate some of the effects of DoS attacks on hosts that 
    perform authentication, integrity, and encryption services. Server 
    implementations, moreover, need to be upgradeable to take advantage 
    of new security technologies including anti-DoS technologies as 
    these become available. 
         
 7. History of the Handle System 
      
    The Handle System was originally conceived and developed at CNRI as 
    part of the Computer Science Technical Reports (CSTR) project, 
    funded by the Defense Advanced Projects Agency (DARPA) under Grant 
    Number MDA-972-92-J-1029. One aspect of this early digital library 
    project, which was also a major factor in the evolution of the 
    Networked Computer Science Technical Reference Library (NCSTRL) 
    [18] and related activities, was to develop a framework for the 
    underlying infrastructure of digital libraries. It is described in 
    a paper by Robert Kahn and Robert Wilensky [17]. The first 
    implementation was created at CNRI in the fall of 1994 in an effort 
    led by David Ely. 
     
    Early adopters of the Handle System include the Library of 
    Congress, the Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC), and the 
    International DOI Foundation (IDF). Feedback from these 
    organizations as well as NCSTRL, other digital library projects, 
    and related IETF efforts as mentioned above have all contributed to 
    the evolution of the Handle System. Current status and available 
    software, both client and server, can be found at 
    http://www.handle.net. 
     
 8. Acknowledgement 
      

  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 15] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    This work is derived from the earlier versions of the handle system 
    implementation. Design ideas are based on those discussed within 
    the handle system development team, including David Ely, Charles 
    Orth, Allison Yu, Sean Reilly, Jane Euler, Catherine Rey, Stephanie 
    Nguyen, Jason Petrone, and Helen She. Their contributions to this 
    work are gratefully acknowledged. 
     
    The authors also thanks and acknowledges Mark Baugher 
    (mbaugher@cisco.com) for his extensive review and comments of these 
    drafts, as well as recommendations received from other members of 
    the IRTF IDRM research group (http://www.idrm.org). 
        
 References and Bibliography 
     
    [1] The Unicode Consortium, "The Unicode Standard, Version v3.0", 
    Addison-Wesley Pub Co; ISBN: 0201616335 
     
    [2] P. Mockapetris, "DOMAIN NAMES - CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES", 
    RFC1034, November 1987 
     
    [3] P. Mockapetris, "DOMAIN NAMES - IMPLEMENTATION AND 
    SPECIFICATION", RFC1035, November 1987 
     
    [4] Berners-Lee, T., Masinter, L., McCahill, M., et al., "Uniform 
    Resource Locators (URL)", RFC1738, December 1994 
     
    [5] Yergeau, Francois, "UTF-8, A Transform Format for Unicode and 
    ISO10646", RFC2044, October 1996 
     
    [6] ITU-T Rec. X.500, "The Directory: Overview of Concepts, Models, 
    and Services", 1993. 
     
    [7] D W Chadwick, "Understanding X.500 - The Directory", Chapman & 
    Hall ISBN: 0-412-43020-7. 
     
    [8] Wahl, M., Howes, T., and S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory 
    Access Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997 
     
    [9] Sollins, K., and L. Masinter, "Functional Requirements for 
    Uniform Resource Names", RFC 1737, December 1994 
     
    [10] Sollins, K. "Architectural Principles of Uniform Resource Name  
    Resolution", RFC 2276, January 1998 
     
    [11] IETF Uniform Resource Names (URN) Working Group, April, 1998, 
    http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/urn-charter.html 
     
    [12] D-Lib Magazine, http://www.dlib.org 
     
  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 16] 
 
 Internet-Draft          Handle System Overview            October 2002 
  
  
    [13] Sam X. Sun, "Internationalization of the Handle System - A 
    Persistent Global Name Service", Proceeding of 12th International 
    Unicode Conference, April, 1998 
     
    [14] D Goodman, C Robbins, "Understanding LDAP & X.500", August 
    1997 
     
    [15] Deutsch P., Schoultz R., Faltstrom P., and C. Weider, 
    "Architecture of the Whois++ service", RFC 1835, August 1995 
     
    [16] Weider, C., J. Fullton, and S. Spero, "Architecture of the 
    Whois++ Index Service", RFC 1913, February 1996 
     
    [17] Kahn, Robert and Wilensky, Robert. "A Framework for 
    Distributed Digital Object Services", May, 1995 
     
    [18] The Networked Computer Science Technical Reports Library 
    (NCSTRL), http://www.ncstrl.org/ 
     
    [19] P. Karn, W. Simpson, "Photuris: Session-Key Management 
    Protocol", March, 1999 
     
    [20] D. Harkins, D Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)", 
    November, 1998 
     
    [21] S. Sun, S. Reilly, L. Lannom, "Handle System Namespace and 
    Service Definition", IETF draft, http://www.ietf.org/internet-
    drafts/draft-sun-handle-system-def-05.txt, work in progress.         
     
    [22] S. Sun, S. Reilly, L. Lannom, J. Petrone, "Handle System 
    Protocol Specification", IETF draft, http://www.ietf.org/internet-
    drafts/draft-sun-handle-system-protocol-02.txt, work in progress.         
     
 Author's Addresses  
         
    Sam X. Sun 
    Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI) 
    1895 Preston White Dr.  Suite 100 
    Reston, VA 20191  
    Phone: 703-262-5316 
    Email: ssun@cnri.reston.va.us 
     
    Larry Lannom 
    Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI) 
    1895 Preston White Dr.     Suite 100 
    Reston, VA 20191 
    Phone: 703-620-8990 
    Email: llannom@cnri.reston.va.us 

  
  
 Sun                      Expires - April 2003                [Page 17] 
