


Dynamic Host Configuration Working                             S. Venaas
Group                                                           T. Chown
Internet-Draft                                 University of Southampton
Expires: April 27, 2006                                 October 24, 2005


     Dual-stack clients and merging of data from DHCPv4 and DHCPv6
                   draft-ietf-dhc-dual-stack-merge-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 27, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   A node may have support for communications using both IPv4 and IPv6
   protocols.  Such a node may wish to obtain both IPv4 and IPv6
   configuration settings via the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
   (DHCP).  This can be done by using the IPv4 and the IPv6 DHC
   protocols respectively.  This document considers mechanisms that
   allow such a node to make use of the configuration data from both
   protocols to obtain the desired common configuration.




Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Tools for merging  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1   Host prefers IPv4 or IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2   Dual-stack or both DHC protocols client option . . . . . .  4
     2.3   DUID and integrated DHCPv4/v6 server . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.4   DHCPv6 option telling dual-stack client to use DHCPv4  . .  4
     2.5   IPv4-mapped addresses in DHCPv6 options  . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1   Use of preference rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2   Lists of mixed addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3   Issues not solved  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4   Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  8
































Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


1.  Introduction

   The original specification of the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
   (DHCP) was made with only IPv4 in mind.  That specification has been
   subsequently revised, up to the latest version of DHCP [1].  With the
   arrival of IPv6, a new DHCP specification for IPv6 has been designed,
   and published as DHCPv6 [2].

   These protocols allow nodes to communicate via IPv4 or IPv6 to
   retrieve configuration settings for operation in a managed
   environment.  While an IPv6 node may acquire address-related
   configuration settings via IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration
   [3], such a node may wish to use stateless DHCPv6 [4] for other
   administratively configured options, such as DNS or NTP.

   In early IPv6 deployments, a dual-stack mode of operation is
   typically used.  There will thus be nodes that require both IPv4 and
   IPv6 configuration settings.  At the same time there may be IPv4-only
   and IPv6-only nodes using these protocols.  Issues related to this
   have been described in [5].  This document discusses approaches
   towards resolving these issues.

   This initial revision does not attempt to describe any complete
   solutions, but rather serve as a discussion point by describing some
   of the possible methods that may be of use.

   In this document, we refer to DHCP for IPv4 [1] as DHCPv4 and DHCP
   for IPv6 [2] as DHCPv6.

   The authgors would welcome input on these approaches.

2.  Tools for merging

   There are a number of different tools or methods that can be of use
   in ensuring that IPv4-only, IPv6-only and dual-stack hosts each get
   the information they need from DHCPv4, DHCPv6 or a combination of the
   two.

2.1  Host prefers IPv4 or IPv6

   The idea with a preference option of some kind is that a dual-stack
   host may obtain information from both DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 but will
   prefer one of them.  So if a single valued option is received from
   both servers it can use the preferred one.  For a set (or unordered
   list) it might use only the preferred result or mix them, while for
   an ordered list it should probably use all, but put the preferred
   first.  The preference could be manually configured on the host or
   obtained via either DHCPv4 or DHCPv6.  The option would only be



Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


   needed for one of them.

2.2  Dual-stack or both DHC protocols client option

   A host could use a new DHCP option to tell the DHCP server (DHCPv4 or
   DHCPv6) that it is dual-stack and has or will request configuration
   for the other protocol.  This can indicate to the server what
   information the server needs to return to the client.

2.3  DUID and integrated DHCPv4/v6 server

   DHCPv6 [2] uses a DHCP Unique Identifier (DUID).  A client requesting
   both IPv4 and IPv6, should use the same DUID for the two requests, as
   described in [6] for use of DUIDs with IPv4.  If the client requests
   DHCPv4 first, then when it makes the DHCPv6 request, the server knows
   what information the client previously learnt through DHCPv4 from the
   observed DUID and could leave the duplicate information out from the
   DHCPv6 reply.  We are not sure whether this can be done if multiple
   integrated servers are deployed, but it seems an interesting
   approach, and a good usage for DUIDs for IPv4.

2.4  DHCPv6 option telling dual-stack client to use DHCPv4

   A new option could be used by a DHCPv6 server to tell a dual-stack
   client to request IPv4 information even if it has IPv4 addresses
   (tell client to use DHCPINFORM).

2.5  IPv4-mapped addresses in DHCPv6 options

   DHCPv6 options could contain IPv4 addresses written as IPv4-mapped
   IPv6 addresses.  This is not elegant, however.

3.  Solutions

   We will now discuss how the above tools might be used to solve some
   of the issues in [5].

3.1  Use of preference rules

   A simple preference rule as in Section 2.1 might be sufficient in
   many cases.  The perhaps most difficult problem is where the option
   is a list of values, and one wishes to have a mix of IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses where one does not want to list all of one IP type before
   the other, or if one is preferred to the other in most cases but not
   always.  Lists of mixed addresses are discussed in Section 3.2.

   Another solution could be to use FQDNs as option values whenever
   possible.  Then DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 might simply specify the same FQDN



Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


   where the FQDN is registered in the DNS with both IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses.  The preference would then be determined by the host's
   destination address selection rules.  Some sites deploying IPv6
   choose initially to use different FQDNs for IPv6, in which case this
   would not work.

   The preference rule is not sufficient if say IPv6 is generally
   preferred, but IPv4 should preferred in some cases.  One way of doing
   this could be to have the client prefer IPv6 and make the DHCPv6
   server omit IPv6 information for options where IPv4 is preferred.
   The server could do this if by use of the option in Section 2.2 it
   knows that the client will also get the IPv4 information.  An IPv6-
   only client, or one not requesting IPv4 configuration, should still
   get all the IPv6 options.  The administrator may manually configure a
   DHCPv6 server to omit some of the IPv6 configuration for clients that
   also obtain IPv4 information.  A combined DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 server
   might be able to determine this automatically.  With different
   servers it might help to have a single combined admin interface.

   One issue with the above is that the server must only omit options if
   it knows for sure that client will request and successfully obtain
   both IPv4 and IPv6 information.  There are two ways this might be
   done.  One is that the server is told by the client that it uses
   both, by using the option in Section 2.2, possibly combined with the
   option in Section 2.4 where the server tells the client to request
   the other.  Another possibly safer way is to make use of the DUID as
   in Section 2.3 so that server knows that the client that previously
   made a DHCPv6 request, now makes a DHCPv4 request.  The latter should
   work if a client generally prefering one protocol, uses DHCP for the
   preferred protocol last.  We feel the DUID approach is an elegant
   one, and is a good use of the DUID concept that is now available for
   both DHCPv4 and DHCPv6.

3.2  Lists of mixed addresses

   As we said previously, the most difficult problem is when one has a
   list of values, and one wishes to have a mix of IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses where one does not want to list all of one IP type before
   the other.  We are not sure if this is necessary to solve.  If it is,
   the easiest solution might be to use IPv4-mapped addresses as in
   Section 2.5 so that a mixed list of IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses and
   other IPv6 addresses can be passed in a DHCPv6 option.  If this is
   done it might be useful to have an option as described in Section 2.2
   that tells the server that the client is dual-stack.  This is not
   elegant however, and one should certainly not pass mapped addresses
   to an IPv6-only host.

   Another issue with using a simple preference for lists, is that if a



Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


   server is dual-stack with both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, one may not
   wish to have both the addresses in the list.  For example, if one has
   a nameserver with IPv4 address a4 and IPv6 address a6, and another
   with IPv4 address b4, one may not want the list "a6, a4, b4", but
   rather "a6, b4".  Whether this is a problem may depend on whether the
   list is processed sequentially and how long timeout there is before
   trying the next in the list.  If an integrated DHCPv4 and DHCPv6
   server knows that a client has previously got the list "a6" via say
   DHCPv6, it could choose to omit "a4" when the same client makes a
   DHCPv4 query.  It can detect that it is the same client using the
   DUID as in Section 2.3.  However if there are multiple integrated
   servers the two requests may go to different servers.  Another
   alternative could be to use the option in Section 2.2.

3.3  Issues not solved

   There are many issues in [5] that are not tackled by the above.  We
   have not looked at the issue of different people managing DHCPv4 and
   DHCPv6 or the case where the node is statically configured with
   information for one protocol while using DHCP for the other.  Another
   issue is what to do when initially only one IP protocol is enabled,
   and the other is enabled later.  There are other issues not
   sufficiently tackled as well, we suggest reading [5] for the full
   details.  The methods presented here are just some preliminary ideas.
   Through discussion in the DHC WG we will try to come up with
   solutions that can resolve the issues.  It may however not be
   possible to come up with a complete solution to all of them.

3.4  Conclusion

   We have proposed some initial ideas for solving the issue of merging
   DHCP information available from DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 servers to IPv4-
   only, IPv6-only or dual-stack nodes.  We would welcome feedback on
   these initial suggestions before progressing the document in more
   detail, and tackling the additional issues described in the problem
   statement draft.  There are certainly useful tools for the task, in
   particular DUID identifiers now available for DHCPv4 and DHCPv6.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

5.  Security Considerations

   We are not aware of any new security issues as a result of any of the
   described options, but this needs to be considered.





Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


6.  Informative References

   [1]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131,
        March 1997.

   [2]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C., and M.
        Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)",
        RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [3]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
        Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   [4]  Droms, R., "Stateless Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)
        Service for IPv6", RFC 3736, April 2004.

   [5]  Chown, T., "DHCP: IPv4 and IPv6 Dual-Stack Issues",
        draft-ietf-dhc-dual-stack-03 (work in progress), July 2005.

   [6]  Sommerfeld, B. and T. Lemon, "Node-Specific Client Identifiers
        for DHCPv4", draft-ietf-dhc-3315id-for-v4-05 (work in progress),
        June 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Stig Venaas
   University of Southampton
   School of Electronics and Computer Science
   Southampton, Hampshire  SO17 1BJ
   United Kingdom

   Email: sv@ecs.soton.ac.uk


   Tim Chown
   University of Southampton
   School of Electronics and Computer Science
   Southampton, Hampshire  SO17 1BJ
   United Kingdom

   Email: tjc@ecs.soton.ac.uk










Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Merging of DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 data       October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Venaas & Chown           Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 8]

