



nmrg                                                               G. Li
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Intended status: Informational                                   C. Zhou
Expires: 28 April 2022                                      China Mobile
                                                         25 October 2021


   Opportunities of Flexible Addressing and Protocols in Digital Twin
                                Network
               draft-li-nmrg-dtn-addressing-protocols-00

Abstract

   To build digital twin networks based on the digital twin network
   architecture in [DTNConcept], modeling of digital twins and virtual-
   physical mapping are critical.  There are many ways to construct
   network twins, and they have different ways to realize virtual-
   physical mapping and information exchange between twins.
   Constructing a twin of network element that has communication
   requirement and function like a physical entity is a kind of network
   modeling.  In this scenario, when implementing virtual-physical
   mapping and information exchange between twins based on network layer
   communication, It faces problems such as large addressing space
   consumption and low addressing efficiency.

   This document describes an idea to using flexible addressing and
   protocol techniques in digital twin network architecture that can
   help reduce the complexity of digital twin network implementations
   and improve digital twin network efficiency and security.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 April 2022.





Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     NSA                      October 2021


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Flexible Addressing for DTN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Communication between Physical Network Entities . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Communication between Digital Twins . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.3.  Communication between Physical Network Entities and Digital
           Twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Flexible Protocols for DTN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  IANA Considerations {#SEC:iana}.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   With the development of digital transformation, the network scale
   becomes larger and larger, and the types of network and network
   services become more complex.  To improve the efficiency of network
   planning, construction, maintenance, and optimization, the digital
   twin technology is introduced into the network field to implement
   intelligent and automated networks.  In [DTNConcept], a digital twin
   network is defined as a virtual representation of the physical
   network.  In almost all digital twin use cases, real-time connections
   between physical entities and digital twins are necessary.

   In order to implement the mapping between network physical entities
   and digital twins, various data collection technologies are proposed
   [DTNTechs], such as the mature and widely used SNMP (Simple network
   management protocol) and NETCONF, which can collect NetFlow and sFlow



Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     NSA                      October 2021


   of original code streams.  Supports network telemetry in push mode on
   the data source side.  Different data collection solutions have
   different characteristics and are applicable to different application
   scenarios.  However, these data collection methods depend on the
   complex mapping models to act on the correct object, resulting in
   poor readability of the data.

   In order to be compatible with device interfaces and configuration
   models of different vendors, those modelings of mapping needs to
   define complex data acquisition protocols and perform data parsing
   and conversion at the application layer,which increases the
   information transmission delay of the digital twin network.
   Constructing a twin of network element that has communication
   requirement and function like a physical entity is another modeling
   of mapping.  It provides requirements of implementing virtual-
   physical mapping and information exchange between twins based on
   network layer communication.

   This document proposes a flexible network addressing technique to
   solve the problem of mapping network physical entities to digital
   twins.  The physical network domain and the twin network domain use
   the same address configuration, that is, any network entity and its
   corresponding digital twin use the same IP address.  Different NIA
   (Network Index Addresses) are allocated to different domains.  The
   NIA and IP address of network element together constitute a globally
   unique communication identifier.  In addition, a programmable
   flexible network layer protocol is used to carry communication
   traffic between physical entities and digital twins.  Communication
   between network elements and between physical network elements and
   their digital twins is distinguished by using different addresses,
   and fields with different security levels are applied to network
   packet headers.  Therefore, the state synchronization efficiency and
   security of the digital twin network are improved.

2.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] and [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.










Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     NSA                      October 2021


3.  Overview

   Currently, IPv6 (Internet Protocol version 6) is being deployed more
   and more.  As the network scale increases, the distribution of IPv6
   addresses will become more fragmented.  If a 1:1 real-time digital
   twin network needs to be implemented, it is the most natural way to
   create an independent mirror IPv6 space for the digital twin network
   domain.  However, the digital twin network architecture requires
   real-time state synchronization between the physical network layer
   and the twin network layer, which requires that the network physical
   entity and the network digital twin have unique network communication
   identifiers.  Different NIAs are allocated to the physical network
   domain and the twin network domain to implement unique identifiers.

   During running of a digital twin network, communication between
   physical network entities, between network twins, and between
   physical network entities and network twins has different functions.
   However, the format of IPv6 is relatively fixed, and it is difficult
   to reflect characteristics of communication traffic in the digital
   twin network.  In addition, security requirements for these
   communications are different.  IPv6-based security protocols cannot
   flexibly configure security for data flows.  Therefore, a flexible
   and extensible Internet communication protocol will be able to solve
   the above problems.  First, the communication subject needs to carry
   a trusted digital identity in the data packet header.  The network
   can efficiently differentiate traffic and guarantee QoS based on the
   digital identity.  In addition, composite attributes such as a
   digital identity, a verification identifier, and a communication
   policy identifier may be flexibly carried in a data packet header.
   In this way, the communication between the physical IPv6 domain and
   the mirrored IPv6 domain can be implemented through a unified network
   layer protocol.

4.  Flexible Addressing for DTN

   The mapping between digital twins and underlying entities is one of
   the four key elements of digital twin networks.  Conceptually,
   mapping needs to include one-to-one mapping and one-to-many mapping,
   but one-to-one mapping helps achieve clearer digital twins and
   facilitates real-time network state synchronization.  When a digital
   twin network validates a new technology, there may also be multiple
   network digital twins corresponding to the same physical network.
   One-to-one mapping makes this easier.

   The use of IPv6 as a communication identifier in physical networks
   has become a common understanding, and this is a technical
   requirement for many legacy networks.  However, for new digital twin
   networks, using the same IPv6 address space will incur additional



Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     NSA                      October 2021


   mapping storage overhead.  It is also not particularly readable for
   network O&M personnel.  In this case, providing a separate address
   space for each digital twin of the physical network so that the
   digital twin can use the same IPv6 address as its corresponding
   physical entity greatly simplifies network operation complexity.
   Considering that in the case of one-to-one mapping, a continuous data
   flow is required between the physical entity and the digital twin to
   synchronize state, a globally unique identifier needs to be allocated
   to both parties in a communication process.  To address this issue,
   this document introduces the concept of Network Index Address (NIA).
   The NIA uniquely identifies a network address space.  For example, an
   IPv6 address space identifier of a physical network is 0x86, and an
   IPv6 address space identifier of a digital twin network is 0x96,
   0xa6.

   For the three communication models, the communication protocol uses
   different forms of network address to identify the source and
   destination.

4.1.  Communication between Physical Network Entities

   Native IPv6 protocols and addresses can be used for communication.

4.2.  Communication between Digital Twins

   You can use independent IPv6 addresses for internal communication.
   Digital twins are generally carried on physical computing platforms.
   Therefore, when cross-physical-platforms communication is involved,
   how traffic in the digital twin space transit through physical
   network space needs to be considered.

4.3.  Communication between Physical Network Entities and Digital Twins

   Because the communication parties are located in different address
   spaces, a combined NIA and IPv6 address is used as the identifier of
   the communication subject.

5.  Flexible Protocols for DTN

   In a digital twin network system, traffic will have multiple levels
   of significance. such as traditional physical network traffic,
   traffic between digital twins, and state synchronization traffic
   between physical entities and digital twins.  These types of traffic
   have different requirements for reliability, security, and real-time
   communication.  However, the devices carrying the traffic are highly
   overlapped.  Therefore, a unified protocol is required for
   interconnection.  As mentioned earlier, in these communication
   models, the form of source and destination addresses goes beyond IPv6



Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     NSA                      October 2021


   addresses.  At the same time, the diversified requirements for
   security, real-time performance and network policies also require
   better scalability and security of network protocols.

   Flexible network protocols can meet the preceding requirements to the
   maximum extent.  First, in the digital twin network, it is required
   that all virtual and physical elements have globally trusted
   identities.  The identity may be used to sign a network instruction
   and monitoring data, and may be further used to generate a key to
   encrypt a key network parameter or status information.  On the basis
   of trusted identity, the along path verification mechanism can
   efficiently verify the validity of traffic, thereby achieving higher
   security.

   Adding a digital identifier to a packet header facilitates refined
   traffic engineering and management policies according to these
   identifiers, and facilitates fast implementation of complex digital
   twin network applications.  Based on scalable and flexible protocols,
   deterministic network technologies can be customized in packets to
   achieve real-time network communication.

6.  Security Considerations

   The independent address space and flexible protocol encapsulation
   allow you to customize different security levels for different
   traffic.  In particular, the mechanism of trusted identity can
   effectively detect illegal traffic and block it as early as possible,
   which enhances the security of digital twin networks.  However, new
   address modes and protocols may break traditional end-to-end security
   mechanisms.

7.  IANA Considerations {#SEC:iana}.

   In this document, it needs to apply for new registry for the NIA and
   apply for NIA numbers for protocols such as IPv6.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.



Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     NSA                      October 2021


8.2.  Informative References

   [DTNConcept]
              "Digital Twin Network: Concepts and Reference
              Architecture", n.d., <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              draft-zhou-nmrg-digitaltwin-network-concepts/>.

   [DTNTechs] Sun Tao, Zhou Cheng, Duan Xiao-Dong, Lu Lu, Chen Dan-Yang,
              Yang Hong-Wei, Zhu Yan-Hong, Liu Chao, Li Qin, Wang Xiao,
              Shen Zhen, Qu Feng-Zhong, Jiang Huai-Guang, Wang Fei-Yue,
              ., "Digital twin network (DTN): concepts, architecture,
              and key technologies", June 2021, <Acta Automatica Sinica,
              2021, 47(3): 569-582 DOI: 10.16383/j.aas.c210097>.

Authors' Addresses

   Guangpeng Li
   Huawei Technologies
   Beiqing Road, Haidian District
   Beijing
   100095
   China

   Email: liguangpeng@huawei.com


   Cheng Zhou
   China Mobile
   No. 53, Xibianmen Inner Street, Xicheng District
   Beijing
   100053
   China

   Email: zhouchengyjy@chinamobile.com

















Li & Zhou                 Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 7]
