


ENUM -- Telephone Number Mapping                            A. Mayrhofer
Working Group                                                    enum.at
Internet-Draft                                           August 03, 2006
Expires: February 4, 2007


                IANA Registration for vCard Enumservice
                        draft-ietf-enum-vcard-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 4, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This memo registers the Enumservice "vCard" with the subtypes
   "plain", "xml" and "rdf" using the URI schemes "http" and "https"
   according to the IANA Enumservice registration process described in
   RFC 3761.  This Enumservice is to be used to refer from an ENUM
   domain name to a vCard instance describing the user of the respective
   E.164 number.

   Information gathered from those vCards could be used before, during



Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


   or after inbound or outbound communication takes place.  For example,
   a callee might be presented with the name and association of the
   caller before picking up the call.


Table of Contents

   1.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.  ENUM Service Registrations - vCard . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  "Plain" Subtype  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  "RDF" Subtype  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  "XML" Subtype  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   4.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   5.  Security & Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  The ENUM Record Itself . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  The Resource Identified  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10





















Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


1.  Change Log

   [Note to editors: This section is to be removed before publication -
   XML source available on request]

   draft-ietf-enum-vcard-04
      added email address to IANA template (selfcontained)
      changed number in example to UK drama number
      added note about line break in example

   draft-ietf-enum-vcard-03
      Fixed typo in abstract
      Added acks
      Added text about PII data

   draft-ietf-enum-vcard-02
      added Acknowledgement section
      clarified security considerations
      extended introduction
      sanitized references
      added subtypes and URI schemes to Abstract

   draft-ietf-enum-vcard-01
      minor title change
      removed sink type

   draft-ietf-enum-vcard-00
      changed name to reflect WG adoption
      subtyped Enumservice
      added "sink" type idea
      worked on the text

   draft-mayrhofer-enum-vcard-00
      initial draft


2.  Introduction

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [8].

   E.164 Number Mapping (ENUM) [1] uses the Domain Name System (DNS) [2]
   to refer from E.164 numbers [3] to Uniform Resource Identifiers
   (URIs) [5].  The registration process for Enumservices is described
   in section 3 of RFC 3761.

   "vCard" [6] is a transport independent data format for the exchange



Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


   of information about an individual.  For the purpose of this
   document, the term "vCard" refers to a specific instance of this data
   format - an "electronic business card". vCards are exchanged via
   several protocols, most commonly they are distributed as electronic
   mail attachments or published on web servers.  Most popular personal
   information manager applications are capable of reading and writing
   vCards.

   In addition to the format specified in RFC 2426, 'Representing vCard
   Objects in RDF/XML' [4] specifies two alternative formats for
   representing vCard data, namely as RDF or "plain" XML documents.

   The Enumservice specified in this document deals with the relation
   between an E.164 number and vCards.  An ENUM record using this
   Enumservice identifies a resource from where a vCard corresponding to
   the respective E.164 number could be fetched.  Each subtype of the
   Enumservice corresponds to one of the vCard data formats mentioned
   above.

   Clients could use those resources to eg. automatically update local
   address books (a Voice over IP phone could try to fetch vCards for
   all outbound and inbound calls taking place on that phone and display
   them together with the call journal).  In a more integrated scenario,
   Information gathered from those vCards could even be automatically
   incorporated into the personal information manager application of the
   respective user.


3.  ENUM Service Registrations - vCard

3.1.  "Plain" Subtype

   Enumservice Name: "vCard"

   Enumservice Type: "vcard"

   Enumservice Subtype: "plain"

   URI Schemes: "http", "https"

   Functional Specification:
      This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified is a plain
      vCard according to RFC 2426 which may be accessed using HTTP/HTTPS
      [7].
      Clients fetching the vCard from the resource indicated should
      expect access to be restricted.  Additionally, the comprehension
      of the data provided may vary depending on the client's identity.




Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


   Security Considerations: see Section 5

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Alexander Mayrhofer <mailto:alexander.mayrhofer@enum.at>

3.2.  "RDF" Subtype

   Enumservice Name: "vCard"

   Enumservice Type: "vcard"

   Enumservice Subtype: "rdf"

   URI Schemes: "http", "https"

   Functional Specification:
      This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified is a RDF-
      formatted vCard according to section 3 - 5 of W3C vcard-rdf [4]
      which may be accessed using HTTP/HTTPS.
      Clients fetching the vCard from the resource indicated should
      expect access to be restricted.  Additionally, the comprehension
      of the data provided may vary depending on the client's identity.

   Security Considerations: see Section 5

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Alexander Mayrhofer <mailto:alexander.mayrhofer@enum.at>

3.3.  "XML" Subtype

   Enumservice Name: "vCard"

   Enumservice Type: "vcard"

   Enumservice Subtype: "xml"

   URI Schemes: "http", "https"

   Functional Specification:
      This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified is a XML-
      formatted vCard according to section 6 of W3C vcard-rdf [4] which
      may be accessed using HTTP/HTTPS.
      Clients fetching the vCard from the resource indicated should
      expect access to be restricted.  Additionally, the comprehension
      of the data provided may vary depending on the client's identity.




Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


   Security Considerations: see Section 5

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Alexander Mayrhofer <mailto:alexander.mayrhofer@enum.at>


4.  Example

   An example ENUM entry referencing to a plain vCard could look like:

      $ORIGIN 6.4.9.0.6.4.9.7.0.2.4.4.e164.arpa.
      @ IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+vcard:plain"
      "!^.*$!http://example.net/vcard.vcf!" .

   (Note: Due to line length constraints, the example record above is
   split in two lines)


5.  Security & Privacy Considerations

5.1.  The ENUM Record Itself

   Since ENUM uses DNS - a publicly available database - any information
   contained in records provisioned in ENUM domains must be considered
   public as well.  Even after revoking the DNS entry and removing the
   refered resource, copies of the information could still be available.

   Information published in ENUM records could reveal associations
   between E.164 numbers and their owners - especially if URIs contain
   personal identifiers or domain names for which ownership information
   can be obtained easily.

   However, it is important to note that the ENUM record itself does not
   need to contain any personal information.  It just points to a
   location where access to personal information could be granted.

   ENUM records pointing to third party resources can easily be
   provisioned on purpose by the ENUM domain owner - so any assumption
   about the association between a number and an entity could therefore
   be completely bogus unless some kind of identity verification is in
   place.  This verification is out of scope for this memo.

5.2.  The Resource Identified

   In most cases, vCards provide information about individuals.  Linking
   telephone numbers to such Personally Identifyable Information (PII)
   is a very sensitive topic, because it provides a "reverse lookup"



Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


   from the number to its owner.  Publication of such PII is covered by
   data protection law in many legislations.  In most cases, the
   explicit consent of the affected individual is required.

   Users MUST therefore carefully consider information they provide in
   the resource identified by the ENUM record as well as in the record
   itself.  Considerations SHOULD include serving information only to
   entities of the user's choice and/or limiting the comprehension of
   the information provided based on the requesting entity.

   On the other hand, most of the information which a vCard would
   typically contain is already available via more "traditional" sources
   like white pages and offline/online directories, especially if those
   resources already allow "reverse lookups" (using phone numbers as the
   search key).  In such cases, publishing a vCard on the internet and
   associating it to a phone number does not neccessarily increase the
   amount of available information.  It may, however, ease access to
   this information (which is actually the intention of this Enumservice
   in the first place).

   If access restrictions on the vCard resource are deployed, Standard
   HTTP mechanisms MUST be used to enforce those restrictions.  HTTPS
   SHOULD be preferred if the deployed mechanisms are prone to
   eavesdropping and replay attacks.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo requests registration of the "vCard" Enumservice according
   to the definitions in this document and RFC 3761 [1].


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to thank David Lindner for his contributions during
   the early stages of this document.  In addition, Klaus Nieminen and
   Ondrej Sury provided helpful suggestions.

8.  Normative References

   [1]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - Implementation and
        Specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [3]  ITU-T, "The international public telecommunication numbering



Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


        plan", Recommendation E.164 (02/05), Feb 2005.

   [4]  Iannella, R., "Representing vCard Objects in RDF/XML", W3C
        NOTE NOTE-vcard-rdf-20010222, February 2001.

   [5]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC 3986,
        January 2005.

   [6]  Dawson, F. and T. Howes, "vCard MIME Directory Profile",
        RFC 2426, September 1998.

   [7]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
        Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
        HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [8]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

































Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


Author's Address

   Alexander Mayrhofer
   enum.at GmbH
   Karlsplatz 1/9
   Wien  A-1010
   Austria

   Phone: +43 1 5056416 34
   Email: alexander.mayrhofer@enum.at
   URI:   http://www.enum.at/








































Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Mayrhofer               Expires February 4, 2007               [Page 10]

