 


ppvpn working group                                              M. Iyer 
Internet Draft                                                   Alcatel 
Document: draft-iyer-ipvpn-infomodel-req-01.txt             C. Jacquenet 
Category: Informational                             France Telecom R & D 
Expires December 2001                                          A. Jansen 
                                                                 Alcatel 
                                                                 P. Lago 
                                                   Politecnico di Torino 
                                                          R. Scandariato 
                                                   Politecnico di Torino 
                                                               June 2001 
 
 
          Requirements for an IP VPN Policy Information Model 
                  <draft-iyer-ipvpn-infomodel-req-01.txt> 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines the requirements for a policy information model 
   that should help service providers in dynamically provisioning IP 
   Virtual Private Networks (VPN). From this perspective, this draft 
   aims at identifying the basic capabilities that need to be supported 
   by an IP VPN service offering and thus reflected in an IP VPN policy 
   information model, so that IP VPN networks may be dynamically 
   deployed according to the corresponding configuration information. 
    
    
    
    

 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 1] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
1. Introduction 
    
   An IP Virtual Private Networks (IP VPN) can be defined as the 
   collection of switching and transmission resources that will be used 
   by a dedicated set of authorized users to exchange information over a 
   public IP infrastructure, like the Internet. 
     
   IP VPN networks may use different and complex technologies ([2]), 
   thus yielding the need for a high level of automation to dynamically 
   provision such networks. 
     
   To do so, the network resources that will be involved in the 
   forwarding of the traffic for a given (set of) IP VPN will have to 
   process quite a large amount of configuration information: 
    
   - Topology information (e.g. location of the sites that will be 
     interconnected via the IP VPN),  
    
   - Addressing information (e.g. identification of the IP networks and 
     hosts that will access the IP VPN facility), 
     
   - Routing information (e.g. definition of a routing policy within 
     the IP VPN, and how the Internet can be accessed through the IP 
     VPN), 
    
   - Security information (e.g. establishment and activation of 
     filters), 
    
   - Quality of service (QoS) information related to the service 
     offering (e.g. the QoS parameters that will conveyed in a 
     particular Service Level Specification (SLS) template ([3]), and 
     that will be (dynamically) negotiated and invoked between the 
     customer and the service provider, like the bandwidth, the one-way 
     delay, the inter-packet delay variation, [4]).  
    
   The end result of the configuration is to align the network elements 
   to provide consistent treatment of the selected pieces of IP traffic 
   that will reflect the deployment of an IP VPN. The network elements 
   will require a combination of capabilities depending largely on their 
   location in the topology and the technology being used. 
    
   In addition, the IP VPN policy information model can help in defining 
   a standard interface to VPN facilities supported by an IP network. 
   This interface is useful for dynamic and customizable definition of 
   provided VPN services based upon customer needs. 
    
   Therefore, the purpose of this draft is to develop a motivation for 
   an IP VPN policy information model that will aim at providing a 
   common understanding on how the corresponding IP VPN service is to be 
   deployed over the network according to instances of the above 
   information, between the service level and the network level 
   associated to the above-mentioned definition of an IP VPN. 
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 2] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
     
   This document is organized as follows: 
    
   - Section 3 provides basic assumptions and requirements as far as 
     the motivation for an IP VPN policy information model is 
     concerned, 
    
   - Section 4 provides a list of requirements as far as the IP VPN 
     service level is concerned, 
    
   - Section 5 provides a list of requirements as far as the IP VPN 
     network level is concerned,  
    
   - Section 6 provides some elaboration as far as the compliance with 
     existing and ongoing standardization effort is concerned. 
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [5]. 
    
3. Basic assumptions and requirements 
    
   The IP VPN Policy Information model SHOULD provide a standardized 
   view of the network-related information that will be expressed in 
   terms of network element configuration information, and which will 
   help the mapping of the information conveyed in the (IP VPN) service 
   level specifications (SLS) to the device level configuration 
   information for the provisioning of IP VPN services. 
    
   The following figure 1 explains the positioning and role of the IP 
   VPN policy information model in relation to the service level 
   specifications and the device level specifications. 
    
   ----------------- 
   | Service Level | --> SLS capture customer requirement/service goals 
   ----------------- 
       <>--------->  Service goal to network policy translation 
   ----------------- 
   | Network Level | --> IP VPN policies capture network requirements 
   ----------------- 
       <>--------->  Network policy to devices configuration information 
   ----------------- 
   | Device Level  | --> Device specific configuration information 
   ----------------- 
                                      
          - Fig. 1: positioning of an IP VPN information model. - 
                                      
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD provide a standardized 
   network level specification, which will aim at translating the 

 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 3] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
   service level specifications information into device level 
   configuration information. 
    
   To this aim, the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD be able to 
   cope with different needs brought up by various provisioned IP VPN 
   services. The integration of these needs at the information model 
   design stage leads to a straightforward translation of service 
   specifications into network policy instances at the deployment stage. 
    
   On the other hand, the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD be able 
   to capture network-related information in order to enable policy-
   based management systems to translate policies into device 
   configuration files. Network information hereby refers to both device 
   capabilities and topology information: 
    
   - The device capabilities information is needed to perform controls 
     against requirements like serviceability (e.g. to check if the 
     provider has the appropriate resources to deploy an IP VPN service 
     that will comply with customer's requirements) and feasibility 
     (e.g. to check if resources are available), 
     
   - The topology information is needed to identify which nodes are 
     involved in the IP VPN service deployment. 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD also be able to reflect 
   the fact that the IP VPN service offering SHOULD benefit from the 
   intrinsic security and quality of service capabilities of the 
   network. This can be made possible by using extensions and 
   appropriate placeholders within the IP VPN policy information model. 
    
4. Service Level Requirements 
    
   The service parameters that describe the IP VPN service offering, in 
   terms of routing, QoS, security information, etc. will be mapped to 
   corresponding network parameters, like tunnel endpoints 
   identification and link metrics for IP forwarding and routing 
   considerations respectively, PHB (Per Hop Behaviors,[6]) for QoS 
   considerations, and access control lists for security considerations, 
   etc. 
     
   The IP VPN service offering to be provided by an ISP (Internet 
   Service Provider) SHOULD include the ability to specify service 
   requirements related to connectivity, security and QoS 
   considerations. 
     
   It is important to note that there are dependencies that need to be 
   taken into account across these service parameters. For example, the 
   security requirements as well as the QoS requirements could be 
   described with respect to an underlying connectivity requirement. 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model MUST recognize the issues 
   generated by that kind of dependency. 
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 4] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
      
   In addition, the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD be able to 
   capture information related to the following parameters: 
    
     - Reliability: IP VPN services should address reliability issues 
       that can be compared to those addressed by IP networks. The IP 
       VPN policy information model MUST therefore take care of these 
       aspects. 
      
     - Scalability: at the service level, the IP VPN policy information 
       model SHOULD be scalable enough to take into account both large-
       scale and small-scale IP VPN networks. Additionally, it SHOULD 
       be flexible in order to support changes of virtual network 
       dimensions with no disruption of former deployed services. 
      
     - Multi-protocol support: whatever the IP routing policy that may 
       be enforced within a location that will be connected to others 
       via an IP VPN, the IP VPN policy information model should be 
       able to reflect the information related to this IP routing 
       policy. 
       
   The purpose of the following sections 4.x is not to provide a 
   comprehensive list of all the parameters to be serviced, since it is 
   going to remain an ever-growing list. The objective is to provide a 
   sample of the capabilities that SHOULD be represented in the IP VPN 
   policy information model. 
    
4.1. Forwarding and routing considerations 
    
   Customers of an IP VPN service offering may require that the service 
   provider provision the following types of connectivity: 
    
   1. Site-to-Site: forwarding of the private traffic (i.e. the traffic 
      that will correspond to private communications within the IP VPN) 
      over a shared network. The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD 
      support various possible topologies for site-to-site connectivity 
      e.g. point-to-point, hub and spoke, full mesh, partial mesh, etc. 
    
   2. Access to the IP VPN for residential and nomadic users: forwarding 
      of private traffic to and from (dial-up) users, according to a 
      VPDN (Virtual Private Dial-up Network, [2]) scheme is a MUST for 
      an IP VPN service offering. 
    
   3. Access the Internet from the IP VPN: forwarding of private and 
      public traffic within the IP VPN is a MAY for an IP VPN service 
      offering. 
    
   4. Deployment of IP VPN networks for communities of interest: within 
      the context of supporting extranet applications, i.e. applications 
      that may be used by different customers within a single IP VPN, 
      the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD include this facility. 
    
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 5] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
   This will require the corresponding forwarding parameters to be 
   represented in the IP VPN policy information model. 
    
    
    
4.2. Security considerations 
    
   Customers of an IP VPN service offering MAY require that some 
   guarantees be provided as far as the following aspects are concerned: 
    
   1. Identification and authentication of the users that will have the 
      ability to access the IP VPN, including those users that belong to 
      a given community of interest (please refer to point 4 of the 
      above section 4.1 of this draft), 
    
   2. Preservation of the confidentiality of the information that will 
      be conveyed by the IP VPN, 
    
   3. Identification and authentication of the switching resources that 
      will participate in the forwarding of the traffic associated to a 
      given IP VPN, 
    
   4. Secured access to the sites that will be interconnected by the IP 
      VPN: site protection against malicious attacks, including spoofing 
      communications. 
    
   This will require the corresponding security parameters (filters, 
   encryption aspects, firewall configuration information, etc.) to be 
   represented in the IP VPN policy information model. 
    
4.3. QoS considerations 
    
   Customers of an IP VPN service offering may require that the IP VPN 
   be provisioned with a given level of quality, that can be defined in 
   terms of ([6]): 
    
   1. Traffic identification, classification and marking parameters, 
    
   2. Traffic scheduling parameters, 
    
   3. Traffic discarding parameters, 
    
   4. Traffic policing parameters. 
    
   The provisioning of such QoS-based IP VPN networks may therefore 
   gracefully rely upon DiffServ-based and traffic engineering 
   techniques that will aim at selecting and installing the IP VPN 
   routes that will comply with the above-mentioned QoS requirements, 
   including load sharing and restoration capabilities in case of link 
   failure, for example (see [7] as a possible reference). 
    

 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 6] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 

                                     
   This will require the marking, scheduling, bandwidth management and 
   traffic management capabilities to be represented in the IP VPN 
   policy information model, especially because the DiffServ 
   architecture has been widely promoted as the most scalable 
   architecture of the various QoS schemes and it SHOULD be referenced 
   when specifying the QoS requirements. 
    
4.4. Management considerations 
    
4.4.1. Domain-wide considerations 
    
   The deployment of IP VPN services over the Internet raises the inter-
   domain issue, where all the network resources that may be involved in 
   the forwarding of the IP VPN traffic do not belong to the service 
   provider who deploys the IP VPN.  
    
   From this standpoint, the service provider requirements include at 
   least domain-wide administration of (routing) policies, domain-wide 
   distribution of (routing) policies, domain-wide functional 
   partitioning of policies, i.e. the logical separation between the 
   management of a routing policy, a QoS policy, a security policy, 
   etc., so as to reflect the management organization of the service 
   provider. 
    
4.4.1.1. Administrative domain considerations 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model MUST support the notion of 
   administrative domain. In particular, this implies the definition of 
   inter-domain boundaries. 
    
4.4.1.2. Enforcing policies within a domain 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD enable the enforcement of 
   various policies (a routing policy, a QoS policy, a security policy, 
   etc.) on a domain scale. The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD 
   be designed so that the enforcement of such policies be efficient. 
   The policies are distributed to agents who act as policy consumers 
   ([8]). The policy consumers will in turn update the relevant network 
   elements. 
    
4.4.1.3. Design considerations 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD also be designed on a per 
   policy basis, so as to optimize the distribution process (e.g. update 
   the policy provisioning data that need to be updated, and only this 
   information). 
    
4.4.2. Service management platform interaction Requirements 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model MAY provide the service 
   management platform with the adequate hooks to correlate service 
   level specifications with network traffic data generated by the 
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 7] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
   network elements. There are no specific requirements coming out of 
   this, other than the need to ensure that there is a reversible 
   mapping of the network level specifications to the service level 
   specifications.  
    
   This would be a basic requirement regardless of the management 
   platform interaction requirements. This would require that the IP VPN 
   policy information model support references to the SLS templates 
   whose parameters will be used to generate/map to the network level 
   parameters. 
    
   The use of policies includes rules that control the corrective 
   actions taken by management components that are responsible for 
   monitoring the network and ensuring that it meets the IP VPN service 
   requirements. These policies result in corrective action 
   configuration information as opposed to device configuration 
   information.  
    
   The component performing the function of translating the policy 
   provisioning data into device level configuration information MAY be 
   called up to generate the corrective actions as well. The resulting 
   corrective actions MAY reuse the classes defined in the IP VPN policy 
   information model. 
    
5. Network level Requirements 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD also support the modeling 
   information related to the IP network-based capabilities that will 
   participate in the deployment of a given IP VPN, as well as the 
   configuration information related to the forwarding of the traffic 
   associated to a given IP VPN. 
    
5.1. Network topology considerations 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD provide a means of 
   capturing the network topology information, including the components 
   of the network topology (links, routers, etc.). From this standpoint, 
   the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD consist of policy data, 
   which reference objects that have been specified in a network 
   topology part of the model.  
    
   The network topology part of the IP VPN policy information model 
   SHOULD be able to trace the status of the network in terms of 
   available physical resources and to tail resource allocation needed 
   for IP VPN provisioning. 
    
   The topology information SHOULD be as generic as possible in order to 
   be applicable in different network scenarios. In particular:  
    
        - The model SHOULD consider both permanently connected users 
          (e.g. users who always work in their office) and nomadic 
          users (e.g. users who can access the IP VPN from home).  
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 8] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
         
        - The model SHOULD be applicable within the context of a multi-
          provider environment. 
         
   Additionally, the topology part of the model SHOULD allow the 
   disjoined definition of physical and virtual entities (e.g. physical 
   and virtual interfaces of an IP VPN router). However, the IP VPN 
   policy information model SHOULD track mappings between physical and 
   virtual entities to allow identification of policy targets. 
     
   For instance, the topology part of the model SHOULD allow the 
   identification of tunnels that will be established over the Internet 
   without implying the routers of the core of the network. However, the 
   model SHOULD maintain mappings between tunnels and links that are 
   used by the tunnel. This allows the identification of "intermediate" 
   policy targets (the core routers in the above example), e.g. for QoS 
   provisioning purposes. 
    
5.2. Device capability considerations 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD re-use the standardized 
   means of capturing network capabilities of physical devices defined 
   in the IETF and DMTF standardization groups. This information is 
   related to capabilities that are supported by network elements. The 
   IP VPN information model SHOULD support references to the 
   corresponding policy targets. 
    
5.3. Device configuration considerations 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model acts as the link between the 
   service level specifications and the device level configuration 
   information. The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD not depend on 
   any specific device configuration mechanisms. 
    
   The entity that will be involved in the enforcement of an IP VPN 
   policy should be provided with sufficient information to identify the 
   devices that need to be configured to provision the service. This is 
   one of the goals of topology part of the model: this entity should be 
   able to provide sufficient information within the framework of the 
   information model so that it can be identified as a policy target. 
      
   The device configuration layer MAY then rely upon one of the 
   candidate protocols to update the configuration information of the 
   network elements, and these protocols include SNMP (Simple Network 
   Management Protocol, [9]), and COPS (Common Open Policy Service, 
   [10]). 
    
6. Compliance with existing and ongoing standardization efforts 
    
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD conform to the standards 
   being developed in the IETF and other standardization bodies. As an 
   example, the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD reference 
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001           [Page 9] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
   standardized technologies wherever applicable, to adequately describe 
   specific requirements, e.g. IPSec (IP Secure, [11]) terminology could 
   be used to accurately describe encryption requirements that will 
   reflect part of the security considerations (please refer to the 
   section 4.2 of the current draft). 
    
   Furthermore, the IP VPN policy information model SHOULD be based upon 
   the ôPolicy Framework Core Information Modelö [8] and its extensions 
   ([12]). The IP VPN policy information model should reuse the work 
   done with regards to modeling the individual network capabilities 
   such as the ôPolicy Framework QoS Information Modelö [13] and the 
   ôIPSEC Configuration Policy Modelö [14].  
    
   The possible LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol, [15]) 
   implementations of the IP VPN policy information model COULD be built 
   based on the ôPolicy Core LDAP Schemaö [16] and ôPolicy QoS 
   Information Modelö[17] implementations. 
     
   The IP VPN policy information model SHOULD also inter-work with the 
   emerging MPLS (Multi-Protocol Label Switching, [18]) related policy 
   informational models wherever necessary. 
    
   The policy framework WG is also aiming at standardizing information 
   models that describe specific function mechanisms, which are common 
   across devices such as [19] for QoS policy management.  
    
   Finally, the IP VPN information model SHOULD provide a mechanism to 
   extend the information model to leverage this work in future. The 
   extensions would reference additional objects in the newly 
   standardized models for specific functions. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   There is a strong requirement for ensuring security related to the 
   provisioning of configuration information. The IP VPN policy 
   information model SHOULD provide the ability to specify 
   administrative rights associated to the use and the transmission of 
   the provisioning information. It SHOULD also support the flexibility 
   required to reflect administrative boundaries, which could in turn be 
   divided into functional boundaries. 
     
   There are also security concerns associated with the propagation of 
   the IP VPN policy provisioning data to the network elements, that 
   MUST participate in the global enforcement of an IP VPN provisioning 
   policy, and to the customers (including service providers within an 
   inter-domain context) who may access such data. 
    
8. References  
 
  [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
       9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
 
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001          [Page 10] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
 
  [2]  Gleeson, B. et al., "A Framework for IP Based Virtual Private 
       Networks", RFC 2764, February 2000. 
  [3]  Goderis D., T'Joens Y., Jacquenet C., Memenios G., Pavlou G., 
       Egan R., Griffin D., Georgatsos P., Georgiadis L., 
       "Specification of a Service Level Specification (SLS) Template", 
       draft-tequila-sls-00.txt, Work in Progress, November 2000. Check 
       http://www.ist-tequila.org for additional information. 
  [4]  Mahdavi, J., Paxson, V., "IPPM Metrics for Measuring 
       Connectivity", RFC 2678, September 1999. 
  [5]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
  [6]  Blake, S. et al., "An Architecture for Differentiated Services", 
       RFC 2475, December 1998. 
  [7]  Awduche, D., et al., "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over 
       MPLS", RFC 2702, September 1999. 
  [8]  Moore, B. et al., "Policy Core Information Model -- Version 1 
       Specification", RFC 3060, February 2001. 
  [9]  Harrington, D. et al., "An Architecture for Describing SNMP 
       Management Frameworks", RFC 2571, April 1999. 
  [10] Yavatkar, R., et al., "A Framework for Policy-based Admission 
       Control", RFC 2753, January 2000. 
  [11] Kent, S., Atkinson, R., "Security Architecture for the Internet 
       Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998. 
  [12] Moore, B., et al., "Policy Core Information Model Extensions", 
       draft-ietf-policy-pcim-ext-01.txt, Work in Progress, April 2001. 
  [13] Snir, Y., Ramberg, Y., Strassner, J., Cohen, R., ôPolicy 
       Framework QoS Information Modelö, draft-ietf-policy-qos-info-
       model-03.txt, Work in Progress, April 2001. 
  [14] Jason, J., et al., "IPsec Configuration Policy Modelö, draft-
       ietf-ipsp-config-policy-model-02.txt, Work in Progress, March 
       2001. 
  [15] Sermersheim, J., et al., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 
       (v3)", draft-ietf-ldapbis-protocol-01.txt, Work in Progress, 
       February 2001. 
  [16] Strassner, J. et al., "Policy Core LDAP Schema", draft-ietf-
       policy-core-schema-11.txt, Work in Progress, May 2001. 
  [17] Snir, Y., et al., "Policy QoS Information Modelö, draft-ietf-
       policy-qos-info-model-03.txt, Work in Progress, April 2001. 
  [18] Rosen, E., et al., "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture", 
       RFC 3031, January 2001. 
 

 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001          [Page 11] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
 
  [19] Moore, B., et al., "Information Model for Describing Network 
       Device QoS Datapath Mechanisms", draft-ietf-policy-qos-device-
       info-model-03.txt, Work in Progress, May 2001. 
    
9. Authors' Addresses 
    
   Mahadevan Iyer 
   Alcatel Inc 
   595 Yosemite Blvd, Milpitas, CA 
   Phone: 408 586 7687 
   E-Mail: mahadevan.iyer@ind.alcatel.com 
    
   Christian Jacquenet 
   France Telecom R & D 
   DMI/SIR 
   42, rue des Coutures 
   BP6243 
   14066 Caen Cedex 4 
   France 
   Phone: +33 2 31 75 94 28 
   E-Mail: christian.jacquenet@francetelecom.com 
    
   Arnold Jansen 
   Alcatel Inc 
   595 Yosemite Blvd, Milpitas, CA 
   Phone: 408 586 7687 
   E-Mail: arnold.jansen@ind.alcatel.com 
    
   Patricia Lago 
   Politecnico di Torino 
   Dip. Automatica e Informatica 
   Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24 
   10129 Torino, Italy 
   Phone: +39 011 564 7008 
   E-Mail: patricia.lago@polito.it 
    
   Riccardo Scandariato 
   Politecnico di Torino 
   Dip. Automatica e Informatica 
   Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24 
   10129 Torino, Italy 
   Phone: +39 011 564 7091 
   E-Mail: riccardo.scandariato@polito.it 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001          [Page 12] 
  

Internet Draft   Reqts. for an IP VPN Information Model        June 2001 
                                     
                                     
   or assist its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    






























 
Iyer et al.        Informational - Expires Dec. 2001          [Page 13] 
  
