
Networking Working Group                                JP. Vasseur, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                        Cisco Systems, Inc
Expires: December 17, 2006                                      R. Zhang
                                                              BT Infonet
                                                                N. Bitar
                                                                 Verizon
                                                             JL. Le Roux
                                                          France Telecom
                                                           June 15, 2006


 A Backward Recursive PCE-based Computation (BRPC) procedure to compute
     shortest inter-domain Traffic Engineering Label Switched Paths
                     draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 17, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The ability to compute constrained shortest Traffic Engineering (TE)
   Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)



Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks across multiple domains (where
   a domain is referred to as a collection of network elements within a
   common sphere of address management or path computational
   responsibility such as IGP areas and Autonomous Systems) has been
   identified as a key requirement .  This document specifies a
   procedure relying on the use of multiple Path Computation Elements
   (PCEs) in order to compute such inter-domain shortest constraint
   paths, using a backward recursive path computation technique while
   preserving confidentiality across domains, which is sometimes
   required when domains are managed by different Service Providers.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].



































Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  History  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  General assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  BRPC Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  Domain path selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Mode of Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  PCEP Protocol Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Inter-AS TE-related link flooding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Usage in conjunction with per-domain path computation  . . . .  9
   9.  BRPC procedure completion failure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.1. Diverse end-to-end path computation  . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.2. Path optimality  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Reoptimization of an inter-domain TE LSP . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Metric normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   13. Manageability Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   14. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   15. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   16. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   17. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     17.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     17.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     17.3. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Proposed Status and Discussion [To Be Removed
                Upon Publication] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15





















Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


1.  History

   The aim of this document is to specify a Backward Recursive PCE-based
   Computation (BRPC) procedure to compute shortest constrained inter-
   domain (G)MPLS TE LSP.  Such procedure had been initially documented
   in draft-vasseur-ccamp-inter-domain-path-comp (Scenario 2) and is now
   moved to a separated ID in the light of the progress made by the PCE
   Working Group.


2.  Terminology

   ABR: routers used to connect two IGP areas (areas in OSPF or levels
   in IS-IS).

   ASBR: routers used to connect together ASs of a different or the same
   Service Provider via one or more Inter-AS links.

   Boundary Node (BN): a boundary node is either an ABR in the context
   of inter- area TE or an ASBR in the context of inter-AS TE.

   Entry BN of domain(n): a BN connecting domain(n-1) to domain(n).

   Exit BN of domain(n): a BN connecting domain(n) to domain(n+1).

   Inter-AS TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an AS boundary.

   Inter-area TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an IGP area boundary.

   LSR: Label Switching Router.

   LSP: Label Switched Path.

   PCE (Path Computation Element): an entity (component, application or
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route
   based on a network graph and applying computational constraints.

   PCE(i) is a PCE with the scope of domain(i).

   TED: Traffic Engineering Database.

   VSPT: Virtual Shortest Path Tree.

   The notion of contiguous, stitched and nested TE LSPs is defined in
   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-framework] and will not be repeated
   here.





Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


3.  Introduction

   The requirements for inter-area and inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering
   have been developed by the Traffic Engineering Working Group (TE WG)
   and have been stated in [RFC4105] and [RFC4216], respectively.

   The framework for inter-domain MPLS Traffic Engineering has been
   provided in [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-framework].

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp] defines a technique for
   establishing inter-domain (G)MPLS TE LSP whereby the path is computed
   during the signalling process on a per-domain basis by the entry
   boundary node of each domain (each node in charge of computing a
   section of an inter-domain TE LSP path is always along the path of
   such TE LSP).  Such path computation technique fulfills some of the
   requirements stated in [RFC4105] and [RFC4216] but not all of them.
   In particular, it cannot guarantee to find an optimal (shortest)
   inter-domain constrained path.  Furthermore, it cannot be efficiently
   used to compute a set of inter-domain diversely routed TE LSPs.

   The aim of this document is to describe a PCE-based TE LSP
   computation procedure to compute optimal inter-domain constrained
   (G)MPLS TE LSPs.

   Qualifying a path as optimal requires some clarification.  Indeed, a
   globally optimal TE LSP placement usually refers to a set of TE LSPs
   whose placements optimize the network resources with regards to a
   specified objective function (e.g. a placement that reduces the
   maximum or average network load while satisfying the TE LSP
   constraints).  In this document, an optimal inter-domain constrained
   TE LSP is defined as the shortest path satisfying the set of required
   constraints that would be obtained in the absence of multiple domains
   (in other words, in a totally flat network between the source and
   destination of the TE LSP).


4.  General assumptions

   In the rest of this document, we make the following set of
   assumptions common to inter-area and inter-AS MPLS TE:

   - Each area or AS is assumed to be Traffic Engineering enabled (i.e.
   running OSPF-TE or ISIS-TE and RSVP-TE).

   - No topology or resource information is distributed between domains
   (as mandated per [RFC4105] and [RFC4216]), which is critical to
   preserve IGP/BGP scalability and confidentiality.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   - While certain constraints like bandwidth can be used across
   different domains, other TE constraints like resource affinity,
   color, metric, etc. as listed in [RFC2702] could be translated at
   domain boundaries.  If required, it is assumed that, at the domain
   boundary nodes, there will exist some sort of local mapping based on
   policy agreement, in order to translate such constraints across
   domain boundaries during the inter-PCE communication process.

   - The various ASBRs are BGP peers, without any IGP running on the
   inter-ASBR links.

   - Each AS can be made of several IGP areas.  The path computation
   procedure described in this document applies to the case of a single
   AS made of multiple IGP areas, multiples ASs made of a single IGP
   area or any combination of the above.  For the sake of simplicity,
   each AS will be considered to be comprised of a single area in this
   document.  The case of an Inter-AS TE LSP spanning multiple ASs where
   some of those ASs are themselves made of multiple IGP areas can be
   easily derived from this case by applying the BRPC procedure
   described in this document, recursively.

   - The domain path (set of domains traversed to reach the destination
   domain) is either administratively pre-determined or discovered by
   some means (outside of the scope of this document).


5.  BRPC Procedure

   The BRPC procedure is a Multiple-PCE path computation technique as
   described in [I-D.ietf-pce-architecture].  A possible model consists
   of hosting the PCE function on boundary nodes (e.g., ABR or ASBR) but
   this is not mandated by the BRPC procedure.

   BRPC does not make any assumptions with regards to the nature of the
   inter-domain TE LSP that could be contiguous, nested or stitched.

   No assumption is made on the actual path computation algorithm in use
   by a PCE (it can be any variant of CSPF, algorithm based on linear-
   programming to solve multi-constraints optimization problems and so
   on).

5.1.  Domain path selection

   The PCE-based BRPC procedure applies to the computation of an optimal
   constrained inter-domain TE LSP.  The sequence of domains to be
   traversed can either be determined a priori or during the path
   computation procedure.  The BRPC procedure guarantees to compute the
   optimal path across a specific set of traversed domains (which



Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   constitutes an additional constraint).  In the case of an arbitrary
   set of meshed domains, the BRPC procedure can be used to compute the
   optimal path across each domain set in order to get to optimal
   constrained path between the source and the destination of the TE
   LSP.

5.2.  Mode of Operation

   Definition of VSPT(i)

   In each domain i:

   * There is a set of X-en(i) entry BNs noted BN-en(k,i) where BN-
   en(k,i) is the kth entry BN of domain(i).

   * There is a set of X-ex(i) exit BN noted BN-ex(k,i) where BN-ex(k,i)
   is the kth exit BN of domain(i).

   A virtual shortest path MP2P (MultiPoint To Point) tree VSPT(i)
   returned by PCE(i) to PCE(i-1) has the following form:


               Root (TE LSP destination)
               /         I            \
         BN-en(1,i)   BN-en(2,i) ... BN-en((j), i).

   Where j<= [X-en(i)]



   Each link of tree VSPT(i) represents the shortest path between BN-
   en(j,i) and the destination that satisfies the set of required
   constraints for the TE LSP (bandwidth, affinities, ...).  These are
   path segments to reach the destination from BN-en(j,i).

   Note that PCE(i) only considers the entry BNs that provide
   connectivity from domain(i-1).  That is, the set BN-en(k,i-1) is only
   made of those BNs that provide connectivity from domain (i-1) to
   domain(i).  Furthermore, some BNs may be excluded according to policy
   constraints (either due to local policy or policies signaled in the
   path computation request).

   Step 1: the PCC needs to first determine the PCE capable of serving
   its path computation request.  The path computation request is then
   relayed until reaching a PCE(n) such that the TE LSP destination
   resides in the domain(n).  At each step of the process, the next PCE
   can either be statically configured or dynamically discovered via
   IGP/BGP extensions.  If no next PCE can be found or the next hop PCE



Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   of choice is unavailable, the procedure stops and a path computation
   error is returned (see section Section 9).  If multiple PCEs are
   discovered, the PCE may select a subset of these PCEs based on some
   local policies/heuristics.  Note also that a sequence of PCEs might
   be enforced by policy on the PCC and this constraint can be either
   carried in the PCEP path computation request (defined in [I-D.ietf-
   pce-pcep].

   Step 2: PCE(n) computes VSPT(n) made of the list of shortest
   constrained path(s) between every BR-en(j,n) and the TE LSP
   destination using a suitable path computation algorithm (e.g.  CSPF)
   and returns the computed VSPT(n) to PCE(n-1).

   Step i:

   - For i=n-1 to 2:

   PCE(i) concatenates the ASi topology (using its TED) with the
   received VSPT(i+1) and computes VSPT(i).

   In the case of Inter-AS TE, this operation also includes the links
   connecting ASBRs of ASi and ASi+1.

   End

   Finally PCE(1) computes the end-to-end shortest constrained path from
   the source to the destination and returns the corresponding path to
   the requesting PCC.

   Each branch of the VSPT tree (path) may be returned in the form of an
   explicit path (in which case all the hops along the path segment are
   listed) or a loose path (in which case only the BR is specified) so
   as to preserve confidentiality along with the respective cost.

   BRPC guarantees to find the optimal (shortest) constrained inter-
   domain TE LSP according to a set of defined domains to be traversed.
   Note that other variants of the BRPC procedure relying on the same
   principles are also possible.

   Note also that in case of ECMP paths, more than one path could be
   returned to the requesting LSR.


6.  PCEP Protocol Extensions

   The BRPC procedure requires the specification of a new flag of the RP
   object carried within the PCReq message (defined in [I-D.ietf-pce-
   pcep]), the aim of which is to specify that the shortest path(s)



Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   satisfying the constraints from the destination to the set of entry
   boundary nodes are requested (such set of path(s) forms the
   downstream VSPT as specified in Section 5.2).

   The following new flag is defined: VSPT (V) flag: 0x20.  When set,
   this indicates that the PCC requests the computation of an inter-
   domain TE LSP using the BRPC procedure.

   Because path segment(s) computed by a downstream PCE in the context
   of the BRPC procedure must be provided along with their respective
   path cost(s), the C flag of the RP object carried within the PCReq
   message MUST be set.  It is the choice of the requester to
   appropriately set the O bit of the RP object.


7.  Inter-AS TE-related link flooding

   In term of computation of an inter-AS TE LSP path, an interesting
   optimization for the computation of unidirectional TE LSP consists of
   allowing the ASBRs to flood the TE information related to the inter-
   ASBR link(s) although no IGP TE is enabled over those links (and so
   there is no IGP adjacency over the inter-ASBR links).  This of course
   implies for the inter-ASBR links to be TE-enabled although no IGP is
   running on those links.  This allows the PCE of a domain to get
   entire TE visibility up to the set of entry ASBRs in the downstream
   domain.  In the absence of such optimization, the only constraint is
   to ensure that each PCE along the path computation chain gets access
   to the TE-related data for the inter-AS links connecting its domain
   to the downstream domain.


8.  Usage in conjunction with per-domain path computation

   The BRPC procedure may be used to compute path segments and could be
   used in conjunction with other path computation techniques (such as
   the per-domain path computation technique defined in [I-D.ietf-ccamp-
   inter-domain-pd-path-comp]) to compute the end-to-end path.  In this
   case end-to-end path optimality can no longer be guaranteed.


9.  BRPC procedure completion failure

   If the BRPC procedure cannot be completed because a PCE along the
   domain path does not support the procedure, a PCErr message is
   returned to the upstream PCE with a Error-Type "BRPC procedure
   completion failure".  The PCErr message MUST be relayed to the
   requesting PCC.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   PCEP-ERROR objects are used to report a PCEP protocol error and are
   characterized by an Error-Type which specifies the type of error and
   an Error-value that provides additional information about the error
   type.  Both the Error-Type and the Error-Value are managed by IANA.
   A new Error-Type is defined that relates to the BRPC procedure.

    Error-type          Meaning
        10              BRPC procedure completion failure
                         Error-value
                             1: BRPC procedure not supported by one or more PCEs
                                along the domain path


10.  Applicability

   As discussed in section 2, the requirements for inter-area and
   inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering have been developed by the Traffic
   Engineering Working Group (TE WG) and have been stated in [RFC4105]
   and [RFC4216], respectively.  Among the set of requirements, both
   documents indicate the need for some solution providing the ability
   to compute an optimal (shortest) constrained inter-domain TE LSP and
   to compute a set of diverse inter-domain TE LSPs.

10.1.  Diverse end-to-end path computation

   PCEP allows a PCC to request the computation of a set of diverse TE
   LSPs thanks to the SVEC object by setting the flags L, N or S to
   request link, node or SRLG diversity respectively.  Such request MUST
   be taken into account by each PCE along the path computation chain
   during the VSPT computation.  In the context of the BRPC procedure, a
   set of diversely routed TE LSP between two LSRs can be computed since
   the paths segment(s) of the VSPT are simultaneously computed by a
   given PCE.  The BRPC path procedure allows for the computation of
   diverse paths under various objective functions (such as minimizing
   the sum of the costs of the N diverse paths, etc) thus avoiding the
   well-known "trapping" problem.  Indeed, with a 2-step approach
   consisting of computing the first path followed by the computation of
   the second path after having removed the set of network elements
   traversed by the first path (if that does not violate confidentiality
   preservation), one cannot guarantee that a solution will be found
   even if such solution exists.  Furthermore, even if a solution is
   found, it may not be the most optimal one with respect to objective
   function such as minimizing the sum of the paths costs, bounding the
   path delays of both paths and so on.  Finally, it must be noted that
   such a 2-step path computation approach is usually less efficient in
   term of signalling delays since it requires two serialized TE LSP set
   up.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


10.2.  Path optimality

   BRPC guarantees that the optimal (shortest) constrained inter-domain
   path will always be found subject to policy constraints.  When
   combined with other local path computation techniques (e.g. in the
   case of stitched/nested TE LSP) and in the case where a domain has
   more than one BR-en or more than one BR-ex, optimality after some
   network change within the domain can only be guaranteed by re-
   executing the BRPC procedure.


11.  Reoptimization of an inter-domain TE LSP

   The ability to reoptimize an existing inter-domain TE LSP path has
   been explicitly listed as a requirement in [RFC4105] and [RFC4216].
   In the case of a TE LSP reoptimization request, regular procedures
   apply as defined in PCEP where the path in use (if available on the
   head-end) is provided within the path computation request in order
   for the PCEs involved in the reoptimization request to avoid double
   bandwidth accounting.


12.  Metric normalization

   In the case of inter-area TE, the same IGP/TE metric scheme is
   usually adopted for all the IGP areas (e.g. based on the link-speed,
   propagation delay or some other combination of link attributes).
   Hence, the proposed set of mechanisms always computes the shortest
   path across multiple areas obeying the required set of constraints
   with respect to a well-specified objective function.  Conversely, in
   the case of Inter-AS TE, in order for this path computation to be
   meaningful, a metric normalization between ASs may be required.  One
   solution to avoid IGP metric modification would be for the SPs to
   agree on a TE metric normalization scheme and use the TE metric for
   TE LSP path computation (in that case, this must be requested in the
   PCEP Path computation request) thanks to the COST object.


13.  Manageability Considerations

   To be added in a further revision of this document.


14.  IANA Considerations

   A new flag of the RP object (specified in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]) is
   defined in this document.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


   Name: VSPT (V)

   Value: 0x20.

   When set, this indicates that the PCC requests the computation of an
   inter-domain TE LSP using the BRPC procedure.

   A new Error-Type is defined in this document (Error-Type and Error-
   value to be assigned by IANA).

    Error-type          Meaning
        10              BRPC procedure completion failure
                         Error-value
                             1: BRPC procedure not supported by one or PCEs
                                along the domain path


15.  Security Considerations

   The BRPC procedure does not introduce any additional security issues
   beyond the ones related to inter-PCE communication.


16.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Arthi Ayyangar and Dimitri
   Papadimitriou for their useful comments.  A special thank to Adrian
   Farrel for his useful comments and suggestions.


17.  References

17.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-pce-architecture]
              Farrel, A., "A Path Computation Element (PCE) Based
              Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture-05 (work in
              progress), April 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]
              Vasseur, J., "Path Computation Element (PCE) communication
              Protocol (PCEP) - Version 1", draft-ietf-pce-pcep-01 (work
              in progress), March 2006.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.





Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


17.2.  Informative References

17.3.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-framework]
              Farrel, A., "A Framework for Inter-Domain MPLS Traffic
              Engineering", draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-framework-04
              (work in progress), July 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp]
              Vasseur, J., "A Per-domain path computation method for
              establishing Inter-domain Traffic  Engineering (TE) Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp-02 (work in
              progress), February 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-rsvp-te]
              Ayyangar, A. and J. Vasseur, "Inter domain GMPLS Traffic
              Engineering - RSVP-TE extensions",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-rsvp-te-03 (work in
              progress), March 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-pce-disco-proto-igp]
              Roux, J., "IGP protocol extensions for Path Computation
              Element (PCE) Discovery",
              draft-ietf-pce-disco-proto-igp-01 (work in progress),
              March 2006.

   [RFC2702]  Awduche, D., Malcolm, J., Agogbua, J., O'Dell, M., and J.
              McManus, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS",
              RFC 2702, September 1999.

   [RFC4105]  Le Roux, J., Vasseur, J., and J. Boyle, "Requirements for
              Inter-Area MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4105, June 2005.

   [RFC4216]  Zhang, R. and J. Vasseur, "MPLS Inter-Autonomous System
              (AS) Traffic Engineering (TE) Requirements", RFC 4216,
              November 2005.


Appendix A.  Proposed Status and Discussion [To Be Removed Upon
             Publication]

   This Internet-Draft is being submitted for eventual publication as an
   RFC with a proposed status of Informational.  Discussion of this
   proposal should take place on the following mailing list:
   pce@ietf.org.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   JP Vasseur (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   USA

   Email: jpv@cisco.com


   Raymond Zhang
   BT Infonet
   2160 E. Grand Ave.
   El Segundo, CA  90025
   USA

   Email: raymond_zhang@bt.infonet.com


   Nabil Bitar
   Verizon
   40 Sylvan Road
   Waltham, MA  02145
   USA

   Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com


   JL Le Roux
   France Telecom
   2, Avenue Pierre-Marzin
   Lannion,   22307
   FRANCE

   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@orange-ft.com















Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        draft-vasseur-pce-brpc-01.txt            June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires December 17, 2006              [Page 15]



