Network Working Group                        D. Crocker, Brandenburg
Internet-Draft: draft-ietf-fax-ffpim-00.txt               Consulting
                                                   G. Klyne, Content
Expiration <3/2000>                                     Technologies
                                                  L. Masinter, Xerox
                                                         àand others
                                                           22-Oct-99
                                
                                
                                
         Full-mode Fax Profile for Internet Mail:  FFPIM



Status Of This Memo
     
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full
     conformance with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
     
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
     groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
     documents as Internet-Drafts.  Internet-Drafts are draft
     documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be
     updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
     reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."
     
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

     The list of nternet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
     
     This document and related documents are discussed on the
     IETF Fax mailing list. To join the list, send mail to ietf-
     fax-request@imc.org. To contribute to the discussion, send
     mail to ietf-fax@imc.org. The archives are at
     http://www.imc.org/ietf-fax. The Fax working group charter,
     including the current list of group documents, can be found
     at http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/fax-charter.html.



Table Of Contents

     1.  Introduction
     2.  Content Negotiation
     3.  Timely Delivery
     4.  Security Considerations
     5.  Acknowledgments
     6.  Full Copyright Statement
     7. Contact



Abstract
     
     Classic facsimile document exchange represents both a set of
     technical specifications [T30] and a class of service.
     Previous work [RFC2305, RFC2532] has replicated some of that
     service class as a profile within Internet mail.  The
     current specification defines ôfull modeö carriage of
     facsimile data over the Internet, building upon that
     previous work and adding the remaining functionality
     necessary for achieving reliability, timeliness and
     capability negotiation for Internet mail that is on a par
     with classic T.30 facsimile. These additional features are
     designed to provide the highest level of interoperability
     with the existing and future standards-compliant email
     infrastructure and mail user agents, while providing a level
     of service that approximates the level currently enjoyed by
     fax users.
     
     The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights
     claimed in regard to some or all of the specification
     contained in this document.  For more information consult
     the online list of claimed rights in
     <http://www.ietf.org/ipr.html>.
     
     NOTE:     THIS IS A FIRST AND VERY PRELIMINARY
               VERSION OF SPECIFICATION.  PLEASE FOCUS
               ON MAJOR STRUCTURAL AND SEMANTIC
               REQUIREMENTS



Copyright Notice
     
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights
     Reserved.



1.   Introduction
     
     The current specification defines ôfull modeö carriage of
     facsimile data over the Internet, building upon previous
     work [RFC2305, RFC2532] and adding the remaining
     functionality necessary for achieving reliability,
     timeliness and capability negotiation for Internet mail that
     is on a par with classic T.30 facsimile. These additional
     features are designed to provide the highest level of
     interoperability with the existing and future standards-
     compliant email infrastructure and mail user agents, while
     providing a level of service that approximates the level
     currently enjoyed by fax users.
     
     The new features are designed to be interoperable with the
     existing base of mail transfer agents (MTAs) and mail user
     agents (MUAs), and take advantage of existing standards for
     advanced functionality such as positive delivery
     confirmation and disposition notification.  The enhancements
     described in this document utilize the messaging
     infrastructure, where possible, instead of creating fax-
     specific features that are unlikely to be implemented in non-
     fax messaging software.

     This document standardizes the following two features.
          
          ¸    Content negotiation (Section 2) (required)
          
          ¸    Timely delivery (Section 3) (required)
     
     The key words ôMUSTö, ôMUST NOTö, ôREQUIREDö, ôSHALLö,
     ôSHALL NOTö, ôSHOULDö, SHOULD NOTö, ôRECOMMENDEDö, ôMAYö,
     and ôOPTIONALö in this document are to be interpreted as
     described in [RFC2119].



2.   Content Negotiation
     
     Classic facsimile service is interactive, so that a sending
     station can discover the capabilities of the receiving
     station, prior to sending a facsimile of a document.  The
     permits the sender to transmit the best quality of facsimile
     that is supported by both the sending station and the
     receiving station.  Internet mail is store-and-forward, with
     potentially long latency, so that before-the-fact
     negotiation is problematic.  This specification therefore
     uses a post-hoc technique that permits an originator to send
     the best version known by the originator to be supported by
     the recipient and then sending a better version of the
     recipient requests it.
     
     The specification for this technique is in [CONNEG].



3.   Timely Delivery
     
     Internet mail is often reliable and speedy.  However it
     displays a very wide range of variability for these
     characteristics, depending upon details such as software
     implementation, systems operation, network connectivity, and
     network activity.  By contrast, facsimile systems typically
     suffer only the fixed delay of telephone call setup time.
     Since the T.30 standard includes a required delivery
     confirmation, the sender gets an immediate, unambiguous
     report on the status of a transmission.  Internet mail
     standards include methods of reporting confirmation, but
     these are not always supported.
     
     This specification defines a set of capabilities which
     permits an originator to request that the email transport
     system give a particular timeliness in delivery and then
     assures that the system will report the success or failure
     of that request.
     
     The specification for this technique is in [TIMELY].



4.   Security Considerations
     
     As this document is an extension of [RFC2305] and [RFC2532],
     the Security Considerations sections of [RFC2305] and
     [RFC2532] applies to this document.
     
     It appears that the mechanisms added by this specification
     do not introduce new security considerations, however the
     concerns raised in [RFC2532] are particularly salient for
     these new mechanisms.



5.   Acknowledgments
     
     [TIMELY] G. Klyne, et al, draft-ietf-fax-timely-00.txt
     
     [CONNEG] G. Klyne, R. Iwazaki, D. Crocker , draft-ietf-fax-
     content-negotiation-00.txt Content Negotiation for Facsimile
     Using Internet Mail
     
     [RFC2305] Toyoda, K., Ohno, H., Murai, J. and  D. Wing, "A
     Simple Mode of Facsimile Using Internet Mail", RFC 2305,
     March 1998.
     
     [T.30]    "Procedures for Document Facsimile Transmission in
     the General Switched Telephone Network", ITU-T (CCITT),
     Recommendation T.30, July, 1996.



6.   Full Copyright Statement

     
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights
     Reserved.
     
     This document and translations of it may be copied and
     furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
     otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be
     prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
     part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the
     above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on
     all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
     document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by
     removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
     Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
     for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which
     case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
     Standards process must be followed, or as required to
     translate it into languages other than English.
     
     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
     not be    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors
     or assigns.
     
     This document and the information contained herein is
     provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
     THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL
     WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
     ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT
     INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



7.   Contact
     
     
     David H. Crocker               <dcrocker@brandenburg.com>
     Brandenburg Consulting         Tel:  +1.408.246.8253
     675 Spruce Dr.                 Fax:  +1.408.249.6205
     Sunnyvale, CA 94086 USA


     Graham Klyne                   Tel: +44 118 930 1300
     Content Technologies Ltd.      Fax: +44 118 930 1301
     1220 Parkview,                 Email:    GK@ACM.ORG
     Arlington Business Park
     Theale
     Reading, RG7 4SA
     United Kingdom


     Larry Masinter                 Fax:    +1 650 812 4333
     Xerox Palo Alto Research       EMail:
     Center                         masinter@parc.xerox.com
     3333 Coyote Hill Road
     Palo Alto, CA 94304  USA