IAB                                                         B. Carpenter
Internet Draft                                                Y. Rekhter
August 1995



                   Renumbering considered unavoidable



                                 Abstract

                          draft-iab-renum-00.txt

   Changes to addressing information (renumbering) associated with various
   network components are likely to become more and more widespread and
   common, and in many cases unavoidable.  The IAB would like to stress
   the need to develop and deploy solutions that would facilitate such
   changes.



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).


   Table of Contents:


      Status of this Memo.............................................1
      1. Motivation...................................................2
      2. DNS versus IP Addresses......................................2
      3. Recommendations..............................................3
      4. Security considerations......................................3
      Acknowledgements................................................4
      Authors' Addresses..............................................4














Carpenter & Rekhter      Expires February 1996                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft    Renumbering considered unavoidable         August 1995


1. Motivation

   A need to change IP addressing information associated with various
   network components is known as "renumbering".  Voluntary renumbering
   may occur for a variety of reasons.  For example, moving an IP host
   from one subnet to another requires changing the host's IP address.
   Physically splitting a subnet due to traffic overload may also
   require renumbering.  A third example where renumbering may happen is
   when an organization changes its addressing plan.  Such changes imply
   changing not only hosts' addresses, but subnet numbers as well.
   These are just three examples that illustrate possible scenarios
   where voluntary renumbering could occur.

   Increasingly, renumbering will be unavoidable and involuntary.
   Extended deployment of Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) is vital
   to keep the Internet routing system alive and to maintain continuous
   uninterrupted growth of the Internet.  With current IP technology,
   this requires the vast majority of Internet hosts and subnets to have
   addresses belonging to a single large block of address space that has
   been allocated to their current service provider.  To contain the
   growth of routing information, whenever a subscriber changes to a new
   service provider, the subscriber's addresses will have to change.
   Occasionally, service providers themselves may have to change to a
   new and larger block of address space. In either of these cases,  to
   contain the growth of routing information the subscribers concerned
   must renumber their subnet(s) and host(s).  If the subscriber does
   not renumber, the subscriber may be faced with either (a) limited
   (less than Internet-wide) IP connectivity, or (b) extra cost to
   offset the overhead associated with the subscriber's routing
   information that Internet Services Providers have to maintain, or
   both.

   Currently, renumbering is usually a costly, tedious and error-prone
   process.  It usually requires the services of experts in the area and
   considerable advance planning.  Tools to facilitate renumbering are
   few, not widely available, and not widely deployed. While a variety
   of ad hoc approaches to renumbering have been developed and used, the
   overall situation is far from satisfactory.  There is little or no
   documentation that describes renumbering procedures.  While
   renumbering occurs in various parts of the Internet, there is little
   or no documented experience sharing.



2. DNS versus IP Addresses

   Within the Internet architecture an individual host can be identified
   by the IP address(es) assigned to the network interface(s) on that
   host.  The Domain Name System (DNS) provides a convenient way to
   associate legible names with IP addresses.  The DNS name space is
   independent of the IP address space.  DNS names are related to the
   ownership and function of the hosts, not to the mechanisms of
   addressing and routing.  A change in DNS name is generally a sign of
   a real change in function, whereas a change in IP address is a purely
   technical event.


Carpenter & Rekhter      Expires February 1996                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft    Renumbering considered unavoidable         August 1995


   Expressing the information in terms of Domain Names allows one to
   defer binding between a particular network entity and its IP address
   until run time.  Since Domain Names names are expected to be fairly
   long-lived, and more stable than IP addresses, deferring the binding
   avoids the risk of changed mapping between IP addresses and specific
   network entities (due to changing addressing information).  Moreover,
   reliance on Fully Qualified Domain Names (rather than IP addresses)
   also localizes to the DNS the changes needed to deal with changing
   addressing information due to renumbering.



3. Recommendations

   The development and deployment of a toolkit that could facilitate and
   automate host renumbering is essential.  The Dynamic Host
   Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is clearly an essential part of such a
   tool kit.  The IAB strongly encourages implementation and wide-scale
   deployment of DHCP.  Support for dynamic update capabilities to the
   Domain Name System (DNS) that could be done with sufficient
   authentication would further facilitate host renumbering.  The IAB
   strongly encourages progression of work in this area towards
   standardization within the IETF, with the goal of integrating DHCP
   and dynamic update capabilities to provide truly autoconfigurable
   TCP/IP hosts.

   The IAB strongly recommends that all designs and implementations
   should minimise the cases in which IP addresses are stored in non-
   volatile storage maintained by humans, such as configuration files.
   Configuration information used by TCP/IP protocols should be
   expressed, whenever possible, in terms of Fully Qualified Domain
   Names, rather than IP addresses. Hardcoding IP addresses into
   applications should be deprecated.  Files containing lists of name to
   address mappings, other than that used as part of DNS configuration,
   should be deprecated, and avoided wherever possible.

   The IAB strongly encourages sharing of experience with renumbering
   and documenting this sharing within the Internet community.  The IAB
   suggests that the IETF (and specifically its Operational Area) may be
   the most appropriate place to develop such documentation.  The IAB
   welcomes the decision of the CIDRD working group to document existing
   methods of renumbering.



4. Security considerations

   Renumbering is compatible with the Internet security architecture.









Carpenter & Rekhter      Expires February 1996                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft    Renumbering considered unavoidable         August 1995


Acknowledgements

   This document is a collective product of the Internet Architecture
   Board.



Authors' Addresses


       Brian E. Carpenter
       Group Leader, Communications Systems      Phone:  +41 22 767-4967
       Computing and Networks Division           Fax:    +41 22 767-7155
       CERN                                      Telex:  419000 cer ch
       European Laboratory for Particle Physics  Email: brian@dxcoms.cern.ch
       1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

       Yakov Rekhter
       cisco Systems
       170 West Tasman Drive
       San Jose, CA 95134

       Phone: (914) 528-0090
       EMail: yakov@cisco.com

































Carpenter & Rekhter      Expires February 1996                  [Page 4]




