



Routing Area Working Group                                   J. Mitchell
Internet-Draft                                          October 19, 2015
Intended status: Informational
Expires: April 21, 2016


          A Pseudo-Protocol for BGP Next Hop Cost Manipulation
               draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost-00

Abstract

   This describes a local router implementation option that provides a
   facility for the manipulation of the costs of IGP learned routes that
   are utilized as BGP NextHops rather than using the SPF calculated
   cost to the same route when running the BGP path selection algorithm.
   The result is something that works like a pseudo-routing protocol but
   only impacting the BGP decision making process.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Implementation Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Implementation Details  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Key-Value Store . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Cost Replacement Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.2.1.  Simple Implementation Option  . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.2.2.  Alternative Implementation Option (for use with ORR)    4
       3.2.3.  IGP Shortcuts Like Implementation Option  . . . . . .   5
       3.2.4.  Handling Router Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Relationship to Other Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   In networks where out of band route reflectors are in use that also
   deploy tunneling technologies such as RSVP-TE LSPs and where the
   operator has selected to use non-IGP SPF derived metrics on those
   tunnels which influence the BGP path selection process at the point
   when it reaches step (e) of section 9.1.2.2 of [RFC4271], an operator
   wishing to make the same decision for BGP prefixes that reach this
   point in the process on a router which does not deploy the tunneling
   technology has little capability to do so given existing
   functionality available in vendor implementations.  This limits the
   ability for the out of band BGP route reflector from being deployed
   in these networks without implementing the tunnel technologies in use
   similiar to a router in the forwarding path (in band) or choosing to
   live with the IGP SPF derived decision for this step, neither of
   which are an ideal deployment scenario.  Presumably, the metrics
   configured on the tunnels deployed have value from a traffic
   engineering standpoint versus the IGP derived metrics, and issues may
   occur meeting the network requirements if the route reflector in
   question were to make a different decision than that made by a
   similarly located client.

   This draft proposes a way for an implementation to provide a simple
   capability to manipulate the cost to the typically IGP learned
   prefixes that are utilized as BGP next hops.



Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


2.  Implementation Overview

   A pseudo-protocol can be used to manipulate the cost to a BGP nexthop
   in cases where the normal IGP SPF cost is not desirable.  To
   accomplish this, the pseudo-protocol would need the desired cost and
   a way to inject this cost in the BGP bestpath calculation.  This can
   be accomplished via two components:

   o  A key-value store (e.g. an associative array) for associating
      nexthop prefixes to costs

   o  A cost replacement mechanism for utilizing the looked up
      information in place of the normally utilized IGP cost to the
      nexthop available in the routing table when doing the BGP bestpath
      calculation.

3.  Implementation Details

   As discussed above the implementation must provide two distinct
   components, a key-value store and a cost replacement mechanism.

3.1.  Key-Value Store

   An implementation must provide a basic key-value store such as an
   associative array to store the replacement cost information
   configured by the operator.  The key in this mechanism MUST be
   represented by an actual prefix, typically a host route such a /32 in
   IPv4 or a /128 for IPv6.  The value stored to represent the nexthop
   cost MUST be an unsigned integer with possible values of 0 to a
   minimum of 2^32 to cover the maximum path metrics utilized by the
   most widely deployed IGPs, such as OSPF [RFC2328] or IS-IS [RFC1195]
   when utilizing wide metrics [RFC3784].  Implementations MAY support
   maximum values up to 2^64 for a wider range of applications.

   The implementation MAY choose to represent the operator input data
   into the store directly in the router configuration or utilize a
   separate storage mechanism to store the configured information,
   however the implementation MUST persist this information through
   router reload or other events regardless of local representation of
   the data.  An implementation MAY also provide a separate ephemeral
   mechanism for this information that replaces information from the
   persistent option, however no use case requiring this is discussed
   further in the draft.  Specifying the method for configuring these
   values (for instance through CLI or NetConf/Yang) is out of the scope
   of this draft.






Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


3.2.  Cost Replacement Mechanism

   There are several implementation options for using the data in key-
   value store described above to replace the BGP nexthop costs.  These
   are described in the sections below.

3.2.1.  Simple Implementation Option

   Upon finishing the computation of the SPF, or for non link-state
   protocols, at any point upon which a route is due to be added or
   updated in the routing information base (RIB), a lookup MUST be done
   on the route in the key value store and the cost to the nexthop for
   that prefix MUST be replaced by the value returned if one is
   available.  The implementation SHOULD provide a mechanism that allows
   the operator to utilize either the nexthop replacement information or
   the SPF or normal routing protocol derived cost.  For instance an
   implementation MAY do this by associating a different, operator
   configurable, route preference with the routes created by the pseudo-
   protocol versus the IGP protocol route preference.  If the
   replacement routes are installed into the RIB and Forwarding
   Information Base (FIB) of the router, the associated Layer3 and
   Layer2 information and any other adjacency information required to
   forward on the route should be copied from the original route so that
   traffic from the router itself is still forwarding correctly.

3.2.2.  Alternative Implementation Option (for use with ORR)

   In the case that the router performing the implementation described
   in this document does not actually need to forward along the BGP
   prefixes received (is out of band from a network traffic forwarding
   standpoint) and has an implementation of BGP optimal route reflection
   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-optimal-route-reflection] in place, the BGP nexthop
   costs can be associated only with the decision made for the BGP
   optimal route reflection group.  The information in the local key-
   value store could be used to replace directly the IGP costs from the
   topology standpoint of the out of band router or the costs that would
   have been computed from the virtual IGP placement configured by ORR.
   In either of these cases, there is no need to actually place the
   information in the RIB or FIB of the local router, if nexthop
   information is stored only for the purpose of BGP bestpath
   calculations, as it is not necessary for local decisions as long as
   the appropriately configured BGP clients receive the appropriate
   paths as a result from the BGP bestpath decision.








Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


3.2.3.  IGP Shortcuts Like Implementation Option

   In some cases, operators may not find it sufficient to only replace
   configured nexthop costs directly using the mechanism described
   above.  If the desire of the operator is to utilize the BGP pseudo-
   protocol to mirror the operational BGP bestpath behavior of traffic
   forwarding routers in the network that utilize RSVP-TE LSPs in
   conjunction with a deployment of IGP Shortcuts [RFC3906], a more
   complicated implementation approach can resolve such a use case.  It
   should be noted this implementation option is only required if in the
   use case the operator utilizes an absolute or relative configured
   metric for the on the RSVP-TE LSPs in question, and does not
   dynamically derive the metrics to points beyond the tail-end of the
   tunnel strictly from the IGP SPF cost to that prefix.  In this
   situation the implementation MAY attempt to come to same cost system
   as this design requires by implementing a similar approach as
   sections 4 through 6 of [RFC3906] describe but with the important
   difference that the router running this implementation does not
   actually have RSVP-TE LSPs configured.  The way that they can
   implement the approach is by considering at every node processed in
   the SPF algorithm whether the key-value store contains an entry
   representing the traffic engineering router id for that node (for
   instance as described in Section 4.3 of [RFC5305] for IS-IS or for
   OSPF, Section 3.4.1 of [RFC3630] or Section 3 of [RFC5329] for OSPFv2
   and OSPFv3 respectively.  If the key-value store does have such an
   entry, the cost up to that step in the SPF algorithm should be
   replaced with the value for that entry so the end result is that all
   downstream derived costs are influenced by the replacement cost
   looked up in the key-value store.  This is similar in operation to
   Section 5 of [RFC3906] with the same end result in respect to the
   costs used by the BGP path selection process.

3.2.4.  Handling Router Maintenance

   Having a hard coded value that represents the cost to a prefix
   negates the normal reaction of costs to network events and for the
   most part this is the operator desired behavior when utilizing this
   feature.  However in the case where the prefix in question was sent
   by a router that has been taken out of service from an IGP
   standpoint, for instance by utilizing the IS-IS overload bit or by
   configuring unusually high IGP costs, for instance as described in
   [RFC6987], the operator's intentions are likely to be different in
   respect to direct traffic to that prefix.  To simplify the language,
   this draft refers to any of these mechanisms as "overloading" the
   router.  To avoid utilizing the pseudo-protocol's costs in the case
   of overloaded routers, an implementation MAY choose not to replace
   the costs normally derived via the IGP (effectively ignoring the
   existence of the entry in the key-value store) in the cases where



Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


   that entry represents a router or prefix which appears to be
   overloaded.  In the case of implementations that have the "IGP
   Shortcuts Like Implementation" functionality, no cost replacements
   should happen for any nodes beyond the node that appears to be
   overloaded either.

4.  Relationship to Other Work

   The mechanism in this draft solves similar problems as those
   described in BGP optimal route reflection
   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-optimal-route-reflection] with the primary
   differences being the source of the authoritative information for the
   nexthop replacement cost information as well as the optional
   implementation approach outlined for IGP Shortcut Like impact on
   downstream routers.

   Another draft aimed at similar use cases is
   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost] which currently proposes utilizing BGP-LS
   to distribute next hop cost information from a controller or router
   in the network to the router upon which cost manipulation may happen.
   The primary difference between this draft and that is the reduced
   protocol complexity.  In networks that use absolute metrics on tunnel
   infrastructure that influence BGP bestpath decisions, this
   information is already typically centrally stored, so adding protocol
   complexity necessary to send this information between routers and
   then utilize that information received is not necessary for the
   solution to be implemented.  This draft does not require or propose
   any BGP protocol extensions.  Another advantage of this approach than
   receiving the information from the client is the lack of delay as the
   router doing the calculation is receiving SPF updates on a similar
   timeframe as the client and is not waiting for it to finish the
   calculation and then repackage the information after change into a
   BGP-LS message to send to the out of band route reflector.

5.  Security Considerations

   The design does not introduce any additional security concerns.
   General BGP security considerations are discussed in [RFC4271] and
   [RFC4272].

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.








Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ina Minei for initial review of this document and helpful
   suggestions.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Ed., Li, T., Ed., and S. Hares, Ed., "A
              Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, DOI
              10.17487/RFC4271, January 2006,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4271>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, DOI 10.17487/RFC1195,
              December 1990, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1195>.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2328, April 1998,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2328>.

   [RFC3630]  Katz, D., Kompella, K., and D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering
              (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630, DOI
              10.17487/RFC3630, September 2003,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3630>.

   [RFC3784]  Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to Intermediate
              System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering (TE)",
              RFC 3784, DOI 10.17487/RFC3784, June 2004,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3784>.

   [RFC3906]  Shen, N. and H. Smit, "Calculating Interior Gateway
              Protocol (IGP) Routes Over Traffic Engineering Tunnels",
              RFC 3906, DOI 10.17487/RFC3906, October 2004,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3906>.

   [RFC4272]  Murphy, S., "BGP Security Vulnerabilities Analysis", RFC
              4272, DOI 10.17487/RFC4272, January 2006,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4272>.

   [RFC5305]  Li, T. and H. Smit, "IS-IS Extensions for Traffic
              Engineering", RFC 5305, DOI 10.17487/RFC5305, October
              2008, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5305>.





Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   draft-mitchell-rtgwg-pseudo-bgp-nh-cost    October 2015


   [RFC5329]  Ishiguro, K., Manral, V., Davey, A., and A. Lindem, Ed.,
              "Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF Version 3", RFC
              5329, DOI 10.17487/RFC5329, September 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5329>.

   [RFC6987]  Retana, A., Nguyen, L., Zinin, A., White, R., and D.
              McPherson, "OSPF Stub Router Advertisement", RFC 6987, DOI
              10.17487/RFC6987, September 2013,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6987>.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-optimal-route-reflection]
              Raszuk, R., Cassar, C., Aman, E., Decraene, B., and S.
              Litkowski, "BGP Optimal Route Reflection (BGP-ORR)",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-optimal-route-reflection-10 (work in
              progress), July 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost]
              Varlashkin, I., Raszuk, R., Patel, K., Bhardwaj, M., and
              S. Bayraktar, "Carrying next-hop cost information in BGP",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost-02 (work in progress), May
              2015.

Author's Address

   Jon Mitchell

   Email: jrmitche@puck.nether.net
























Mitchell                 Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 8]
