
  Internet Draft                                               Penn Pfautz
  Document: <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01.txt>                         AT&T
  Category: Informational                                         James Yu
                                                             NeuStar, Inc.
                                                                March 2001
   
   
                                      
                                      
                          ENUM Administrative Process 
   
                        <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01.txt> 
   
   
   
   
  Status of this Memo 
   
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
   
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.  
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress."  
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
       
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
     To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check 
     the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts 
     Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net 
     (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East 
     Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast). 
      









    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational- Expires Sept. 2001      1 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
  Abstract 
      
     This document considers administrative processes for ENUM and 
     offers a general administrative model for an environment where 
     number portability has been implemented.  The ENUM administrative 
     process is a critical piece in making ENUM operational.  The 
     administrative process involves several entities.  A telephony 
     user's identity and his/her assignment of a telephone number must 
     be validated before ENUM service can be granted.  Therefore, the 
     entity that assigns telephone numbers (often but not always 
     telephony user's telephony service provider) plays an important 
     and sometimes necessary role in making the ENUM administrative 
     process successful. 
      
     The information flows associated with the reference model proposed 
     in this document are described to show the interactions among the 
     involved entities and the functions to be performed by each 
     involved entity.  The industry and regulators will decide whether 
     this reference models or some alternative is to be used. 
   
      
  1. Introduction 
      
     Provisioning of ENUM [2,3,4] is complex because it combines 
     elements of the domain name registration process (after all it is 
     a domain name that is being registered) and the preferred carrier 
     selection process (because particular providers are being selected 
     to provide services to the holder of the domain name identified by 
     the telephone number). ENUM provisioning also is tied to number 
     administration because of the need to verify a user's rights to 
     have ENUM records for a particular telephone number and to 
     terminate those rights when service on the number is disconnected. 
     It is essential to develop an administrative process that is 
     operationally efficient, provides adequate authentication of 
     requests and at the same time is not burdensome for the end user 
     of the telephone number. 















    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 2 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
      
     The ENUM Operations document [4] and RFC 3026 [5] suppose ENUM 
     implementation in a tiered Architecture. In the Operations 
     document, the first tier is described as directing queries to the 
     entity that holds the actual Naming Authority Pointer (NAPTR) 
     records for an individual telephone number. Discussions between 
     the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and Internet 
     Engineering Task Force (IETF) (RFC 3026) suggest that this tier 
     will actually be composed of two distinct sub-tiers: one which 
     directs queries to the administrative entity that an ITU member 
     state has designated to provide the Tier 1 function for the 
     telephone number in question and that Tier 1 entity itself. This 
     document will refer to the first entity as Tier 0, and the second 
     as Tier 1. 
      
     Tier 0 is the Reseaux IP Europeens Network Control Center (RIPE 
     NCC) that maintains the e164.arpa zone. Entries in the RIPE NCC 
     name server correspond to country codes (CCs) or portions of 
     country codes and point to the Tier 1 or Registry that is the 
     authoritative name server for that country code or portion of 
     country code1.  
      
     At Tier 1, the Registry maintains records that indicate the 
     authoritative name server(s) for individual E.164 numbers or 
     blocks of numbers in the country code or portion thereof.2 
      
     At Tier 2, the Service Registrar for an E.164 number maintains the 
     actual NAPTR records that contain information for specific 
     communication services. These NAPTR records in turn either point 
     to Application Service Providers (ASPs) that provide these 
     services or contain the Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) for 
     contacting the user's end points directly. 
      
     This document discusses the ENUM administrative process in an 
     environment in which number portability [6,7] has been implemented 
     such that the telephony user controls the assigned telephone 
     number so long as it maintains the telephony service.  In such 
     environments, the donor telephony service provider (i.e., the 
     telephony service provider that is assigned a block of telephony 
                       

     1 In the actual Recommendation E.164, a 'country' in this sense 
     means 'a specific country, a group of countries in an integrated   
     numbering plan or a specific geographical area.' 
     2 Although the focus of this document is on geographic country 
     codes assigned to a single state or group of states as an 
     integrated numbering plan, much of what is proposed would be 
     applicable to telephone numbers in country codes that are shared 
     by regional or international communities such as the +881 and +878 
     numbers as well as to numbers in geographic country codes. 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 3 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     numbers before any number porting event happens from that number 
     block) is not to be relied on for maintaining the delegation 
     information for a TN  (i.e., the Tier 1 function in the ENUM 
     process). 
        
     The reference model presented here assumes that a "Tier 1 Entity 
     (T1E)" has been chartered by national (or, potentially multi-
     national in the case of an integrated numbering plan such as the 
     North American Numbering Plan (NANP)[8]) authorities to provide 
     the Domain Name System (DNS) service for the <country 
     code>.e164.arpa domain (e.g., 1.e164.arpa for NANP) and that this 
     entity provisions zones of authority for each telephone number 
     (TN) that point to the correct service registrar for the telephone 
     number. The service registrar's DNS in turn holds the NAPTR[9] 
     records for the TN.  
      
     Note that in some cases the separation (DNS delegation) at the 
     national Tier 1 level may occur below the country code level when 
     countries share a common country code (or integrated numbering 
     plan.) 
      
     For example, if there were to be separate Tier 1s for the US and 
     Canada, two of the countries in the integrated numbering plan for 
     country code 1, then the delegations would have to be 
     appropriately divided at the area code level. 
      
     However, such policy-area divisions would still have to ensure 
     that there is only one Tier 1 registry for any given telephone 
     number, and that these subdivisions are static, limited, and 
     delegated in a way that does not burden Tier 0. 
      
  2. Terminology and Abbreviations 
      
     ASP    Application Service Provider, a service provider that 
            provides applications such as e-mail, or voice messaging to 
            an EU that is assigned with a TN. 
      
     CC     Country Code 
      
     DNS    Domain Name System 
      
     ENUM   Telephone Number to URI mapping 
      
     EU     End User, a person or entity that is assigned a telephone 
            number.  The EU plays the role similar to the "registrant." 
      
     HLR    Home Location Register 
      
     ICANN  Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
      

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 4 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     ID     Identity or Identification 
      
     ISP    Internet Service Provider 
      
     ITU    International Telecommunication Union 
      
     LERG   Local Exchange Routing Guide  
      
     NANP   North American Numbering Plan 
      
     NAPTR  Naming Authority Pointer 
      
     NCC    Network Control Center 
      
     NPA    Numbering Plan Area 
      
     NPAC   Number Portability Administration Center 
   
     PA     Portability Administrator 
      
     PIC    Preferred Inter-exchange Carrier 
      
     Registry  The entity whose name server identifies the Service 
            Registrar for a given telephone number 
      
     RFC    Request For Comment  
      
     RR     Resource Record 
      
     RIPE   Reseaux IP Europeens 
      
     Service Registrar the entity that hosts the NAPTR records for a 
            given telephone number 
      
     SIP    Session Initiation Protocol 
      
     SMS    Service Management System 
      
     SMS-MC Short Message Service Message Center 
      
     T1E    Tier 1 Entity, the entity that has a pointer to the Tier 2 
            Entity for each served TN.  The T1E is the Registry, 
            similar to the registry in the general domain name 
            registration process. 
      
     T2E    Tier 2 Entity, the entity that has all the NAPTR RRs 
            associated with each served TN.  The T2E plays the role of 
            the service registrar, which is similar to that of the 
            registrar in the general domain name registration process. 
      

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 5 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     T3E    Tier 3 Entity, the entity that provides the service-
            specific directory services for retrieving additional 
            information for services related to a TN. 
      
     TN     Telephone number, an E.164 number in the national or 
            international numbering plan. 
      
     TNAA   Telephone Number Assignment Authority, the entity that 
            holds information about the current assignment of a 
            telephone number to an end user. This is often, but not 
            always the current TSP for a number. 
      
     TSP    Telephony Service Provider, the telephony service provider 
            that provides telephony and related services to a TN. 
      
     VLR    Visitor Location Register 
      
     URI    Uniform Resource Identifier 
      
     URL    Uniform Resource Locator 
      
      
  3. Reference Model 
      
     This section discusses a reference model that shows the entities 
     that are involved in the ENUM administrative process and the 
     interfaces among them.  The assumptions are first described below 
     before the discussion of the reference model. 
   
   
  3.1. Assumptions 
      
     Some assumptions are made so as to describe the proposed ENUM 
     administrative process in a controlled manner.  Those assumptions 
     are made based on the objectives to have an efficient and 
     effective and a user-friendly administrative process.  They are 
     shown below.   
      
     - One Tier 1 Entity (T1E) handles the subdomain of e164.arpa 
       corresponding to a particular country code or portion thereof 
       and points each served Telephone Number (TN) for which an ENUM 
       record exists to the proper T2E. 
      
     - All NAPTR records for a given TN must be stored in a single Tier 
       2 entity's name server. 
      
     - Not every TN has a record or records at the T1E. 
      



    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 6 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     - The EU can use the ENUM service as a personal number service and 
       can subscribe to many application services (e.g., e-mail and 
       voice mail) from various ASPs including his/her TSP. 
      
     - The TSP of an EU may use the ENUM service for network-related 
       services.  Some of those network-related services use TNs that 
       are not assigned to the EUs. For example, the ENUM process can 
       be used to identify the wireless network element such as the 
       Home Location Register (HLR) or Visitor Location Register (VLR) 
       by using TNs not assigned to the EUs [10].  Other network-
       related services may use TNs that are assigned to the EUs.  For 
       example, ENUM process can be used to identify the wireless Short 
       Message Service Message Center (SMS-MC) when a short message is 
       addressed to a wireless subscriber's TN. 
      
     - The TSP may offer application services to the EUs.  For those 
       application services, the TSP is no different from the ASPs that 
       can offer the same applications services to the EUs.  The TSP 
       will be treated as the ASPs for those EUs' application services. 
      
     - The EU decides which Tier 2 Entity (T2E) to use for its assigned 
       TN. 
      
     - The mention of the entity such as T1E or T2E in this document 
       sometimes means the entity that offers a specific functionality 
       (e.g., T1E) and other times refers to the domain name servers 
       (e.g., can be two or more) operated by that particular entity.    
      
     - The EU has authority over provisioning of the Naming Authority 
       Pointer (NAPTR) Resource Records (RRs) at the T2E for his/her 
       application services, but in most instances may not provide the 
       NAPTR RRs to the T2E directly, but rather authorize the T2E and 
       various ASPs to provision the records.  The TSP has authority 
       over provisioning of the NAPTR RRs at the T2E for the network-
       related services.  The T2E must control the access rights to the 
       NAPTR RRs so that the TSP and ASPs can only provision/access/ 
       change their own NAPTR RRs.   
      
     - The NAPTR RRs for the EU's application services and the TSP's 
       network-related services can be easily differentiated (e.g., via 
       the "service" field of the NAPTR RR). 
      
     - For a TN that is not assigned to any EU, the TSP that controls 
       that TN can be viewed as the EU for that TN. 
      
      
      
      
      
      

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 7 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     - If the TSP uses ENUM for network-related services, the TSP may 
       designate a T2E, called "TSP's default T2E," to hold these 
       network-related NAPTR RRs if the EU has not opted to make use of 
       ENUM services.  When an EU does decide to make use of ENUM 
       services and chooses a T2E different than the TSP's default T2E, 
       the EU's chosen T2E will become the new T2E and will retrieve 
       the TSP's NAPTR RRs from the TSP's default T2E.  When the EU 
       stops using the ENUM service and the T2E informs the T1E to 
       remove the pointer to it for that TN, the T1E will point to the 
       TSP's default T2E for that TN if such a default T2E exists. 
      
     - The T1E knows the Telephone Number Assignment Authority (TNAA) 
       and TSP for each TN and knows when a number porting takes place 
       through information from the Portability Administrator (PA) that 
       administers the number porting process (e.g., the Number 
       Portability Administration Center (NPAC) in the U.S.A. [11]). 
      
     - The EU can change the T2E without informing the current serving 
       T2E (the old T2E).  The new T2E may inform the old T2E and will 
       inform the T1E about the T2E change for the TN.  The T1E will 
       confirm the change with the old T2E and inform the new T2E about 
       the confirmation.  After retrieving the NAPTR RRs for the TN 
       from the old T2E, the new T2E informs the T1E to make the T2E 
       change in effect.  This process is similar to the change of the 
       TSP through the NPAC in the U. S. A. and the change of registrar 
       through the registry for existing domain name registration.   
      
     - The TNAA may need to confirm the TN assignment to an EU when 
       requested by the T1E and/or T2E.  The need for this action from 
       the TNAA depends on whether the T1E or T2E can get the 
       information from other sources. 
      
     - The EU loses his/her right to the assigned TN and ENUM services 
       when he/she disconnects the telephony service and no longer 
       owns/controls the TN.  
      
     - The TNAA is aware when rights to a TN are relinquished, e.g. 
       through service disconnection  
      
     - The TNAA informs the T1E in a timely manner when the EU 
       relinquishes a TN. 
      
     - An EU can be assigned one TN or a set of TNs.  The 
       administrative process will be designed to handle individual TN 
       or set of TNs for an EU.  In the discussion of information 
       flows, only single TN is addressed. 
      
      
      
   

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 8 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
  3.1. Reference Model Architecture 
      
     Figure 1 shows the reference model. All the entities involved are 
     shown as logically distinct but in some cases a single individual 
     or corporation may perform the roles of multiple entities. In 
     particular the TSP may be the TNAA. The EU decides which T2E to be 
     his/her service registrar.  The T2E can be physically operated by 
     the EU itself, its TSP, its Internet Service Provider (ISP), or a 
     third-party entity designated by the EU. The T2E may need to meet 
     criteria to be defined by the appropriate national authorities. 
     These may or may not be the same criteria applied to domain name 
     registrars in general. 
      
      
      
      
      
   
                        +-----+ 
         +--------------| PA  | 
         |              +-----+ 
         |                 | 
         |                 |M 
         |  +-----------+-----+             +-----+ 
         |  |  +--------| T1E |      +------| T2E | 
         |  |  |        +-----+      |      +-----+ 
         |  |  |           |         | 
         |  |  |          A+ +-------+I 
         |  |  |           | | 
         |  |  |        +-----+      B      +----+ 
         |  |  |  +-----| T2E |------+------| EU |---+ 
        N+  |  |  |   +-+-----+   +---------+----+   | 
         |  |  |  |   |    |  |   |           |      | 
         | F+ C+  |   |    +G |   |  H        +E     | 
         |  |  |  + L |    |  +---|--+-----+  |      | 
         |  |  |  |   |    |      |        |  |      +J 
         |  |  |  |   +-+-----+   +D       +-----+   | 
         |  |  +--------|TNAA |---+        | ASP |   | 
         |  |     |     +--+--+            +-----+   |                    
         |  |     |        |K                        | 
         |  |     +-----+--+--+                      |        
         |  +-----------| TSP |----------------------+         
         +--------------+-----+             

   
                 Figure 1. Reference Model  
   
      
     Interface A is used by the new T2E to indicate the T2E change to 
     the T1E or by the T2E to provision its RRs (e.g., change the name 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 9 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     server RRs) at the T1E for a TN, and by the T1E to inform the old 
     T2E when the EU changes to a new T2E, and the new T2E about the 
     old T2E, and to acknowledge the new T2E request for a T2E change 
     for a TN.  
      
     Interface B is used by the EU to request ENUM service from a T2E, 
     provision/access/change information in his/her NAPTR RRs at the 
     T2E, and authorize his/her ASPs for the access right to their 
     respective NAPTR RRs at the T2E for a specific TN that is assigned 
     to the EU. 
      
     Interface C is used by the TNAA to inform the T1E about 
     termination of TN assignment. It may be used by the T1E to verify 
     the assignment of a TN and whether a TN is a working TN assigned 
     to an EU, or to the TSP. 
      
     Interface D is used by the EU to request a TN assignment, or to 
     terminate the assignment, or by the TNAA to assign a TN to the EU 
     or to terminate the assignment.  
      
     Interface E is used by the ASP to provide its NAPTR RRs or the 
     application service related information (e.g., e-mail or SIP 
     address) to the EU or to request the EU to authorize it to 
     provision/access/change its NAPTR RRs at the T2E, and by the EU to 
     subscribe, change or terminate application services from the ASP 
     or discuss matters related to the EU's account. 
      
      
     Interface F is used by the TSP to inform the T1E about its default 
     T2E for the network-related services for a TN and by the T1E to 
     inform the TSP about the change of the T2E.  
      
     Interface G may be used by the T2E to verify the assignment of a 
     TN and by the TNAA to inform the T2E about the telephony service 
     disconnection for a TN. 
      
     Interface H may be used by the ASP to provision/access/change the 
     NAPTR RRs associated with the application services for a TN at the 
     T2E if the EU gives it the authorization to do so. This includes 
     the termination of a specific application service for a TN.   
      
     Interface I is used between the old T2E and the new T2E to resolve 
     disputes about the T2E change and for the new T2E to retrieve the 
     NAPTR RRs at the old T2E.  
      
     Interface J is used between the EU and TSP to request or terminate 
     telephony service. 
      
     Interface K is used between the TNAA and TSP as needed to verify 
     or update number/service status. 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 10 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
      
     Interface L is used by the TSP to provision/access/change the 
     NAPTR RRs associated with the network-related services for a TN at 
     the T2E.  
      
     Interface M is used by the Portability Administrator (PA) to 
     inform the T1E about the number porting events for a TN that is 
     managed by the PA.   There can be multiple PAs with each one 
     handling different number ranges/blocks (e.g., one for geographic 
     number and one for freephone numbers). 
      
     Interface N is used between the TSP and the Portability 
     Administrator (PA) about number porting events. It is defined by 
     each of the number portability administration process for a 
     specific number ranges/blocks and is outside the scope of this 
     document. 
      
     Interfaces A, B and C are to be defined and supported. The other 
     interfaces are subject to the entities that are involved.  For 
     example, a T2E can provide a web-based graphic user interface for 
     the EU and possibly the TSP or ASP to interact with it, and the 
     T2Es can define interface I to standardize the communication among 
     themselves.   
      
     Where the TSP rather than an independent TNAA is responsible for 
     number assignments, interfaces D and J collapse, as do interfaces 
     G and L, and Interfaces C and F. 
      
     Where the TSP serves as the T2E interface L becomes internal, 
     interfaces A and F collapse, and interfaces B and J collapse. 
      
     Where the EU plays the T2E's role for its own TN or TNs, 
     interfaces E and H collapse, interfaces J and L collapse, and 
     interface B becomes internal. 
      
  4. Information Flows 
      
     This section describes the information flows for several scenarios 
     to show how the entities in the reference model interact during 
     the ENUM administration process. Only the successful scenarios are 
     discussed for the proposed administrative process.   After the 
     reference model and basic concept of operation are agreed, the 
     failure scenarios then can be identified and discussed.  
      
     The processes of verifying the EU's identity and EU's assignment 
     of the TN by the T2E, verifying the TSP's or ASP's identity and 
     rights of provisioning/accessing/ changing the NAPTR RRs at the 
     T2E by the T2E, or verifying the T2E's identity by the T1E, are 
     not detailed or not shown in this section to simplify the 
     explanation.  The authentication aspect is discussed in Section 5. 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 11 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
      
      
  Case A. Initial ENUM service request by the End User 
      
     This case happens when the EU approaches a T2E for ENUM service.  
     The EU may initiate the service request due to his/her need for 
     ENUM service, or at the request of his/her TSP or ASP for some 
     application services. 
      
     1.   The EU requests a T2E to host the NAPTR RRs for his/her TN. 
     2.   The T2E verifies the EU's identity and the assignment of the 
          TN, accepts the service request and collects information from 
          the EU. 
     3.   There are several ways of provisioning the NAPTR RRs 
          associated with the EU's application services at the T2E. 
     3a.  The EU provides all the necessary information to the T2E 
          based on the information (e.g., voice-mail address and e-mail 
          address) received from its TSP and ASPs.  The EU can provide 
          the exact NAPTR RRs or some application address information 
          that is converted by the T2E to the NAPTR RRs.  This case, 
          where the ASP must go through the EU to make changes to the 
          NAPTR RRs at the T2E for the EU's TN, may be burdensome and 
          error prone for many EUs. 
     3b.  The EU gives the authorization to the T2E for his/her ASPs to 
          provision/access/change the RRs at the T2E.  The ASP then 
          provisions the NAPTR RRs at the T2E for a TN.  The TSP is 
          authorized to provision the NAPTR RRs associated with 
          network-related services.  The T2E will verify and allow the 
          TSP or ASP to provision only those NAPTR RRs it is 
          authorized.  The EU may pass the information that is unique 
          to the TSP or ASP so that the T2E can authenticate the TSP or 
          ASP when it interacts with the T2E, or the T2E can provide 
          some information (e.g., user ID and password) to be passed to 
          the TSP or ASP by the EU. 
     3c.  The EU provides all the necessary information to the T2E 
          based on the information received from its ASPs and gives the 
          authorization to the T2E for his/her ASPs and TSP to 
          provision/access/change the RRs at the T2E. 
     3d.  The EU may give the authorization to the T2E for some of 
          his/her ASPs to provision NAPTR records for the applications 
          services they provide.  In that case, information at the T2E 
          for those services without the EU's authorization must go 
          through the EU to make changes. 
     4.   Since the T2E has not already provisioned this TN at the T1E, 
          it requests that the T1E provision the TN with proper DNS RRs 
          pointing to the T2E. 
     5a.  If the EU's TSP has provided the default T2E information to 
          the T1E (e.g., for using the ENUM services for the TSP's 
          network-related services), the T1E informs the TSP about the 
          new EU-selected T2E, confirms the provisioning request with 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 12 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
          the EU-selected T2E and informs the EU-selected T2E about the 
          TSP's default T2E.  The EU-selected T2E then retrieves the 
          NAPTR RRs that are associated with the TN from the TSP's 
          default T2E. 
     5b.  If the T1E does not have information about the TSP's default 
          T2E (e.g., the TSP has no use of the ENUM services for its 
          network-related services), it just sends an acknowledgement 
          to the new EU-selected T2E. 
     6.   The T1E creates the proper DNS RRs for the TN to point to the 
          new EU-selected T2E. 
      
     The TSP may have a need to use the ENUM service for some 
     application services for TNs not assigned to the EUs.  In that 
     case, the TSP acts as the EU in terms of selecting the T2E for 
     that TN and giving the authorization to itself to 
     provision/access/change the NAPTR RRs at the T2E.  The TSP can be 
     the T2E in this case or can use a third party as the T2E.  No ASP 
     will be involved in this case for those TNs. 
      
  Case B. Initial ENUM service request by the Telephony Service 
  Provider for the network-related services 
      
     This case happens when the TSP wants to use the ENUM services for 
     network-related services for a TN. 
      
     1.   The TSP contacts the T1E requesting ENUM for network-related 
          services for a TN. Recall that the T1E can verify that the 
          TSP currently serves the TN in question. 
     2.   The T1E accepts and stores the default T2E provided by the 
          TSP. 
     3.   There are two possibilities depending on whether the EU has 
          been using the ENUM services or not. 
     3a.  If the T1E has no pointer to an EU-selected T2E for that TN, 
          it adds proper DNS RRs to point to the TSP's default T2E for 
          that TN. 
     3b.  If the T1E has a pointer to an EU-selected T2E for that TN, 
          it informs the TSP about the EU-selected T2E.  The TSP then 
          interacts with the EU-selected T2E to provision those NAPTR 
          RRs associated with the TSP's network-related services.  Or 
          the T1E can inform the EU-selected T2E about the TSP's 
          default T2E so that the EU-selected T2E can retrieve the 
          NAPTR RRs from the TSP's default T2E.  
      
     The TSP can interact with the T1E later to change the default T2E 
     information.  It is expected that the TSP will store the NAPTR RRs 
     associated with its network-related services for a TN on a T2E so 
     that the same T2E can host the NAPTR RRs for the EU's application 
     services for the same TN when the EU selects the TSP for the T2E 
     service.  Having the NAPTR RRs associated with the network-related 
     services for a TN stored on a default T2E even when there is an 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 13 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     EU-selected T2E allows the T1E to quickly point to the TSP's 
     default T2E when the EU stops using the ENUM service. 
      
  Case C. End User changes Tier 2 Entity 
      
     This case happens when the EU decides to use another T2E for the 
     ENUM service.  There may or may not be any changes in the TSP or 
     any of the ASPs.  To simplify the scenario, it is assumed that no 
     NAPTR RR is changed due to this move.  If there are changes, the 
     new T2E needs to work with the EU and EU's ASPs to create the 
     correct NAPTR RRs. 
      
     1.   The EU requests a T2E (the new T2E) to host the NAPTR RRs for 
          his/her TN and indicates that all the NAPTR RRs stored at the 
          old T2E (the old T2E) are still valid. 
     2.   The T2E verifies the EU's identity and the assignment of the 
          TN, accepts the service request and collects information from 
          the EU.  The new T2E may notify the old T2E of the EU's 
          request. 
     3.   The new T2E requests that the T1E provision the TN with 
          proper DNS RRs pointing to it. 
     4.   The T1E informs the old T2E about the T2E change for that TN. 
     5.   The old T2E confirms the T2E change. 
     6.   The T1E acknowledges the change with the new T2E and informs 
          the new T2E about the old T2E. 
     7.   The new T2E retrieves the NAPTR RRs (related to EU's 
          application services and TSP's network-related services) from 
          the old T2E. 
     8.   The new T2E informs the T1E to make the T2E change in effect. 
     9.   The T1E creates the proper DNS RRs for the TN to point to the 
          new T2E.  
      
     It is possible that the old T2E can dispute the T2E change for a 
     TN.  The T1E will not change the pointer to the new T2E unless the 
     dispute is resolved or if the old T2E fails to respond to the T1E 
     within a specified time period.  
   
  Case D. End User relinquishes telephone number 
         
     This case happens when the EU decides to disconnect his/her 
     telephony service (e.g., move to a new city) or his/her TSP 
     disconnects his/her telephony service due to reasons such as non-
     payment.   
      
     1.   The EU relinquishes the TN, e.g. disconnects service.  
     2.   The TNAA informs the T1E about the telephony service 
          disconnection for a TN.  The T1E relays that information to 
          the EU-selected T2E if applicable. 
     3a.  If the EU's TSP has provided the default T2E information to 
          the T1E, the T1E changes the DNS RRs for that TN to point to 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 14 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
          the TSP's default T2E and informs the TSP about the T2E 
          switch for that TN.  
     3b.  If the T1E does not have information about the TSP's default 
          T2E, it removes the DNS RRs for that TN. 
      
   
  Case E. Tier 2 Entity changes information at Tier 1 Entity 
          
     This case happens when the T2E needs to change the information 
     such as the DNS RRs or contact person information at the T1E.  The 
     T2E interacts with the T1E to make the necessary changes. 
      
  Case F. End User changes Telephony Service Provider 
          
     This case happens when the EU changes from one TSP to another.  
     The processes vary depending on whether the old serving TSP or new 
     serving TSP uses the ENUM services for network-related services or 
     whether the EU uses the ENUM services.  The T1E will be informed 
     of such a TSP change by the PA and must synchronize the TSP change 
     with the portability process.  The exact time to remove the old 
     serving TSP's NAPTR RRs and/or to add the new serving TSP's NAPTR 
     RRs at the T2E or to point to the new serving TSP's default T2E 
     are not specifically addressed to simplify the description.  The 
     change of the TSP does not impact the pointer to the current 
     serving T2E for a TN at the T1E if the old TSP is not the T2E for 
     that IN.  This scenario assumes that is the case. 
   
     1.   If the new serving TSP has the use of the ENUM services for 
          the network-related services, it informs the T1E about its 
          default T2E information as described in Case B. 
     2a.  If the EU has no use of ENUM services, the T1E creates the 
          DNS RRs for the TN pointing to the new serving TSP's default 
          T2E.  If the old serving TSP has provided the default T2E 
          information, that information at the T1E would be replaced by 
          the new serving TSP's default T2E.  The process stops here. 
     2b.  If the EU has selected a T2E, the T1E informs the EU- 
          selected T2E about the TSP change so that the T2E can allow 
          the new TSP to provision its NAPTR RRs or can retrieve the 
          NAPTR RRs from the new TSP's default T2E.  The T2E will swap 
          the NAPTR RRs from the new TSP when it is informed by the T1E 
          to make that switch.  The process stops here. 
     3.   If the new serving TSP has no use of the ENUM services for 
          the network-related services for the TN, the old serving TSP 
          has the use of the ENUM services, and the EU has selected a 
          T2E, the T1E, synchronized with the portability process, 
          instructs the EU-selected T2E to remove all the NAPTR RRs 
          associated with the old serving TSP's network-related 
          services and removes the stored default T2E information 
          provided by the old serving TSP for the TN. The process stops 
          here. 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 15 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     4.   If the new serving TSP has no use of the ENUM services for 
          the network-related services, the old serving TSP has the use 
          of the ENUM services, and the EU has no use of the ENUM 
          services, the T1E, synchronized with the NPAC process, 
          removes the stored default T2E information provided by the 
          old serving TSP for the TN. The process stops here. 
     5.   If both the old and new serving TSPs have no use of the ENUM 
          services for the network-related services for the TN and 
          regardless whether the EU has selected a T2E, the T1E takes 
          no action.  
   
   
   
   
  Cases G to K. Changing information at Tier 2 Entity 
      
     In many cases the information at the T2E such as the NAPTR RRs or 
     the TSP or ASP that has the authorization to provision/access/ 
     change the information for a specific service or services needs to 
     be changed.  Each distinct occasion is separately described below 
     although some or all of them may be completed in one session. 
      
     Since the T2E may store the NAPTR RRs associated with EU's 
     application services and/or TSP's network-related services for a 
     TN and the TSP can act as an ASP for some application services 
     provided to that TN, the T2E must control the access rights to a 
     particular NAPTR RR that is stored at the T2E.  The EU should be 
     authorized to provision/access/change all the NAPTR RRs associated 
     with the application services for a TN assigned to him/her.  The 
     TSP or ASP, if authorized by the EU, should be able to provision/ 
     access/change all the NAPTR RRs associated with the application 
     services it offers to the EU's TN.  The ASPs may not be allowed to 
     change the "order" and "preference" fields of the NAPTR RRs. 
      
     The EU may need to change personal information (e.g., address) 
     that does not impact the NAPTR RRs or the authorization of the TSP 
     or ASPs at the T2E.   If authorized by the EU, the TSP or ASPs 
     also may need to change the private information (e.g., contact 
     person's phone number) at the T2E.  Those cases are obvious and 
     are not included here.  But the protocols should be designed to 
     allow those cases to proceed properly. 
      
  Case G. End User changes Application Service Provider 
          
     This case happens when the EU decides to change his/her ASP for an 
     application service.  If the EU authorizes the TSP or ASP to 
     interact with the T2E, that authorization needs to be transferred 
     to the new ASP for the associated application service. 
      


    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 16 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     1a.  If the EU performs the provisioning/modification for that 
          particular service or set of services, he/she first gets the 
          information from the new ASP and interacts with the T2E to 
          provide the changes to the NAPTR RRs related to that 
          particular service or set of services for his/her TN. 
     1b.  If the EU authorizes the ASP for provisioning/accessing/ 
          changing the information for his/her TN, he/she informs the 
          T2E about the change of authorization from the old ASP to the 
          new ASP for a specific service or set of services for his/her 
          TN. 
     1c.  If the EU has the information from his/her new ASP, he/she 
          can make the necessary changes to the NAPTR RRs related to 
          the specific service or set of services during the same 
          session with the T2E. 
     2.   The T2E makes the necessary changes to the information 
          related to the TN. 
     3.   The TSP or ASP, if authorized by the EU, can interact with 
          the T2E to provision/access/change the information related to 
          application service or services for the TN. 
   
   
   
   
  Case H.  End User terminates an application service 
      
     This case happens when the EU terminates an application service 
     (i.e., not a telephony service) that is provided by an ASP. 
      
     1.   The EU informs the ASP to terminate an application service. 
     2.   There are several possible ways that the T2E can be informed 
          about such a service termination. 
     2a.  If the EU does not authorize the ASP to interact with the T2E 
          for his/her TN, the EU must interact with the T2E to remove 
          the NAPTR RRs associated with that particular application 
          service. 
     2b.  If the EU does authorize the ASP to interact with the T2E for 
          his/her TN or set of TNs for the terminated application 
          service, either the EU or ASP can interact with the T2E to 
          remove the NAPTR RRs associated with that particular 
          application service.  If the ASP interacts with the T2E after 
          the EU has interacted with the T2E, its authorization for 
          that service for the TN would have been revoked.  If the EU 
          interacts with the T2E after the ASP has interacted with the 
          T2E, he/she will find that the NAPTR RR(s) associated with 
          the application service for his/her TN has/have been removed. 
      
  Case I.  End User adds or removes authorization 
      
     This case happens when the EU wants to add or remove the 
     authorization of an ASP for a particular application service or 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 17 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     set of services.  This case can be triggered at the request from 
     the ASP to the EU or simply an EU decision to do so.  After the 
     interaction, the EU may inform or confirm with the ASP about the 
     addition or removal of the authorization for a specific service or 
     set of services. 
      
      
  Case J. End User/Telephony Service Provider/Application Service 
  Provider changes information at Tier 2 Entity 
      
     This case happens when the information at the T2E needs to be 
     changed.  The EU can change any NAPTR RR that is related to the 
     application services.  There are many possible ways.  The ASP can 
     only change the NAPTR RRs associated with the application services 
     that it is authorized to access.  The TSP may interact with the 
     T2E to change those NAPTR RRs associated with the network-related 
     services. 
      
  Case K. End User adds a new application service 
      
     This case happens when the EU subscribes to a new application 
     service from an ASP that currently offers some application 
     services to the EU or from a new ASP.  The EU can receive the 
     information from the ASP that provides the new application service 
     and interact with the T2E to add the new NAPTR RRs associated with 
     the new application, or it can give the authorization to the T2E 
     for the new ASP to provision/access/change the data at the T2E. 
   
   
   
   
  Case L. Requesting Tier 2 Entity information for a telephone number 
      
     Any entity can obtain this information by launching an ENUM query 
     to determine the entity that provides the T2E service for a TN. 
     The T2E information would be limited to the information in the DNS 
     RRs for a TN at the T1E.  For example, there will not be any 
     contact information.  The contact information may help the TSP or 
     an ASP to determine who to contact to submit EU authorization for 
     an application or network-related service. 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
   
   
   

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 18 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
  5. Security Considerations 
   
      
  5.1. Authentication 
   
     Since the correctness of the NAPTR RRs stored at the T2E and the 
     DNS RRs stored at the T1E for a TN may impact whether an EU can 
     receive incoming calls or messages when the ENUM process is 
     invoked, it is essential to ensure that provisioning requests are 
     adequately authenticated. 
       
     The T2E needs to authenticate the EU when an EU approaches it to 
     be the T2E for his/her TN.  The T2E is responsible for validating 
     the EU's identity and his/her assignment of the TN.  The EU could 
     be asked to provide a recent phone bill and other information 
     (e.g., pictured ID), or the TNAA may need to be involved. 
      
     The T1E needs to authenticate the TSP and T2E before accepting 
     information from them.  If the EU gives the authorization for the 
     ASP to provision/access/change the data for a TN at the T2E, the 
     T2E must authenticate the TSP or ASP and ensure that it can only 
     touch the information related to its application or network-
     related service or services. 
   
     The T2E may need to be a trusted/certified entity to play the T2E 
     role.  If an EU wants to play the T2E role for his/her own TN, 
     there must exist a way to certify that this particular EU or 
     entity does control/own that TN. 
      
      
  5.2. Secure Communication 
      
     Communication over Interfaces A, B and C in the Reference Model 
     must be secure to prevent eavesdropping of the exchanged data and 
     to ensure the data integrity. 
      
      
  6. Discussions/Issues 
      
      
     The reference model and associated information flows raise a 
     number of issues.  As the responsible entities take up the work of 
     instantiating ENUM service, these issues will need to be 
     addressed. 
   
      
     -  How can we make it easy so that the EU can be the T2E for its 
        TN or set of TNs?  The requirement to be a certified service 
        registrar may not apply in this case unless this EN or entity 
        wants to provide the T2E functionality for other EUs' TNs.   

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 19 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
     -  If the EU changes the TSP, the time that the T2E replaces the 
        NAPTR RRs associated with the new TSP's network-related 
        services must be synchronized with the number portability 
        process (e.g., when receiving notification that the TSP has 
        changed). 
     -  Many EUs will not be sophisticated enough to create the NAPTR 
        RRs themselves.  The T2E may need to convert the application 
        address information received from the EU to the proper NAPTR 
        RRs, or the ASP may need to be authorized to provision/access/ 
        change the information for a TN.  For the former case, can the 
        T2E do it for all kinds of the NAPTR RRs?  For the latter case, 
        the T2E must authenticate the ASP and ensure that it can only 
        access those NAPTR RRs it is authorized to access. 
     -  If the EU changes the ASP for an application service and the 
        T2E is not informed about the change (e.g., the EU forgets to 
        inform the T2E), there may be a need for the ASP to interact 
        with the T2E so that its NAPTR RRs for a specific service for a 
        TN can be removed. 
     -  Is there a need to define the interfaces between the EU or the 
        ASP/TSP and the T2E for provisioning/accessing/changing the 
        NAPTR RRs and between the two T2Es or should those interfaces 
        be left to those entities to decide? 
     -  Where the TSP has the TNAA function, what arrangements are 
        required for the TSP to inform the T1E about telephony service 
        disconnection for a TN in a timely manner? 
     -  What should constitute sufficient authentication in terms of 
        validating among the EU, TNAA, T2E, TSP, ASP and T1E? 
     -  What, if any, services does the TSP have the right to provision 
        without explicit EU consent?  There must be a clear definition 
        and distinction on what belong to the EUs' application services 
        and what belong to the TSPs' network-related services.  If an 
        EU can receive a particular service from multiple service 
        providers, that service may be considered as the EUs' 
        application service.  If an EU can only receive a service from 
        the TSP or a service is offered only by the TSP, that service 
        may be considered as the network-related service. 
     -  The NAPTR RRs associated with the TSP's network-related 
        services must be distinct from those associated with the EU's 
        application services.  Some fields (e.g., the service field) in 
        the NAPTR RR must clearly indicate whether it is an application 
        service or network-related service.  
     -  It is likely that an EU may want to have multiple NAPTR RRs for 
        the same application service (e.g., e-mail) from many ASPs.  
        The T2E must ensure that a particular ASP can only provision/ 
        access/change a particular NAPTR RR for a specific application 
        service.  If the ASP is authorized to provision/access/change 
        the information at the T2E, how can the EU control the orders 
        and preferences of multiple NAPTR RRs related to the same 
        application service that are offered by several ASPs?  The T2E 


    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 20 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
        may need to ensure that the ASPs cannot modify the order and 
        preference fields of their NAPTR RRs.   
      
      
     Another issue that has arisen in ENUM discussions is the potential 
     for the use of the ENUM protocol to query domains other than 
     e164.arpa. Although RFC 2916 is focused on the use of a single 
     tree (i.e., e164.arpa) for all E.164 numbers, nothing prevents the 
     protocol from being used to query other domains providing private 
     directory services. It is anticipated that in such services Tiers 
     0-2 may be collapsed with the same entity acting as both registry 
     and service registrar. Accordingly, this document does not discuss 
     administrative arrangements for such services, though clearly, 
     many of the same concerns about number assignment validation, 
     telephone service disconnect notification, and service registrar _ 
     ASP interactions apply. 
   
   
      
  REFERENCES 
      
     [1]  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3, 
          BCP9," RFC 2026, October 1996. 
     [2]  A. Brown, "Telephone Number Mapping", draft-enum-rqmts-01-
          txt, June 2000. 
     [3]  P. Faltstrom, "E.164 number and DNS," RFC 2916, September 
          2000. 
     [4]  A. Brown & G. Vaudreuil, "ENUM Service Specific Provisioning: 
          Principles of Operation," draft-ietf-enum-operation-02.txt, 
          February 23, 2001. 
     [5]  R. Blane, _Liaison to IETF/ISOC on ENUM,_ RFC 3026, January 
          2001. 
     [6]  M. Foster, T. McGarry & J. Yu, "Number Portability in the 
          GSTN: An Overview," draft-ietf-enum-e164-gstn-np-02.txt, 
          February 2001. 
     [7]  A. Gallant, " The Number Portability Supplement to ITU-T 
          Recommendation E.164,"draft-ietf-enum-e164s2-np-00.txt, July 
          7, 2000. 
     [8]  North American Numbering Plan Administration (NANPA), 
          <http://www.nanpa.com> 
     [9]  M. Mealing & R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer (NAPTR) 
          DNS Resource Record," RFC 2915, September 2000. 
     [10] J. Loughney & J. Yu, " Roaming Support with DNS," draft-
          loughney-enum-roaming-00.txt, July 14, 2000. 
     [11] Number Portability Administration Center (NPAC), 
          <http://www.npac.com>  
     [12] Local Exchange Routing Guide (LERG), <http://www.trainfo.com> 
      
   
   

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 21 


   ENUM Administrative Process                               March 2001 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  Authors' Addresses 
   
      
     Penn Pfautz 
     AT&T 
     Room E4-3A01 
     200 South Laurel Avenue 
     Middletown, NJ 07748 
     U.S.A. 
     Phone: +1-732-420-4962 
     Email: ppfautz@att.com 
      
      
     James Yu 
     NeuStar, Inc. 
     1120 Vermont Avenue, NW, Suite 400 
     Washington, D.C., 20005 
     U.S.A. 
     Phone: +1-202-533-2814 
     Email: james.yu@neustar.com 
   
   
   
     Full Copyright Statement 

     "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished 
     to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
     explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
     copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
     restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice 
     and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative 
     works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
     way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the 
     Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed 
     for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the 
     procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards 
     process must be followed, or as required to translate it into. 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-01> Informational - Expires Sept. 2001 22 


