



Network Working Group                                          T. Taylor
Internet-Draft                                                    Nortel
Expires: November 9, 2006                                    May 8, 2006


              Example media types for use in documentation
                   draft-taylor-types-example-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 9, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document is registration for the 'example' media type and
   'example' subtypes within the standards tree.  The 'example/*' and
   '*/example' media types are defined for documentation purposes only.


1.  Introduction

   From time to time, documents created by the IETF or by other
   standards bodies show examples involving the use of media types,



Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Example media types                  May 2006


   where the actual media type is not relevant.  It would be useful in
   such cases to be able to show a media type whose illustrative role in
   the example is clear.  In the worst case, this can be useful to debug
   implementations where the designer mistook the example for a
   requirement of the protocol concerned.

   To meet this need, this document registers the following media types:
   o  the 'example' media type;
   o  the 'text/example', 'image/example', 'audio/example', 'video/
      example', 'application/example', and 'multipart/example' media
      subtypes.

   It is suggested that compilers of illustrative examples involving
   media types in trees other than the standards tree might also
   incorporate the string "example" into their hypothetical media types.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Registration of the 'example' media type

   This section registers the 'example' media type in accordance with
   the requirements of RFC 4288.

   Type name: example.

   Subtype name: any subtype may be used with the 'example' type.
   However, subtypes of 'example' MUST NOT be registered.

   Required parameters: as invented by the user.

   Optional parameters: as invented by the user.

   Encoding considerations: as invented by the user.

   Security considerations: The 'example' media type is defined for use
   in documentation only.  It MUST NOT be implemented.  Its appearance
   in real code could lead to unpredictable results and therefore open
   up security holes.

   Interoperability considerations: Any attempt to negotiate or send the
   'example' media type is bound to lead to interoperability problems.




Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Example media types                  May 2006


   Published specification: this document.

   Applications that use this media type: as invented by the user.

   Additional information:
      Magic number(s): not applicable.
      File extension(s): not applicable.
      Macintosh file type code(s): not applicable.

   Person & email address to contact for further information:
   ietf-types@iana.org.

   Intended usage: LIMITED USE.

   Restrictions on usage: this type is intended only for use in
   documents providing examples involving specification of some media
   type, where the actual media type used is irrelevant.

   Author: Internet Engineering Task Force

   Change controller: Internet Engineering Task Force


4.  Registration of the 'text/example', 'image/example', 'audio/
    example', 'video/example', and 'application/example' subtypes

   This section registers 'example' media subtypes in accordance with
   the requirements of RFC 4288.

   Type name: text, image, audio, video, application, and multipart.

   Subtype name: example.

   Required parameters: those required by the type and any others as
   invented by the user.

   Optional parameters: those offered by the type and any others as
   invented by the user.

   Encoding considerations: as invented by the user.

   Security considerations: The 'example' media subtypes are defined for
   use in documentation only.  They MUST NOT be implemented.  Their
   appearance in real code could lead to unpredictable results and
   therefore open up security holes.

   Interoperability considerations: Any attempt to negotiate or send one
   of these 'example' media subtypes is bound to lead to



Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Example media types                  May 2006


   interoperability problems.

   Published specification: this document.

   Applications that use this media type: as invented by the user.

   Additional information:
      Magic number(s): not applicable.
      File extension(s): not applicable.
      Macintosh file type code(s): not applicable.

   Person & email address to contact for further information:
   ietf-types@iana.org.

   Intended usage: LIMITED USE.

   Restrictions on usage: these subtypes are intended only for use in
   documents providing examples involving specification of some subtype
   of the given media type, where the actual subtype used is irrelevant.

   Author: Internet Engineering Task Force

   Change controller: Internet Engineering Task Force


5.  Security considerations

   The 'example' media type and subtypes are defined for use in
   documentation only.  They MUST NOT be implemented.  Any attempt to
   implement them in real code could lead to unpredictable results and
   thus potentially open up security holes.


6.  IANA considerations

   This document specifies and registers the 'example' media type and
   the 'text/example', 'image/example', 'audio/example', 'video/
   example', 'application/example', and 'multipart/example' media
   subtypes.


7.  Acknowledgements

   This document sprang from Magnus Westerland's expression of need and
   Rod Walsh's support and suggestions for generalization.  Warnings
   against implementation in the Security Considerations and
   Interoperability Considerations sections and the 'multipart/example'
   subtype were added at John Klensin's suggestion.  Some editing



Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Example media types                  May 2006


   touchup and strengthening of the language in the Security
   Considerations sections was done in response to the Gen-ART reviewer,
   Sharon Chisholm.

8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4288]  Freed, N. and J. Klensin, "Media Type Specifications and
              Registration Procedures", BCP 13, RFC 4288, December 2005.








































Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Example media types                  May 2006


Author's Address

   Tom Taylor
   Nortel
   1852 Lorraine Ave
   Ottawa, Ontario  K1H 6Z8
   Canada

   Email: taylor@nortel.com










































Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Example media types                  May 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Taylor                  Expires November 9, 2006                [Page 7]


