Network Working Group                                        S. Bradner
Internet-Draft                                               Harvard U.
                                                             March 2004


             An Idea for an Alternate IETF Standards Track


                  <draft-bradner-ietf-stds-trk-01.txt>


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC 2026.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Abstract
   The discussion in the problem working group reached consensus that
   the current IETF 3-stage standards track, as implemented, is not
   working.  This is a proposal for an alternate, also 3-stage,
   standards track that I feel better matches current reality.
   This is a republication of an ID originally published in June 2003


                 Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003)


1. Introduction
   The consensus in the problem working group is that the current IETF
   3- stage standards track described in RFC 2026 [RFC2026] is not
   working as originally intended.  The draft problem statement document
   [prob] says:


      "The current hierarchy of Proposed, Draft and Full Standard
      maturity levels for specifications is no longer being used in the
      way that was envisioned when the stratification was originally
      proposed.  In practice, the IETF currently has a one-step
      standards process that subverts the IETF's preference for



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



      demonstrating effectiveness through running code in multiple
      interoperable implementations and compresses the process that
      previously allowed specifications to mature as experience was
      gained with actual implementations:"


   The draft document then goes on to list 4 observations:


   1/ few documents actually progress after being published as PS


   2/ there is a perception that the IESG raised the quality requirement


   3/ in spite of the raised quality requirement, running code is not
      required


   4/ there seems to be a reinforcing feedback loop involved: vendors
      implement and deploy PS documents so the IESG tries to make the PS
      documents better


   The draft document concludes that the 3-stage process is excessive.
   I disagree that is a reasonable conclusion based on the discussions.
   Clearly there is consensus that there is something wrong with the
   current process but I do not think that the consensus extends to
   saying that any 3-stage process would get the same treatment and this
   document is a proposal for a revised 3-stage process that I think
   will meet the needs of vendors and of the IETF.


3. My Observations
   My observations are somewhat different than those of the problem
   working group.  I think that that, in effect, the standards process
   has been shifted one place to the left.


   Vendors implement, and their customers deploy, technology based
   Internet drafts as soon as the Internet drafts seem to be stable.
   Thus, Internet drafts have, in effect, replaced Proposed Standard as
   the first stage of the IETF standards process.


   But there are significant problems with using Internet Drafts as
   standards documents.  Most importantly, Internet Drafts are not
   stable.  Internet Drafts have short lifetimes with most of them being
   replaced by new versions or expiring within a few months.  If a
   vendor decides to implement from an Internet Draft they have to be
   sure that they are implementing the same version of the Internet
   Draft as the other vendors that they want to interoperate with used.


   I agree that, over time, the IESG has raised the bar for the
   publication of Proposed Standard documents.  The current level of
   review, except for not having a requirement for interoperable
   implementations, is about what I expected the review would be for




Bradner                                                         [Page 2]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



   Draft Standard when RFC 2026 was published. Thus Proposed Standard
   has, in effect, replaced Draft Standard as the second stage in the
   IETF standards process.


   Having a Draft Standard level of review for Proposed Standard
   documents has raised the bar for getting working group output
   published as RFCs such that vendors feel that they must implement
   from Internet Drafts if they are to make it to marketplace in a
   reasonable period of time.


   Very few specifications are advanced to Internet Standard status so
   that stage has been, in practice, removed from the IETF standards
   track and Draft Standard has, in effect, become the top rung on the
   standards ladder. Too few specifications are promoted to the Draft
   Standard level and a revision of the IETF standards process should
   try to correct that.



4. Current IETF Standards Track
   RFC 2026 defines the stages on the IETF standards track as follows:


4.1 Standards Track Maturity Levels
   Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
   and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these stages
   are formally labeled "maturity levels".


   This section describes the maturity levels and the expected
   characteristics of specifications at each level.


4.1.1 Proposed Standard
   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Proposed
   Standard".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Proposed Standard"
   level.


   A Proposed Standard specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.  However, further experience
   might result in a change or even retraction of the specification
   before it advances.


   Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
   required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
   Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
   usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed Standard
   designation.





Bradner                                                         [Page 3]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



   The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
   prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
   materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
   behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
   Internet.


   A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  However, the IESG may
   waive this requirement in order to allow a specification to advance
   to the Proposed Standard state when it is considered to be useful and
   necessary (and timely) even with known technical omissions.


   Implementors should treat Proposed Standards as immature
   specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to gain
   experience and to validate, test, and clarify the specification.
   However, since the content of Proposed Standards may be changed if
   problems are found or better solutions are identified, deploying
   implementations of such standards into a disruption-sensitive
   environment is not recommended.


4.1.2 Draft Standard
   A specification from which at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations from different code bases have been developed, and
   for which sufficient successful operational experience has been
   obtained, may be elevated to the "Draft Standard" level.  For the
   purposes of this section, "interoperable" means to be functionally
   equivalent or interchangeable components of the system or process in
   which they are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology
   is required for implementation, the separate implementations must
   also have resulted from separate exercise of the licensing process.
   Elevation to Draft Standard is a major advance in status, indicating
   a strong belief that the specification is mature and will be useful.


   The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
   specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
   have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
   implementations, the specification may advance to the Draft Standard
   level only if those options or features are removed.


   The Working Group chair is responsible for documenting the specific
   implementations which qualify the specification for Draft or Internet
   Standard status along with documentation about testing of the
   interoperation of these implementations.  The documentation must
   include information about the support of each of the individual
   options and features.  This documentation should be submitted to the
   Area Director with the protocol action request.





Bradner                                                         [Page 4]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



   A Draft Standard must be well-understood and known to be quite
   stable, both in its semantics and as a basis for developing an
   implementation.  A Draft Standard may still require additional or
   more widespread field experience, since it is possible for
   implementations based on Draft Standard specifications to demonstrate
   unforeseen behavior when subjected to large-scale use in production
   environments.


   A Draft Standard is normally considered to be a final specification,
   and changes are likely to be made only to solve specific problems
   encountered.  In most circumstances, it is reasonable for vendors to
   deploy implementations of Draft Standards into a disruption sensitive
   environment.


4.1.3 Internet Standard
   A specification for which significant implementation and successful
   operational experience has been obtained may be elevated to the
   Internet Standard level.  An Internet Standard (which may simply be
   referred to as a Standard) is characterized by a high degree of
   technical maturity and by a generally held belief that the specified
   protocol or service provides significant benefit to the Internet
   community.


   A specification that reaches the status of Standard is assigned a
   number in the STD series while retaining its RFC number.


5. An Alternate Standards Track
   I would like to propose an alternate IETF standards track with a new
   stage inserted before Proposed Standard, combining Draft Standard and
   Internet Standard and retaining Proposed Standard as it has evolved
   over the years.


   Part of the problem we have been seeing with getting timely
   publication of IETF specifications is that once people start
   implementing the technology it often seems counterproductive to
   dedicate effort to finishing off the documents.  If implementations
   of Internet Drafts achieve success in the marketplace, as they did
   with MPLS, it may seem that it is not worth spending time tweaking
   successive generations of Internet Drafts in order to get something
   the IESG is willing to publish as a Proposed Standard then, if that
   achieves widespread success in the market, fiddle with the document
   again and do the bookkeeping needed to get it published as a Draft
   Standard.  The prerequisites for getting something published as an
   Internet Standard seem to many people to be fuzzy at best.  In
   addition, the current standards track steps did not do much to
   encourage early implementations, which are the best way to check to
   see that a specification is clear enough for implementers to use.





Bradner                                                         [Page 5]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



   This alternate set of stages tries to encourage vendors to implement
   specifications and the comments with the descriptions of each stage
   attempt to provide guidance for the IESG in implementing reviews for
   each stage.


   RFC 2026 would have to be revised in order to put any change of this
   type into effect.  That could be done by replacing RFC 2026 itself
   with a whole new document or by writing a short document that updates
   the standards track part of RFC 2026.


5.1 Alternate Standards Track Maturity Levels
   Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
   and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these stages
   are formally labeled "maturity levels".


   This section describes a set of alternate maturity levels and the
   expected characteristics of specifications at each level.


5.2 Stable Snapshot
   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Stable
   Snapshot".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Stable Snapshot"
   level.


   A Stable Snapshot specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.  However, further experience
   might result in a change or even retraction of the specification
   before it advances.


   A Stable Snapshot should have no unknown technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  Any such omissions must
   be noted in the document.  No such omission can endanger the security
   or stability of the Internet or of networks where the technology
   might be used.


   Implementers should treat Stable Snapshots as immature, pre-standard,
   specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to gain
   experience and to validate, test, and clarify the specification.
   However, since the content of Stable Snapshots will be changed if
   problems are found or better solutions are identified, and will be
   changed as the technology is finalized, deploying implementations of
   such technologies into a disruption-sensitive environment is not
   recommended.


      Comments:
      This stage is designed to institutionalize and encourage the




Bradner                                                         [Page 6]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



      current practice of vendors implementing from Internet Drafts
      while providing a way that a working group can indicate that they
      feel that a technology is stable enough to be so implemented and
      to provide a long-lived, unlike Internet Drafts, snapshot that the
      vendors can implement.  Having vendors implement technology is an
      important quality check and meets the "running code" requirement
      of our motto.  We want to encourage implementations whenever we
      can but this does need to be balanced with


      This is almost the same definition as RFC 2026 has for Proposed
      Standard.  The major difference is that some of the technical
      requirements might not have yet been met.  This is OK as long as
      any such holes in the specification are carefully noted in the
      document, except that there needs to be a complete enough security
      component so as to not endanger the networks where the technology
      is to be used, and that the technology not endanger the wellbeing
      of the network it will be run on.  For example, a technology that
      requires reliable data transmission but is not compliant with RFC
      2914 [RFC2914] would not be acceptable.  The exact guidelines for
      the level of security required for a Stable Snapshot will evolve
      over time.


      In reviewing an Internet Draft for publication as a Stable
      Snapshot the IESG only needs to be sure that the working group has
      a reason to think that the technology is at a mature enough level
      that implementers can start to play with it and that the minimum
      security and 'health of the net' requirements have been met.  The
      IESG should not try to ensure that the text is clear and
      unambiguous, the vendors will find that out while implementing and
      provide feedback to the working group. The IESG should not do a
      careful technology review as a precondition for publication as a
      Stable Snapshot.  This process should be lightweight, not taking
      too much time on the part of the IESG or effort on the part of the
      working group and authors.


      The name, "Stable Snapshot" was chosen to clearly indicate that
      this is a pre-standard stage and to ensure that marketing people
      cannot easily misrepresent the status but there may be a better
      name that accomplishes the same goals.


5.3 Proposed Standard
   A Proposed Standard specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.


   Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
   required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed




Bradner                                                         [Page 7]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



   Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
   usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed Standard
   designation.


   Generally some documented level of implementation and/or operational
   experience is required prior to granting Proposed Standard status.
   However, the IESG may waive this requirement in order to allow a
   specification to advance to the Proposed Standard state when it is
   considered to be useful and necessary (and timely) even without any
   known implementations.


   A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.


   Implementers should treat Proposed Standards as stable, but perhaps
   not final, specifications.  A Proposed Standard must be well-
   understood and known to be quite stable, both in its semantics and as
   a basis for developing an implementation.  A Proposed Standard may
   still require additional or more widespread field experience, since
   it is possible for implementations based on Proposed Standard
   specifications to demonstrate unforeseen behavior when subjected to
   large-scale use in production environments.


      Comments:
      The requirements for publication as a Proposed Standard are mostly
      the same as currently in RFC 2026 for Proposed Standard with the
      addition of a requirement for at least some implementation
      experience.


      The IESG review for Proposed Standard could stay just like it is.
      The IESG should do the same careful technical review and a review
      to ensure that the language of the document is clear and precise
      as it has been doing for quite a while.


      Because most specifications for which publication as a Proposed
      Standard is requested will have been implemented I would expect
      that the IESG review will generally take less effort since the
      implementers experience will have uncovered unclear language and
      some or all technical issues, at least for the parts of the
      specification that had been implemented.


      There should be some documentation to show that there has been at
      least one implementation of a specification before the IESG
      authorizes the publication of the specification as a Proposed
      Standard.  But the documentation does not need to be so detailed
      that it shows which individual options have been implemented.  A
      list of the names of people or companies who have said they had
      implemented the specification should be sufficient.




Bradner                                                         [Page 8]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



      Before adoption of a new description of Proposed Standard the IPR-
      related aspects should be revisited in list of the work in the IPR
      working group but I have not done that here.


5.4 Internet Standard
   A specification from which at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations from different code bases have been developed, and
   for which sufficient successful operational experience has been
   obtained, may be elevated to the "Internet Standard" level.  For the
   purposes of this section, "interoperable" means to be functionally
   equivalent or interchangeable components of the system or process in
   which they are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology
   is required for implementation, the separate implementations must
   also have resulted from separate exercise of the licensing process.
   Elevation to Internet Standard is a major advance in status,
   indicating a strong belief that the specification is mature and will
   be useful.


   The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
   specification.  In cases in which one or more options or features
   have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
   implementations, the specification may advance to the Internet
   Standard level only if those options or features are removed.


   The Working Group chair is responsible for documenting the specific
   implementations which qualify the specification for Draft or Internet
   Standard status along with documentation about testing of the
   interoperation of these implementations.  The documentation must
   include information about the support of each of the individual
   options and features.  This documentation should be submitted to the
   Area Director with the protocol action request.


   A Internet Standard (which may simply be referred to as a Standard)
   must be well-understood and known to be stable, both in its semantics
   and as a basis for developing an implementation.  An Internet
   Standard is characterized by a high degree of technical maturity and
   by a generally held belief that the specified protocol or service
   provides significant benefit to the Internet community.


   An Internet Standard is considered to be a final specification, and
   changes should only be made to solve specific problems encountered.


      Comments:
      The description here is a combination of the descriptions of Draft
      Standard and Internet Standard in RFC 2026.


      One issue we have had over the years is just what does a working




Bradner                                                         [Page 9]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



      group chair have to do to show multiple implementations of the
      base specification and all of the features.  I have always felt
      that a simple spread sheet showing each feature, how many vendors
      claim to have the feature, and a checkbox to indicate that two or
      more vendors claim that they have tested implementations of the
      feature, would be just fine.  But this turns out to be quite
      complex in some cases (see the Implementer's report for http 1.1
      as an example).  I am not sure if this turns out to be actually
      too much of an effort or just seems like too much of an effort.  I
      still think it seems like about the right thing but the barrier to
      reach Internet Standard should be just as high as it needs to be
      but no higher.


      Since, in reality, there was little difference between the
      requirements in RFC 2026 for Draft Standard and Internet Standard,
      mostly a need to show market acceptance in some way, there seems
      to be no technical reason to preserve the different labels.


5.5 Minimum time in each stage.
   It seems to me that there needs to be a minimum time that a document
   must sit at a stage before it can move onward (as is the case in RFC
   2026) just to be sure that problems are uncovered.


   I'm not sure if there is any way to figure out the ideal time so I
   would suggest that 6 months would be enough (as long as the rest of
   the requirements for the next level have been met).


6. Summary
   I've put out this proposal to stimulate discussion.  There are a lot
   of details that would be needed to be worked out before actually
   proceeding but I do think that this would do the job of
   reestablishing the idea that it is worth the effort to move a
   document along the standards track while preserving the "running
   code" concept.



7. Security Considerations
   This document relates to IETF process, not any particular technology,
   thus it raises no particular security concerns.



8. Informative References
   [RFC2026] Bradner, S. Ed., "The Internet Standards Process --
      Revision 3," October 1996, RFC 2026


   [prob] Davies, E. Ed., "IETF Problem Statement," work in progress,
      July 2003





Bradner                                                        [Page 10]
Internet-Draft          Alternate Standards Track             March 2004



   [RFC2914] Floyd, S., "Congestion Control Principles," September 2000,
      RFC 2914



9. Authors Address


   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   29 Oxford St.
   Cambridge MA, 02138


   sob@harvard.edu +1 617 495 3864


10. Full copyright statement:


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  Except as set forth
   below, authors retain all their rights.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in  part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice  and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However,  this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards  in which case the procedures for
   rights in submissions defined in the Internet  Standards process must
   be followed, or as required to translate it into languages  other
   than English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the  Internet Society or its successors or assigns.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis  and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/S HE
   REPRESENTS (IF ANY), THE INTERNET  SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS  OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.









Bradner                                                        [Page 11] 