

IPO WG                                                    O. Aboul-Magd 
Internet Draft                                              B. Jamoussi 
Document: draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                            S. Shew 
Category: Informational                                 Nortel Networks 
Expires: June 2002                                                      
                                                           Gert Grammel 
                                                         Sergio Belotti 
                                                  Dimitri Papadimitriou 
                                                                Alcatel 
                                                                        
                                                             Nov., 2001 
 
 
 Automatic Switched Optical Network (ASON) Architecture and Its Related 
                               Protocols  
 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   This draft is intended to describe the architecture for intelligent 
   optical networks designed in ITU-T. This architecture is called the 
   automatic switched optical networks (ASON). ASON is a control plane 
   architecture that allows clients to request services from the 
   optical network (server). ASON architecture and its generic 
   automatic switched transport networks (ASTN) has been an active 
   study area both at T1X1 and ITU [2,3]. 
    
   The protocols that run over ASON interfaces are not specified in 
   [2,3]. IP-based protocols like generalized MPLS (GMPLS) [4],can be 
   considered such that the ASON/ASTN work can benefit from the 
   protocols design work progressing at the IETF. In order to cross 
   fertilize the discussion the basic concepts are described hereafter. 
    
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         1 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [5]. 
    
3. Introduction 
    
   The existing transport networks provide SONET/SDH and WDM services 
   whose connections are provisioned via network management protocols. 
   This process is both slow (weeks to months) relative to the 
   switching speed and costly to the network providers. 
    
   An automatic switched optical network (ASON) is an optical/transport 
   network that has dynamic connection capability. It encompasses 
   SONET/SDH, wavelength, and potentially fiber connection services in 
   both OEO and all-optical networks. There are a number of added 
   values related to such a capability: 
    
   - Traffic engineering of optical channels: Where bandwidth 
     assignment is based on actual demand patterns. 
    
   - Mesh network topologies and restoration: Mesh network topologies 
     can in general be engineered for better utilization for a given 
     demand matrix. Ring topologies might not be as efficient due to 
     the asymmetry of traffic patterns. 
    
   - Managed bandwidth to core IP network connectivity: A switched 
     optical network can provide bandwidth and connectivity to an IP 
     network in a dynamic manner compared to the relatively static 
     service available today. 
    
   - Introduction of new optical services: The availability of switched 
     optical networks will facilitate the introduction of new services 
     at the optical layer. Those services include bandwidth on demand 
     and optical virtual private networks (OVPN). 
    
   This draft describes the ASON architecture. ASON and its generic 
   ASTN has been a topic of active discussion both at the T1X1 and ITU. 
   The draft focuses on ASON control plane, its requirements, and 
   related protocols. The ASON architecture at the ITU is discussed in 
   two documents. The first document is G.8070 (previously known as 
   G.astn)[3] describes network level, technology independent, 
   requirements for the control plane of ASTN. The second document is 
   G.8080 [2], and it specifies architecture and requirements for ASTN 
   network as applicable to SDH transport networks and optical 
   transport networks. 
    
4. ASON/ASTN Architecture: An Overview 
    
   ASON/ASTN architecture belongs to client-server models or the 
   overlay network models as defined in [6]. The salient feature of 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         2 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   this model is the existence of well-recognized boundaries between 
   client networks and provider domains. Client/provider separation is 
   a direct recognition of today's networking realities where ownership 
   of layer 3 and layer 1 equipment belongs to different organizations. 
   This client/provider domain separation entails the running of 
   different routing instants at each domain. Thus there is no need to 
   share topology information between carriers and their clients. 
    
   The ASON/ASTN is an architecture that allows for global connectivity 
   as shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 illustrates user end systems 
   connecting to a global ASTN/ASON network, which may be comprised of 
   multiple provider domains. As an overlay model there is no trusted 
   relationship between provider domains so the instantiated interfaces 
   are E-NNIs. Within a provider domain, the instantiated interface 
   between control plane entities is the I-NNI. 
    
                +----+  UNI   +-----------------+  UNI   +----+ 
                |user|--------|                 |--------|user| 
                +----+        |   global ASTN   |        +----+ 
                              +-----------------+  
                             /                   \ 
                            /                     \ 
                     +----------+         +----------+ 
                     |   ASTN   |  E-NNI  | ASTN     | 
                     |provider 1|---------|provider 2| 
                     +----------+         +----------+       
                     /           \ 
                    /             \ 
                   /               \ 
                 +-------------------+ 
                 |                   | 
                 | +--+  I-NNI +---+ | 
                 | |  |--------|   | | 
                 | +--+        +---+ | 
                 +-------------------+ 
    
                  Figure 1: ASON/ASTN Global Architecture 
    
   As applied to optical networks, the ASON network interfaces are 
   further shown in Figure 2. In this Figure all the components that 
   can form part of ASON are shown. The architecture shown is intended 
   to allow switching of optical network connections within the optical 
   transport network under control of ASON signaling network.  
    
   There are three separate planes involved in the network: 
    
   - A transport plane (TP) 
   - A control plane (CP) 
   - A management plane (MP) 
    
       +--------------------------+    +--------------+       
       |   ASON Control Plane     |    |              | 
       |                          |    |              | 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         3 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   UNI |  +------+ I-NNI +------+ E-NNI|    +------+  |    +------+ 
   ------>| OCC  |-------| OCC  |-|----|----| OCC  |  | NMI|      | 
       |  +------+       +------+ |    |    +------+  |<-->|      | 
       |     ^              ^     |    |      ^       |    |      | 
       +-----|--------------|-----+    +------|-------+    |      | 
             | CCI          |                 |            |      | 
       +-----|--------------|-----+    +------|-------+    |      | 
       |     v              v     |    |      v       |    |      | 
       |  +------+       +------+ |    |    +-----+   |<-->|      | 
       |  | OXC  |       | OXC  | | PI |    | OXC |   | NMI+------+ 
       |  |      |-------|      |-----------|     |   | 
       |  +------+       +------+ |    |    +-----+   |    Management 
       | Transport Plane          |    |              |       Plane 
       +--------------------------+    +--------------+ 
    
   OCC = Optical Network Controller        UNI = User Network Interface 
   CCI = Connection Control Interface      OXC = Optical Cross Connect 
   I-NNI = Internal Node to Node Interface 
   E-NNI = External Node to Node Interface 
   NMI = Network Management Interface 
   PI = Physical Interface 
    
      Figure 2: Automatic Switching Optical Network (ASON) Interfaces 
                                      
   The transport plane contains the transport network elements 
   (switches and links) that carry the entity that is switched, i.e. 
   optical connections. End-to-end connections are setup within the 
   transport plane under the control of the ASON control plane (CP). 
   This draft is concerned with the CP part of the ASON architecture. 
   Both the TP and MP are out of the scope of this draft. 
    
5. ASON Control Plane: Requirements and Functional Architecture 
    
   A well-designed control plane architecture should give service 
   providers better control of their network, while providing faster 
   and improved accuracy of circuit set-up. The control plane itself 
   should be reliable, scalable, and efficient.  It should also be 
   sufficiently generic to support different technologies and differing 
   business needs and different partitions of functions by vendors 
   (i.e., different packaging of the control plane components).  In 
   summary, the control plane architecture should:  
    
   - Be applicable to a variety of transport network technologies 
     (e.g., SONET/SDH, OTN, PXC).  In order to achieve this goal, it is 
     essential that the architecture isolates technology dependent 
     aspects from technology independent aspects, and address them 
     separately. 
    
   - Be sufficiently flexible to accommodate a range of different 
     network scenarios. This goal may be achieved by partitioning the 
     control plane into distinct components. This, allows vendors and 
     service providers to decide the location of these components, and 

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         4 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
     also allows the service provider to decide the security and policy 
     control of these components.  
    
   The control plane shall support either switched connections (SC) of 
   soft permenant connections (SPC) of basic connection capability in 
   transport networks. These connection capabilities types are: 
    
   - Uni-directional point-to-point connection 
   - Bi-directional point-to-point connections 
   - Uni-directional point-to-multipoint connections
    
   The components of the control plane architecture are illustrated in 
   Figure 3. This Figure illustrates the control plane functions and 
   their relationships. These entities can be packaged in different 
   ways, depending upon the required functionality.  
    
        +------------------------------------------------+ 
        |                                                | 
        |                                   +--------+   | 
        |                                   |  PA    |   | 
        |                                   +--------+   | 
        |                                        |       | 
        |                                        |       | 
        |    +------+         +------+      +--------+   | 
        X----| RTU  |---------| RT   |------|  LRM   |---X   
        |    +------+         +------+      +--------+   | 
        |                        |         /    |        | 
        |                        |    -----     |        | 
        |    +------+        +------+/     +--------+    | 
        |    | PC   |        |  CC  |------|  CAC   |    | 
        |    +------+        +------+      +--------+    | 
        |                       |                        | 
        +-----------------------X------------------------+ 
 
   PA = Policing Agent          RTU = Routing Table Update 
   RT = Routing Table           LRM = Link Resource Manager 
   CC = Connection Controller   CAC = Connection Admission Control 
   PC = Protocol Controller 
    
   X---  External Interface 
    
          Figure 3: ASON/ASTN Control Plane Functional Components 
    
   Directory service processes may be utilized by the control plane to 
   provide a mapping/translation of names and association of these 
   names between layer networks, sub-network domains (e.g., between 
   provider domains), and user name translations. This process includes 
   functions such as registration of a user within the ASON network 
   (including association of a user name to an ASON name space). 
 

5.1 Connection Controller Function (CC) 
    
   The role of this function within the control plane is: 

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         5 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
     
   - The management and supervision of connection set-ups; 
   - The management and supervision of connection releases; 
   - The modification of connection parameters for existing 
     connections. 
    
   In response to a connection request the function must co-ordinate 
   the interrogation of the route table, requests to the call admission 
   control function, and updating the status of connection points. 
 

5.2 Route Table Function (RT) 
    
   The route table function consists of a list of reachable 
   destinations and for each destination a recommended egress link. The 
   role of the route table function is to respond to the request from 
   the connection controller for the egress link for a particular 
   destination.  
    
   Note that there are likely to be significant differences between I-
   NNI and E-NNI RT functions. Further, the reachability may also be a 
   function of the policy and routing constraints.  
    
5.3 Route Table Update Function (RTU) 
    
   Information stored in routing tables may be manually entered and 
   updated, as in the case of static routing. However, networks may 
   also automatically generate and maintain route tables and distribute 
   them throughout the network (at least within a domain). The role of 
   the route table update function is to: 
    
   - Relay the contents of a local route table for a sub-network to all 
     of its immediate neighbors; 
   - Receive the route tables from immediate neighboring sub-network 
     controllers and update local route table to reflect all of the 
     destinations it can reach via its neighbors. 
 

5.4 Connection Admission Control Function (CAC) 
    
   The role of this function is to decide if there is sufficient free 
   resource on a link to allow a new connection. If there is the call 
   admission control may allow a connection request to proceed. If it 
   is not allowed to proceed then the connection admission control 
   informs the connection controller to either find a new route or, 
   where none is available, notify the originator of the connection 
   request that the request has been refused. In principle there is a 
   connection admission control function associated with every resource 
   manager.  
    
   Connection admission control can also be decided based on 
   prioritization or on other policy decisions. CAC policies are 
   outside the scope of standardization. The connection admission 
   control interacts with: 
    

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         6 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   - The connection controller from which it receives connection 
     requests;  
   - The link resource manager. 
    
5.5 Link Resource Manager Function (LRM) 
    
   The role of this function is to keep track of the way link resources 
   are allocated to connections. The two primary resources that are 
   held by the link resource manager are capacity and connection 
   identifiers. The link resource manager records the capacity as seen 
   by the connection point group agent or access group agent and 
   controls the allocation of capacity to connections when requested as 
   part of the connection set-up process. The link resource manager 
   interacts with: 
    
   - The connection admission control function from which it receives 
     requests for link resources; 
   - The policing function for the setting and enforcement of policing 
     parameters for a connection; 
   - The connection controller that is informed by the link resource 
     manager that a connection has been admitted or released. 
    
   The behaviour of the link resource manager is dependent upon the 
   type of connection involved and the policies in force for 
   reservation and priority. As such the behaviour is technology 
   dependent. 
   In the case of circuit switching resource management is simple since 
   the allocation of capacity is automatic when a link connection is 
   connected to a connection. 
   The link resource manager function looks after label mappings and 
   variable capacity connections. 
 

5.6 Connection Point Status Function (CPS) 
    
   The role of this function is to provide the connection controller 
   with visibility of the status of all the connection points on the 
   boundary of the subnetwork.  The underlying CTP or TTP agents 
   provide the connection point status function. The status is the 
   state of the connection point as it proceeds through connection set-
   up and release. 
    
5.7 Policing Agent Function (PA) 
    
   The role of this function is to check that a connection is sending 
   traffic according to the parameters agreed at connection set-up or 
   as a result of a modification request. Where a connection violates 
   the agreed parameters then the policing agent may instigate measures 
   to correct the situation. Note: this is not needed for a CBR 
   transport layer network. PA relates to the incoming connection only. 
 

5.8 Protocol Controller Function (PC) 
    


  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         7 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   The role of the protocol controller is to provide reliable transfer 
   of control messages across the network by means of a defined 
   interface. This permits messages to be tracked and to ensure 
   expected responses are received or that an exception is reported to 
   the originator. 
     
   Under normal circumstances signaling primitives are passed between 
   the connection controller and the protocol controller within a sub-
   network controller. The protocol controller is semantically 
   transparent to the messaging primitives as these result in external 
   protocol messages and vice versa. Signaling messages are passed 
   between protocol controllers in different sub-network controllers. 
   Protocol controllers are used to transfer the following information 
   Route table update messages via a route table update protocol 
   controller; 
    
   - Link resource manager messages (where appropriate as in available 
     bit rate connections) via a link resource manager protocol 
     controller; 
   - Connection control messages via a connection controller protocol 
     controller. 
 

   In addition, different protocol controllers may be implemented for 
   the following, I-NNI, E-NNI, and UNI. 
 

   In the case of a Ÿfabric controller÷ there is an additional 
   interface, the CCI, between the underlying fabric and the 
   controller. This, in a single network element, is not subject to 
   standardization.  
 
6. ASON Control Plane: External Interfaces and Protocols 
    
   The ASON CP as shown in Figure 2 defines a set of interfaces: 
    
   - User-Network Interface (UNI): UNI runs between the optical client 
     and the network.  
    
   - Internal Node-to-Node Interface (I-NNI): I-NNI defines the 
     interface between the signaling network elements, i.e. OCC within 
     the switched optical network. 
    
   - External Node-to-Node Interface (E-NNI): E-NNI defines the 
     interface between ASON control planes in different administration 
     domains. 
    
   - Connection Control Interface (CCI): The CCI defines the interface 
     between ASON signaling element, i.e. OCC and the transport network 
     element, i.e. the cross connect. 
    
   The different ASON interfaces are described in the next few 
   sections. Candidate protocols for use at the different interfaces 
   are also discussed. 
    

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         8 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
6.1 ASON User-Network Interface 
    
   ASON UNI allows ASON client to perform a number of functions 
   including: 
    
   - Connection Create: Allows the clients to signal to the network to 
     create a new connection with specified attributes. Those 
     attributes might include bandwidth, protection, restoration, and 
     diversity. 
    
   - Connection Delete: Allows ASON clients to signal to the network 
     the need to delete an already existing connection. 
    
   - Connection Modify: Allows ASON clients to signal to the network 
     the need to modify one or more attribute for an already existing 
     connection. 
    
   - Status Enquiry: Allows ASON clients to enquire the status of an 
     already existing connection. 
    
   Other functions that might be performed at the ASON UNI are, client 
   registration, address resolution, neighbor and service discovery. 
   Those functions could be automated or manually configured between 
   the network and its clients. 
    
   Client registration and address resolution are tightly coupled to 
   the optical network address scheme. Requirements for optical network 
   addresses and client names are outlined in [7]. In general the 
   client name (or identification) domain and optical address domain 
   are decoupled. The client id should be globally unique to allow for 
   the establishment of end-to-end connections that encompass multiple 
   administration domains. For security, it is required that the nodal 
   addresses used for routing within an optical domain do not cross 
   network boundaries. The notion of closed user groups should also be 
   included in ASON addressing to allow for the offering of OVPN 
   services. 
    
   Address registration and resolution usually involves some kind of a 
   directory service. The client uses the registration process to 
   register his identification with the provider network for a 
   particular user group or groups. Address resolution involves the 
   process of translating client names to network addresses. Address 
   resolution can be performed at clients, edge network element, or at 
   every administrative boundary entry. It could involves 
   authentication and policy look up to make sure that a client has the 
   necessary credentials to join a user group. 
    
   ASON UNI realization requires the implementation of a signaling 
   protocol with sufficient capabilities to satisfy UNI functions. Both 
   LDP [8] and RSVP-TE [9] have been extended to be used the signaling 
   protocol across the ASON UNI. The extensions involve the definition 
   of the necessary TLVs or objects to be used for signaling connection 
   attributes specific to the optical layer. New messages are also 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                         9 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   defined to allow for connection status enquiry. The Optical 
   Internetworking Forum (OIF) has adopted both protocols in its UNI 
   1.0 specifications [10]. 
    
6.2 ASON Internal Node-to-Node Interface 
    
   The I-NNI defines the interface between adjacent optical connection 
   controls (OCC) in the same network. There are two main aspects of I-
   NNI. Those are signaling and routing. 
 
   Path selection and setup through the optical network requires a 
   signaling protocol. Transport networks typically utilize explicit 
   routing, where path selection can be done either by operator or 
   software scheduling tools in management systems. IN ASON, end-to-end 
   optical channels (connections) are requested with certain 
   constraints. Path selection for a connection request should employ 
   constrained routing algorithms that balance multiple objectives: 
    
   - Conform to constraints such as physical diversity, etc. 
    
   - Load balancing of network traffic to achieve the best utilization 
     of network resources. 
    
   - Follow policy decisions on routing such as preferred routes. 
    
   To facilitate the automation of the optical connection setup, nodes 
   in the optical network must have an updated view of its adjacencies 
   and of the utilization levels at the various links of the network. 
   This updated view is sometime referred to as state information. 
    
   State information dissemination is defined as the manner in which 
   local physical resource information is disseminated throughout the 
   network. First the local physical resource map is summarized into 
   logical link information according to link attributes. This 
   information can then be distributed to the different nodes in the 
   network using the control plane transport network IGP.  
    
   ASON I-NNI could be based on two key protocols, IP and MPLS. Since 
   MPLS employs the principle of separation between the control and the 
   forward planes, its extension to support I-NNI signaling is 
   feasible. Generalized MPLS [4] defines MPLS extensions to suit types 
   of label switching other than the in-packet label. Those other types 
   include, time slot switching, wavelength and waveband switching, and 
   position switching between fibers. Both CR-LDP [11] and RSVP-TE [12] 
   have been extended to allow for the request and the binding of 
   generalized labels. With generalized MPLS, a label switched path 
   (LSP) is established with the appropriate encoding type (e.g. SONET, 
   wavelength, etc.). LSP establishment takes into account specific 
   characteristics that belong to a particular technology.  
    
   MPLS traffic engineering requires the availability of routing 
   protocols that are capable of summarizing link state information in 
   their databases. Extensions to IP routing protocols, OSPF and IS-IS, 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        10 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   in support of link state information for generalized MPLS are 
   described in [13, 14]. 
    
6.3 ASON External Node-to-Node Interface 
    
   E-NNI is an inter-domain interface for use between ASON networks 
   that are under different network administrations. It is similar to 
   the UNI interface with some routing functions to allow for the 
   exchange of reachability information between different domains. BGP 
   is an IP based protocol that could be used to summarize reachability 
   information between different ASON domains in the same manner as it 
   has been in use today for IP networks. 
 
6.4 ASON Connection Control Interface 
 
   CCI defines the interface between the ASON signaling element (OCC) 
   and the transport network elements. Connection control information 
   is passed over this interface to establish connections between the 
   ports of the optical transport switch. The CCI is included as part 
   of ASON control plane because it enables switches of various 
   capacities and internal complexities to be part of an ASON node. 
    
   The protocol running across the CCI must support two essential 
   functions: 
    
   - Adding and deletion of connections. 
    
   - Query of port status of the switch. 
    
   General Switch Management Protocol (GSMP) [15] fits CCI 
   requirements. GSMP is a general-purpose protocol that allows a 
   controller to establish and release connections across a switch. 
   GSMP is well suited for network architectures that employs label 
   swapping in the forwarding plane, e.g. ATM, FR, and MPLS. This 
   property makes GSMP a good fit for generalized label as defined by 
   generalized MPLS. GSMP extensions for generalized MPLS are yet to be 
   worked out. 
    
7. ASON/ASTN CP Transport Network (signaling Network) 
    
   In this section, we detail some architectural considerations for the 
   makeup of the transport network that is used to transport the 
   control plane information.  For circuit-based networks, the ability 
   to have an independent transport network for message transportation 
   is an important requirement. 
    
   The control network represents the transport infrastructure for 
   control traffic, and can be either in-band or out-of-band. An 
   implication of this is that the control plane may be supported by a 
   different physical topology from that of the underlying ASON. There 
   are fundamental requirements that control networks must satisfy in 
   order to assure that control plane data can be transported in a 
   reliable and efficient manner. In the event of control plane failure 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        11 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   (for example, communications channel or control entity failure), 
   while new connection operations will not be accepted, existing 
   connections will not be dropped. Control network failure would still 
   allow dissemination of the failure event to a management system for 
   maintenance purposes. This implies a need for separate notifications 
   and status codes for the control plane and ASON. Additional 
   procedures may also be required for control plane failure recovery. 
    
   It is recognized that the inter-working of the control networks is 
   the first step towards control plane inter-working. To maintain a 
   certain level of ease, it's desirable to have a common control 
   network for different domains/sub-networks or types of network. 
    
   Typically, control plane and transport functions may co-exist in a 
   network element. However, this may not be true in the case of a 
   third party control. This situation needs further study.   
   Furthermore, addressing issues in the control plane vis-Ç-vis the 
   transport network is also for further study. 
    
   ASON CP transport network requirements includes: 
    
   - Control plane message transport should be secure. This requirement 
     stems from the fact that the information exchanged over the 
     control plane is service-provider specific and security is of 
     utmost importance.  
    
   - Control message transport reliability has to be guaranteed in 
     almost all situations, even during what might be considered 
     catastrophic failure scenarios of the controlled network. 
    
   - The control traffic transport performance affects connection 
     management performance.  Connection service performance largely 
     depends on its message transport. Time sensitive operations, such 
     as protection switching, may need certain QoS guarantees. 
     Furthermore, a certain level of survivability of the message 
     transport should be provided in case of control network failure. 
    
   - The control network needs to be both upward and downward scalable 
     in order for the control plane to be scalable. Downward 
     scalability may be envisioned where the ASON network offers 
     significant static connections, reducing the need for an extended 
     control network.  
    
   - The control plane protocols shall not assume that the signaling 
     network topology is identical to that of the transport network. 
     The control plane protocols MUST operate over a variety of 
     signaling network topologies. 
    
   Given the above requirements, it is critical that the maintenance of 
   the control network itself not pose a problem to service providers. 
   As a corollary this means that configuration-intensive operations 
   should be avoided for the control network. 
    
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        12 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   Common channel signaling links are associated with user channels in 
   the following ways: 
    
   - Associated, whereby signaling messages related to traffic between 
     two network elements are transferred over signalling links that 
     directly connect the two network elements 
   - Non-associated, whereby signaling messages between two network 
     elements A and B are routed over several signalling links, whilst 
     traffic signals are routed directly between A and B.  The 
     signalling links used may vary with time and network conditions  
   - Quasi-associated, whereby signaling messages between nodes A and B 
     follow a predetermined routeing path over several signalling links 
     whilst the traffic channels are routed directly between A and B. 
    
   Associated signaling may be used where the number of traffic channels 
   between two network elements is large, thereby allowing a single 
   signaling channel to be shared amongst a large number of traffic 
   channels. 
    
   Quasi-associated signaling may be used to improve resiliency. For 
   example consider a signaling channel that has failure mechanisms 
   independent of the traffic channels. Failure of the signaling channel 
   will result in loss of signaling capability for all traffic channels 
   even if all the traffic channels are still functional. Quasi-
   associated signaling mitigates against this by employing alternative 
   signaling routes. In other words the signaling network must be 
   designed such that failure of a signaling link shall not affect the 
   traffic channels associated with that signaling channel.  
    
8. Transport Network Survivability and Protection 
    
   This section describes the strategies that can be used to maintain 
   the integrity of an existing call in the event of failures within 
   the transport network. The terms ŸProtection÷ (replacement of a 
   failed resource with a pre-assigned standby) and ŸRestoration÷ 
   (replacement of a failed resource by re-routing using spare 
   capacity) are used to classify these techniques. In general, 
   protection actions complete in the tens of millisecond range, while 
   restoration actions normally complete in times ranging from hundreds 
   of milliseconds to up to a few seconds 
    
   The ASON control plane provides a network operator with the ability 
   to offer a user calls with a selectable class-of-service (CoS), 
   (e.g., availability, duration of interruptions, Errored Seconds, 
   etc).  Protection and restoration are mechanisms (used by the 
   network) to support the CoS requested by the user.  The selection of 
   the survivability mechanism (protection, restoration or none) for a 
   particular connection that supports a call will be based on; the 
   policy of the network operator, the topology of the network and the 
   capability of the equipment deployed.  Different survivability 
   mechanisms may be used on the connections that are concatenated to 
   provide a call.  If a call transits the network of more than one 
   operator then each network should be responsible for the 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        13 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   survivability of the transit connections.  Connection requests at 
   the UNI or E-NNI will contain only the requested CoS, not an 
   explicit protection or restoration type. 
    
   The protection or restoration of a connection may be invoked or 
   temporarily disabled by a command from the management plane.  These 
   commands may be used to allow scheduled maintenance activities to be 
   performed.  They may also be used to override the automatic 
   operations under some exceptional failure conditions. 
    
   The Protection or Restoration mechanism should: 
    
   - Be independent of, and support any, client type (e.g., IP, ATM, 
     SDH, Ethernet). 
   - Provide scalability to accommodate a catastrophic failure in a 
     server layer, such as a fiber cable cut, which impacts a large 
     number client layer connections that need to be restored 
     simultaneously and rapidly. 
   - Utilize a robust and efficient signaling mechanism, which remains 
     functional even after a failure in the transport or signaling 
     network. 
   - Not rely on functions which are non-time critical to initiate 
     protection or restoration actions. Therefore consideration should 
     be given to protection or restoration schemes that do not depend 
     on fault localization. 
    
    
10. Relationship to GMPLS Architecture 
    
   The relationship between ASON/ASTN control plane architecture and 
   GMPLS-based protocols is established in section 6, where it has been 
   shown how the different GMPLS protocol could be used for the 
   realization of the different ASON/ASTN external interfaces.  
    
   Recently, a GMPLS architecture [16] has been introduced. It is 
   important to note that there is no real conflict between GMPLS 
   architecture and the network architecture presented in this draft. 
   ASON/ASTN provides a functional architecture of a control plane that 
   allows the establishment of switched paths in optical networks. It 
   provides the set of external interfaces that are necessary for the 
   ASTN/ASON network to have a global reach. It does that, however, in a 
   protocol independent fashion that can be realized in a different ways 
   provided that its requirements are satisfied. 
    
   The GMPLS architecture focuses more on the applications of GMPLS-
   defined protocols, e.g. CR-LDP for the setup of generalized LSP 
   (GLSP) at the different interfaces of the network, e.g. I-NNI, UNI, 
   etc. It does that in a more comprehensible way than what is described  
   in section 6 of this draft. 
    
11. Other ASON/ASTN Related ITU Activities 
    

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        14 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   This section describes other activities that are currently underway 
   at the ITU and are related to ASON/ASTN architecture. 
    
11.1 Common Equipment Management (G.cemr) 
    
   G.cemr [17] recommendation specifies those Equipment Management 
   Functions (EMF) requirements that are common for SDH and OTN. The 
   equipment management function (EMF) provides the means through which 
   a Network Element Level manager manages the Network Element Function 
   (NEF). 
    
   These kind of functions are not detailed in the current GMPLS work 
   since it is focused on control plane related aspects. Network 
   Management aspects are subjects of other working groups in IETF such 
   as OPS WG. 
 
11.1.1 MPLS solution 
    
   Element Manager functions are not part of the control plane 
   specifications in GMPLS. 
    
11.1.2 Requirements 
         -  Network management applications shall perform, Fault, 
            Configuration, Accounting, Performance and Service 
            Management (FCAPS). 
         -  Path setup can be triggered by means of a Network 
            Management System using control plane mechanisms 
         -  For path setup control plane and Network management systems 
            shall cooperate to allow path provisioning by network 
            management as well as provisioning using the control plane. 
 
11.2 Data Communications Network (G.7712/Y.1703) 
 
   In [18] the various functions constituting a telecommunications 
   network can be classified into two broad functional groups. One is 
   the transport functional group which transfers any 
   telecommunications information from one point to another point(s). 
   The other is the control functional group which realizes various 
   ancillary services and operations and maintenance functions. 
    
   The Data Communications Network (DCN) provides transport for the 
   applications associated with the control functional group. Examples 
   of such applications that are transported by the DCN are: transport 
   network operations/management applications, DCN 
   operations/management applications, Automatic Switched Transport 
   Services (ASTN) control plane applications, voice communications, 
   etc. 
    
   The IP-based DCN provides Layer 1 (physical), Layer 2 (data-link) 
   and Layer 3 (network) functionality and consists of 
   routing/switching functionality interconnected via links. These 
   links can be implemented over various interfaces, including WAN 
   interfaces, LAN interfaces, and ECCs. 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        15 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
    
   This recommendation provides the architecture requirements for an 
   IP-based DCN, the requirements for inter-working between an IP-based 
   DCN and an OSI-based DCN, and the IP-based DCN interface 
   specifications. 
 
11.2.1 GMPLS solution 
    
   Since in GMPLS the signaling and management plane are independent 
   from each other, different kinds of networks can be used for both 
   tasks. Today GMPLS itself can be managed by the use of GMPLS MIB 
   (draft-nadeau-mpls-gmpls-te-mib-00.txt and referenced). In the view 
   of GMPLS each node is capable to process signaling and routing 
   messages whereby the topology of the transport network and the 
   control-plane network are the same.   
    
11.2.2 Requirements 
    
         -  The management and signaling functions shall be decoupled 
            from each other 
         -  the DCN shall support in-fiber-in-band, in-fiber-out-of-
            band and out-of-fiber/out-of-band signaling for any kind of 
            technology 
         -  DCN shall be dimensioned to support fast restoration by 
            providing fast transport of restoration messages. 
         -  DCN shall be IP based and support IP addressing. 
         -  IP routing mechanisms (OSPF, IS-IS) shall be used 
 
11.3 Distributed Connection Management (G.7713/Y.1704) 
    
   G.7713/Y.1704 [19] Recommendation covers the areas associated with 
   the signalling aspects of automatic switched transport network, such 
   as attribute specifications, the message sets, the interface 
   requirements, the DCM state diagrams, and the interworking functions 
   for the distributed connection management 
    
11.3.1 GMPLS solution 
    
   In GMPLS a permanent communication between the Network devices is 
   established which is anyhow necessary to exchange reachability and 
   traffic-engineering information (e.g. routing protocol provides 
   reachability and TE attributes information). Link bundling plays a 
   key role by augmenting the scalability of the routing protocol. A 
   user device or a management station can optionally trigger a 
   connection setup and initiates a control plane action.  
     1.         In a first phase the edge device (where the Trail Termination 
        is located) has to determine the route (trail) either by a 
        route calculation (e.g. explicit route computation through C-
        SPF) or by receiving a pre-calculated route from an external 
        device e.g. a Traffic Engineering Tool.  
     2.         Then it signals the trail request to the involved nodes across 
        the network, reserving the bandwidth without allocating it. 

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        16 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
     3.         When bandwidth reservation has been performed the trail is 
        implemented. 
    
   Some optimizations have also been added in order to speed up the 
   process of implementing the connection. The full procedure is 
   explained in more detail in draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-
   05.txt. 
    
11.3.2 Requirements 
 
   GMPLS control plane components could be applied to ASTN to achieve a 
   distributed connection control taking into account draft-ietf-mpls-
   generalized-signaling-05.txt. 
 
11.4 Generalized Automatic Discovery (G.7714/Y.1705)  
    
   G.7714/Y.1705 [20] describes the specifications for automatic 
   discovery (referred to as auto-discovery) to aid distributed 
   connection management (DCM) and routing in the context of 
   automatically switched transport networks (ASTN/ASON). In this 
   recommendation, three major instances of discovery are addressed, 
   (a) adjacency discovery (b) neighbor discovery (c) service 
   discovery. In addition, the results of neighbor discovery are also 
   used for establishing logical adjacencies between nodes at the 
   control plane. 
 
11.4.1 Adjacency Discovery 
 
   Adjacency discovery is described as the process of verifying 
   physical connectivity between two ports on adjacent network elements 
   over a specific physical layer. Depending on the physical packaging 
   of the functions within a network element, two types of associations 
   need to be discovered as part of adjacency discovery.  
    
11.4.2 GMPLS Solution 
    
   Optical Link Interface (OLI) concept and requirement are proposed in 
   conjunction with LMP-WDM protocol to cover the functions provided by 
   adjacency discovery. From the GMPLS perspective, information 
   exchange occurs between a Ÿpassive÷ and an Ÿactive÷ element, such as 
   between a DWDM (OLS) system and an OXC. Ongoing work with ITU 
   referred to as G.VBI (Virtual Backplane Interface) will complete the 
   picture. 
 
11.4.3 Requirements 
     
   - Adjacency discovery should be provided through a simple protocol  
     mechanism for reporting the health and properties of OLSs based  
     on a well-defined set of parameters.  
    
   - It should be extensible so that we can start with a set of  
     most-needed parameters initially, and be able to extend later by  
     adding new parameter types and new parameters within a type.   
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        17 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
        
   - The initial focus is on SONET and SDH equipment. However, the  
     OLI must be extensible to support other types of equipment such    
     as Ethernet and G.709 OTN.  
        
   - The adjacency must be reliable, not only assume a one-to-one     
     relationship between OLS and client i.e., an OLS client will    
     most likely be attached to multiple different OLSs, and a single   
     OLS may have multiple different clients at a single location. 
           
11.4.4 Neighbor Discovery 
    
   [20] Recommendation provides the requirements and message sets for 
   the automatic neighbor for the User-to-Network Interface (UNI), 
   Internal Node-to-Node Interface (I-NNI), External Node-to-Node 
   Interface (E-NNI) and Physical Interface (PI). The requirements in 
   this Recommendation specify the discovery process across these 
   interfaces that aid automated connection management. 
 
11.4.5 GMPLS solution 
    
   MPLS is based on an IP-based control plane incorporating protocols 
   defined for routing and neighbor discovery defined in OSPF and IS-
   IS. To achieve a single control plane across multiple technology 
   layers a single method for neighbor discovery and routing is 
   mandatory. LMP extensions for neighbor discovery have solved the 
   Ÿpotential÷ problem of the usage of a routing protocol at the UNI 
   (when considering for instance OIF UNI 1.0 specification) 
    
11.4.6 Requirements 
    
      -  Neighbor Discovery shall be used to detect and maintain Node 
         adjacencies. For this the mechanisms already defined at the  
         IETF for OSPF and IS-IS shall be used.  
      -  Topology information and resource information shall be 
         decoupled. While topology information remains unchanged, 
         resource utilization can change dynamically when setting up 
         new path. To support this concept the links between two 
         adjacent nodes shall be bundled. In case of any single link 
         failure within the bundle, the topology information remains 
         stable while the capacity information may change. 
      -  The control plane shall detect changes in the resources and 
         enable timely reaction if established path or network 
         resources are affected by this change. 
 
11.4.7 Service Discovery 
 
   [20] provides the requirements and message sets for the automatic 
   service discovery for the User-to-Network Interface (UNI), Internal 
   Node-to-Node Interface (I-NNI), External Node-to-Node Interface (E-
   NNI) and Physical Interface (PI). The requirements in this 
   Recommendation specifies the discovery process across these 
   interfaces that aid automated connection management. 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        18 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
 
11.4.8 GMPLS solution 
    
   GMPLS focuses on intra-domain implementation on which OIF based itËs 
   UNI specification. OIF-UNI GMPLS profile can be considered when 
   discussing about UNI implementations. Extensions of LMP enables the 
   exchange of service discovery information at the UNI 1.0 
   specification. 
    
11.4.9 Requirements 
    
         -  Service discovery mechanisms shall be aligned with the 
            mechanisms provided by GMPLS such that a seamless 
            integration of UNI and NNI can be supported.  
    
11.5 OTN routing (G.rtg) 
    
   A first outline has been presented during the last ITU Q14/SG15 
   meeting, however one doesnËt expect to see a more complete 
   specification prior to Mid-2002. 
    
11.5.1 GMPLS solution 
    
   GMPLS is supposed to be based on OSPF/IS-IS routing mechanisms and 
   more explicitly to the traffic engineering extensions of these 
   protocols like e.g. CSPF. See also: Ÿdraft-kompella-ospf-gmpls-
   extensions-01.txt OSPF Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS÷ 
   and Ÿdraft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-02.txt IS-IS Extensions in 
   Support of Generalized MPLS÷. Today on-going work related to 
   GMPLS/BGP has started as well in order to cover inter-domain routing 
   specification for non-packet based networks (such as draft-parent-
   optical-bgp-00.txt) It allows also to use explicit or implicit 
   routing.  
    
11.5.2 Requirements 
    
        -  Support of explicit and implicit routing 
        -  Support of OSPF and ISIS routing protocols for intra-domain 
           and subsequently BGP for inter-domain routing 
        -  Support of constrained based routing in order to e.g. 
           Conform to constraints such as physical diversity, Achieve 
           traffic engineering objectives in the transport network. 
           Examples are to adhere to operator policies on routing such 
           as preferred routes or to conform to network specific 
           constraints 
 
    
11.6 OTN Connection Admission Control (G.cac) 
    
   Connection admission control (CAC) is necessary for authentication of 
   the user and controlling access to network resources. CAC  shall be 
   provided as part of the control plane functionality. It is the role 
   of the CAC function to determine if there is sufficient free resource 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        19 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   available to allow a new connection. € If there is, the CAC may 
   permit the connection request to proceed, alternatively, if there is 
   not, it shall notify the originator of the connection request that 
   the request has been denied. Connections may be denied on the basis 
   of available free capacity or alternatively on the basis of 
   prioritisation. CAC policies are outside the scope of 
   standardisation.÷ 
    
    
11.6.1 GMPLS solution 
    
   Call admission control in the sense of authentication and access 
   control is not explicitly addressed in GMPLS since a trusted 
   relation in a single operator, multi-vendor network is assumed. The 
   work related to connection admission is performed e.g. in OIF. 
   Related issues like security of signaling protocols is already 
   included in RSVP-TE and CR-LDP. However, if a given LSP can not be 
   established through the network (for reasons as diverse as resource 
   unavailability, overbooking, control-plane congestion, etc.) it is 
   simply rejected.    
    
11.6.2 Requirements 
    
   None 
    
    
11.7 OTN Link Management (G.lm) 
    
   No ITU-T contribution available prior to October 2001. 
    
11.7.1 GMPLS solution 
    
   The Link Management Protocol defined in draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-00.txt 
   is used to manage the resources available between two nodes and to 
   check the connections. It is closely related to the unnumbered 
   interface and bundling concepts described in Ÿdraft-kompella-mpls-
   bundle-05.txt Link Bundling in MPLS Traffic Engineering÷.  
    
11.7.2 Requirements 
    
      -  Link management shall form a consistent network level resource 
         view between adjacent nodes. 
      -  The use of link management shall decouple resource information 
         from topology information which is bound to the bundling 
         concept. 
      -  LMP as under definition in IETF (draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-00.txt) 
         shall be considered for G.lm. 
    
    
    
12. Security Considerations 
 
   This draft does not introduce any unknown security issues. 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        20 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
    
    
13. References 
    
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Mayer, M. Ed., "Requirements for Automatic Switched Transport 
      Networks (ASTN)", ITU G.8070/Y.1301, V1.0, May 2001. 
    
   3  M. Mayer, Ed., "Architecture for Automatic Switched Optical 
      Networks (ASON)", ITU G.8080/Y1304, V1.0, October 2001 
    
   4  Ashwood-Smith, P. et. al., "Generalized MPLS- Signaling 
      Functional Description", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-
      04.txt, work in progress, May. 2001 
    
   5  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   6  Rajagopalan, B. et. al., "IP over Optical Networks: A Framework", 
      draft-many-ipo-optical-framework-03.txt, work in progress, March. 
      2001 
    
   7  Lazar, M. et. al., "Alternate Addressing Proposal", OIF 
      Contribution, OIF2001.21, January 2001. 
       
   8  Aboul-Magd, O. et. al., "LDP Extensions for Optical User Network 
      Interface (O-UNI) Signaling", draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-uni-optical-
      01.txt, work in progress, July 2001. 
     
   9  Yu, J., et. al., "RSVP Extensions in Support of OIF Optical UNI 
      Signaling", draft-yu-mpls-rsvp-oif-uni-00.txt, work in progress, 
      Dec. 2000. 
    
   10 Rajagopalan, B. Editor, "User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0 
      Signaling Specifications", OIF Contribution, OIF2000.125.5, June 
      2001 
    
   11 Ashoowd-Smith, P. et. al., "Generalized MPLS Signaling: CR-LDP 
      Extensions", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-03.txt, work in 
      progress, May 2001 
    
   12 Ashwood-Smith, P. et. al., "Generalized MPLS Signaling: RSVP-TE 
      Extensions", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-03.txt, work in 
      progress, May 2000. 
    
   13 Kompella, K. et. al., "IS-IS Extensions in Support of Generalized 
      MPLS", draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-01.txt, work in progress, 
      Nov. 2000. 
    
 

  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        21 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
 
   14 Kompella, K. et. al., "OSPF Extensions in Support of Generalized 
      MPLS", draft-kompella-ospf-gmpls-extensions-01.txt, work in 
      progress, Nov. 2000. 
    
   15 Doria, A. et. al., "Generalized Switch Management Protocol V3", 
      draft-ietf-gsmp-08.txt, work in progress, Nov. 2000. 
    
   16 Mannie, E., Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Lable Switching 
      (GMPLS) Architecture" draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt, 
      work in progress, June 2001. 
    
   17 Draft New RecommendationG.cemr, Common Equipment Management 
      Function Requirements, ITU, June 2001 
    
   18 C. Daloia, Ed., "Architecture and Specification of Data 
      Communication Network", ITU G.7712/Y.1703, October 2001 
    
   19 Z. Lin, Ed., "Distributed Call and Connection Management", ITU 
      G.7713/Y.1704, October 2001 
    
   20 S. Sankaranarayanan, Ed., "Generalized Automatic Discovery 
      Techniques", ITU G.7714/Y.1705, October 2001. 
    
 
    
14. Author's Addresses 
    
    
   Osama Aboul-Magd 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Phone: 613-763-5827 
   E.mail: Osama@nortelnetworks.com 
 
   Bilel Jamoussi 
   Nortel Networks 
   600 Technology Park Drive 
   Billerica, MA 01821, USA 
   Phone: 978-288-4506 
   Email: jamoussi@nortelnetworks.com 
 
   Stephen Shew 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Phone: 613-763-2462 
   Email: sdshew@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Gert Grammel 
  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        22 

Draft-ietf-ipo-ason-01.txt                                   Nov. 2001 
 
 
   Alcatel 
   Via Trento 30, 
   I-20059 Vimercate, Italy 
   Phone: +39 039 686-4453 
   Email: gert.grammel@netit.alcatel.it 
    
   Sergio Belotti 
   Alcatel 
   Via Trento 30, 
   I-20059 Vimercate, Italy 
   Phone: +39 039 686-7060 
   Email: sergio.belotti@netit.alcatel.it 
    
   Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   Alcatel 
   Francis Wellesplein 1, 
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium 
   Phone: +32 3 240-8491 
   Email: Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel.be 
    
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
 
















  
Aboul-Magd                Expires June 2002                        23 
