

Network Working Group                                         R. Austein
Internet-Draft                                                       ISC
Expires: August 9, 2004                                 February 9, 2004


                          EDNS NSID Extension
                      draft-austein-dnsext-nsid-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 9, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   With the increased use of DNS anycast, load balancing, and other
   mechanisms allowing more than one DNS name server to share a single
   IP address, it is sometimes difficult to tell which of a pool of name
   servers has answered a particular query.  While existing ad-hoc
   mechanism allow an operator to send follow-up queries when it is
   necessary to debug such a configuration, the only completely reliable
   way to obtain the identity of the name server which actually
   responded is to have the name server include this information in the
   response itself.  This note proposes a protocol enhancement to
   support this functionality.






Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Proposed Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1 The SI Flag  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2 The NSID Option  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.1 What Should the NSID Payload Be? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.2 Should Recursive Name Servers Respond to SI? . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 10





































Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


1. Introduction

   With the increased use of DNS anycast, load balancing, and other
   mechanisms allowing more than one DNS name server to share a single
   IP address, it is sometimes difficult to tell which of a pool of name
   servers has answered a particular query.

   Existing ad-hoc mechanisms such as those described in
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-serverid] allow an operator to send follow-up queries
   when it is necessary to debug such a configuration, but there are
   situations in which this is not a totally satisfactory solution,
   since anycast routing may have changed, or the server pool in
   question may be behind some kind of extremely dynamic load balancing
   hardware.  Thus, while these ad-hoc mechanisms are certainly better
   than nothing (and have the advantage of already being deployed), a
   better solution seems desirable.

   Given that a DNS query is an idempotent operation with no retained
   state, it would appear that the only completely reliable way to
   obtain the identity of the name server which actually responded to a
   particular query is to have that name server include identifying
   information in the response itself. This note proposes a protocol
   enhancement to achieve this.




























Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


2. Proposed Mechanism

   This note proposes using an EDNS [RFC2671] flag bit to signal the
   resolver's desire for information identifying the name server, and an
   EDNS option to hold the name server's response (should it chose to
   honor the resolver's request).

2.1 The SI Flag

   A resolver signals its desire for information identifying the server
   by setting the SI (Send Identification) flag in the extended flags
   field of the OPT pseudo-RR.

   The value of the SI flag is [TBD].

   The semantics of the SI flag are not transitive.  That is: the SI
   flag is a request that the name server which receives the query
   identify itself; in a so-called forwarding setup, the first hop name
   server is the one that should identify itself.  If the resolver side
   of a forwarding name server wishes to receive identifying
   information, it is free to set the SI flag in its own queries, but
   that is a separate matter.

   A name server which understands the SI flag should echo its value
   back in the response message, regardless of whether the name server
   chose to honor the request.

2.2 The NSID Option

   A name server which understands the SI flag and chooses to honor it
   responds by including identifying information in a NSID option in an
   EDNS OPT pseudo-RR in the response message.

   The OPTION-CODE for the NSID option is [TBD].

   The precise format of the identifying information is still an open
   issue at this point, and is discussed further in Section 3.1.














Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


3. Open Issues

   There are a couple of open issues in this proposal which would need
   to be settled before it could be used.  The author has opinions on
   both of these and has stated those opinions below, but would
   appreciate feedback from the community.

3.1 What Should the NSID Payload Be?

   There are several options for the payload of the NSID option.

      It could be the "real" name of the specific name server within the
      name server pool.

      It could be the "real" IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) of the name
      server within the name server pool.

      It could be some sort of hash of the DNS name or IP address,
      perhaps including some kind of nonce.

      It could be an arbitrary string of octets chosen at the discretion
      of the name server operator.

   Each of these options has advantages and disadvantages. Using the
   "real" name or "real" address is simple, but assumes that the name
   server has a "real" name (it probably does have at least one
   non-anycast IP address, for maintenance operations).  Using the
   "real" IP address assumes that the operator of an anycast name server
   is willing to divulge a non-anycast address for the name server,
   which might not be the case.  Using a hash (with or without a nonce)
   provides a fixed length value that the resolver can use to tell two
   name servers apart without necessarily being able to tell where
   either one of them "really" is, but makes debugging more difficult if
   one happens to be in a friendly open environment.  Using an arbitrary
   octet string means that at least half of the name servers that
   support this option will probably end up identifying themselves as
   "My Name Server", which is not particularly useful.

   Given that one of the reasons for using anycast DNS techniques is
   often an attempt to harden a critical name server against denial of
   service attacks, the author believes that the hash with nonce option
   is probably the right choice here, since it will provide enough
   information for useful debugging without leaking the maintenance
   address of anycast name servers to nogoodniks.

3.2 Should Recursive Name Servers Respond to SI?

   Most of the discussion of name server identification to date has



Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


   focused on identifying authoritative name servers, since the best
   known cases of anycast name servers are a subset of the name servers
   for the root zone.  However, given that anycast DNS techniques are
   equally applicable to recursive name servers as well as authoritative
   name servers, it may be useful for the name server side of a
   recursive name server to support this mechanism as well.  The
   semantics proposed for the SI bit in Section 2.1 are intended to
   support this model.











































Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


4. Acknowledgements

   David Conrad, Paul Vixie, Randy Bush, Suzanne Woolf, and the law firm
   of Dewey, Chetham, and Howe.















































Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


Normative References

   [RFC2671]  Vixie, P., "Extension Mechanisms for DNS (EDNS0)", RFC
              2671, August 1999.















































Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-serverid]
              Conrad, D., "Identifying an Authoritative Name Server",
              draft-ietf-dnsop-serverid-01 (work in progress), November
              2002.


Author's Address

   Rob Austein
   ISC
   950 Charter Street
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   USA

   EMail: sra@isc.org


































Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            EDNS NSID Extension              February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Austein                  Expires August 9, 2004                [Page 11]


