


Standards Track                                               L. Walleij
Internet-Draft                                  The Ogg Vorbis Community
Expires: June 1, 2003                                           Dec 2002


                     The application/ogg Media Type
                     draft-walleij-ogg-mediatype-07

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 1, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Ogg Bitstream Format aims at becoming a general, freely-
   available standard for transporting multimedia content across
   computing platforms and networks.  The intention of this document is
   to define the MIME media type application/ogg to refer to this kind
   of content when transported across the Internet.  It is the intention
   of the Ogg Bitstream Format developers that it be usable without
   intellectual property concerns.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2].




Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       The application/ogg Media Type             Dec 2002


1. The Ogg Bitstream Format

   The Ogg Bitstream format has been developed as a part of a larger
   project aimed at creating a set of components for the coding and
   decoding of multimedia content (codecs) which are to be freely
   available and freely re-implementable both in software and in
   hardware for the computing community at large, including the Internet
   community.

   Raw packets from these codecs may be used directly by transport
   mechanisms that provide their own framing and packet-separation
   mechanisms (such as UDP datagrams).

   One such framing and content-separation mechanism is the real-time
   transport protocol (RTP).  RTP allows the streaming of syncronous
   lossy data for broadcasting and similar purposes.  Should this
   functionality be desired, a separate RTP wrapping mechanism should be
   used, and such a mechanism is currently under development.

   For stream based storage (such as files) and transport (such as TCP
   streams or pipes), Ogg codecs use the Ogg Bitstream Format to provide
   framing/sync, sync recapture after error, landmarks during seeking,
   and enough information to properly seperate data back into packets at
   the original packet boundaries without relying on decoding to find
   packet boundaries.  The application/ogg MIME type refers to this kind
   of bitstreams, when no further knowledge of the bitstream content
   exists.

   The bitstream format in itself is documented in [1].






















Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       The application/ogg Media Type             Dec 2002


2. Registration Information

   To: ietf-types@iana.org

   Subject: Registration of MIME media type application/ogg

   MIME media type name: application

   MIME subtype name: ogg

   Required parameters: none

   Optional parameters: none

   Encoding Considerations:

   The Ogg bitstream format is binary data, and must be encoded for non-
   binary transport; the Base64 encoding is suitable for Email, Binary
   encoding could also be used.

   Security Considerations:

   As the Ogg bitstream file is a container format and only a carrier of
   content (such as Vorbis audio) with a very rigid definition (see
   [1]), this format in itself is not more vulnerable than any other
   content framing mechanism.  The main security consideration for the
   receiving application is to ensure that manipulated packages can not
   cause buffer overflows and the like.  It is possible to encapsulate
   even execuatble content in the bitstream, so for such uses additional
   security considerations must be taken.

   Ogg bitstream files are not signed or encrypted using any applicable
   encryption schemes.  External security mechanisms must be added if
   content confidentiality and authenticity is to be achieved.

   Interoperability considerations:

   The Ogg bitstream format has proved to be widely implementable across
   different computing platforms.  A broadly portable reference
   implementation is available under a BSD license.

   The Ogg bitstream format is not patented and can be implemented by
   third parties without patent considerations.

   Published specification:

   See [1].




Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       The application/ogg Media Type             Dec 2002


   Applications which use this media type:

   Any application that implements the specification will be able to
   encode or decode Ogg bitstream files.  Specifically, the format is
   supposed to be used by subcodecs that implement for example Vorbis
   audio.

   Additional information:

   Magic number(s):

   In Ogg bitstream files, the first four bytes are 0x4f 0x67 0x67 0x53
   corresponding to the string "OggS".

   File extension: .ogg

   Macintosh File Type Code(s): OggS

   Object Identifier(s) or OID(s): none

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

   Questions about this proposal should be directed to Linus Walleij
   <triad@df.lth.se>.  Technical questions about the Ogg bitstream
   standard may be asked on the mailing lists for the developer
   community.  <http://www.xiph.org/archives/>

   Intended usage: COMMON

   Author/Change controller:

   This document was written by Linus Walleij <triad@df.lth.se>, changes
   of this document will be handled by him or a representative of the
   Xiph.org or the associated development communities.

   The Ogg bitstream format is controlled by the Xiph.org and the
   respective development communities.














Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       The application/ogg Media Type             Dec 2002


3. Security Considerations

   Security considerations are discussed in the security considerations
   clause of the MIME registration in section 2.















































Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       The application/ogg Media Type             Dec 2002


References

   [1]  The Xiph.org, "Ogg logical and physical bitstream overview",
        November 2002, <http://xiph.org/ogg/doc/oggstream.html>.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Author's Address

   Linus Walleij
   The Ogg Vorbis Community
   Master Olofs Vag 24
   Lund  224 66
   SE

   Phone: +46 703 193678
   EMail: triad@df.lth.se
   URI:   http://www.xiph.org/































Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       The application/ogg Media Type             Dec 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Walleij                   Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 7]


