



FECFRAME Working Group                                            Watson
Internet-Draft                                          Digital Fountain
Expires: January 1, 2007                                   June 30, 2006


                         FECFRAME requirements
                       draft-ietf-fecframe-req-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document defines requirements for a "FEC Framework" to be
   defined by the IETF FECFRAME working group.  The object of this group
   is primarily to develop specifications for using forward error
   correction (FEC) codes with applications in the Internet to provide
   protection against packet loss.







Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Essential requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Non-essential requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11









































Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


1.  Introduction

   This document defines requirements for a "FEC Framework" to be
   defined by the IETF FECFRAME working group.  The purpose of this
   working group is defined in the working group charter as follows:

      "The object of this group is to develop specifications for using
      forward error correction (FEC) codes with applications in the
      Internet to provide protection against packet loss.  The group
      will develop a protocol framework for application of FEC codes to
      arbitrary packet flows over unreliable transport protocols over
      both IP multicast and unicast."

   This document defines requirements for this protocol framework.  Both
   'essential' ('SHALL') and 'non-essential' ('SHOULD') requirements are
   considered.

   A 'protocol framework' is a partial specification of a protocol,
   along with a formal description of the missing aspects which are
   required to form a full protocol specification - i.e. a protocol
   framework is a protocol with 'holes' and a detailed description of
   the 'shape' of those holes.  Protocol frameworks provide for maximum
   commonality between different complete protocols which provide
   similar functions and therefore simplify implementation and
   understanding of a set of alternative protocols which perform similar
   functions.  In this case, support for different complete protocols is
   valuable for two reasons.  Firstly because there exist many different
   forward error correction codes, with different properties in terms of
   error correction capability, computational complexity, flexibility
   and intellectual property rights.  Secondly, there are many
   applications which could benefit from the use of forward error
   correction.  The FEC framework therefore replaces the "full mesh" of
   application/FEC code combinations with a single general approach
   which specifies how any FEC code meeting the FEC code requirments
   defined in the framework can be used with any application meeting the
   application requirements defined in the framework.

   The FEC protocol framework must therefore define as much as possible
   of a protocol for providing forward error correction for arbitrary
   packet flows over unreliable transport, without defining a particular
   FEC code or assuming a particular application.  Furthermore, the
   protocol framework specification will define a clear interface
   between the specified parts and the unspecified, FEC-code-specific
   and application-specific, parts.  For this purpose, the building
   block techniques applied in the Reliable Multicast (RMT) working
   group will be re-used, specifically the FEC Building Block [I-D.ietf-
   rmt-fec-bb-revised]




Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


   The term "Forward Error Correction" refers here to application/
   transport layer techniques for recovering lost packets of data.  More
   accurately, the term "Forward Erasure Correction" should be used.  In
   many contexts the term "Application Layer FEC (AL-FEC)" is also used,
   although the mechanisms considered here could be considered as either
   application or transport layer (the important point being that they
   are end-to-end).

   Generally, an "FEC Code" is defined in terms of the operations
   required to construct encoded data from source data (at an encoder)
   and to reconstruct source data from encoded data (at a decoder).  In
   order to apply an FEC Code to arbitrary packet flows, additional
   elements are required such as protocol elements to identify encoded
   data within packets, pre-processing of source data (e.g. segmentation
   and/or addition of FEC-related indications into the source data).
   Therefore, in order to adapt an FEC Code for use in the context of
   the FEC Framework, additional FEC-code specific specification is
   required.  Following the approach of the FEC Building Block, this
   specification is known as an "FEC Scheme".  The FEC Framework will
   define the requirements that FEC Schemes must meet for use with the
   framework.

   Generally, it is required to add forward error correction to existing
   applications, for example media streaming applications.  In this
   case, the application protocols must be extended to support this.
   The FEC framework will describe the requirements that application
   protocols must meet in order to be used with the FEC framework.

   This version of this document is a first draft for discussion in the
   FECFRAME working group.





















Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


2.  Terminology

   'FEC' Forward Erasure Correction.

   'AL-FEC' Application Layer Forward Erasure Correction

   'FEC Framework' The protocol framework which is to be defined by
      FECFRAME and for which this document provides requirements.

   'Source data flow' The packet flow or flows to which FEC protection
      is to be applied.

   'Repair data flow' The packet flow or flows carrying forward error
      correction data

   'Source protocol' A protocol used for the source data flow being
      protected - e.g.  RTP.

   'Transport protocol' The protocol used for transport of the source
      data flow being protected - e.g.  UDP, DCCP.

   'Application protocol' Control protocols used to establish and modify
      the source data flow being protected - e.g.  RTSP.

   'FEC Code' An algorithm for encoding data such that the encoded dats
      flow is resiliant to data loss or corruption.

   'FEC Scheme' A specification which defines the additional protocol
      aspects required to use a particular FEC code with the FEC
      framework, or (in the context of RMT), with the RMT FEC Building
      Block.

   'Source Block' the group of source data packets which are to be FEC
      protected as a single block

   'Protection amount' The relative increase in data sent due to the use
      of FEC.














Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


3.  Essential requirements

   Req-10: The FEC Framework shall support a wide range of FEC codes,
      using the abstractions of the FEC Building Block defined in RMT
      [I-D.ietf-rmt-fec-bb-revised] (including short and long block FEC
      codes, systematic and non-systematic codes).  Specifically, the
      FEC Framework shall define the requirements that FEC code
      specifications shall meet in order to be used with the framework,
      re-using, as far as possible, the FEC code specification approach
      and requirements from the FEC Building Block and specifying any
      further requirements that must be met for the FEC Framework.

   Req-20: The FEC Framework shall support a wide range of application
      protocols, using the abstractions of the FEC Building Block
      [I-D.ietf-rmt-fec-bb-revised].  Specifically, the FEC Framework
      shall define the requirements that application protocol
      specifications shall meet in order to be used with the framework,
      re-using, as far as possible, the Content Delivery Protocol
      specification approach and requirements from the FEC Building
      Block and specifying any further requirements that must be met for
      the FEC Framework.

   Req-30: The FEC Framework shall support variable source block sizes,
      including real-time variation of source block size between blocks
      of a given source data flow.

   Req-30: The FEC Framework shall support variable protection amounts,
      including real-time variation of protection amount between blocks
      within a given source data flow.

   Req-40: The FEC Framework shall be independent of the source
      protocols (provided that source protocol uses one of the supported
      transport protocols).

   Req-50: The FEC Framework shall place minimal requirements on the
      application protocols.

   Req-60: The FEC Framework shall support variable source data flow
      rates.

   Req-70: The FEC Framework shall support variable source data flow
      packet sizes.

   Req-80: The FEC Framework shall provide support of combined
      protection of multiple source data flows.






Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


   Req-90: The FEC Framework shall provide support of multiple transport
      protocols for the source data protocols (UDP, DCCP, others ?).

   Req-100: The FEC Framework shall provide support for definition of
      backwards-compatible FEC protocols (i.e. where the source packets
      are not modified in any way).

   Req-110: The FEC Framework shall provide support for different source
      data protocols (RTP, MIKEY, others ?).

   Req-120: The FEC Framework shall shall address the security issues,
      if any, associated with the use of FEC.







































Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


4.  Non-essential requirements

      The FEC Framework should be constructed such that the FEC
      streaming protocol defined by 3GPP in TS26.346 is a valid protocol
      according to the FEC Framework.














































Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   This document defines requirements for the work of the FECFRAME
   working group and includes a requirement that the security
   implications of the use of FEC, if any, should be addressed in that
   work.

6.  References

   [I-D.ietf-rmt-fec-bb-revised]
              Watson, M., "Forward Error Correction (FEC) Building
              Block", draft-ietf-rmt-fec-bb-revised-03 (work in
              progress), January 2006.






































Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


Author's Address

   Mark Watson
   Digital Fountain
   39141 Civic Center Dr.
   Suite 300
   Fremont, CA  94538
   US

   Email: mark@digitalfountain.com









































Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            FECFRAME requirements                June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Watson                   Expires January 1, 2007               [Page 11]


