Network Working Group                                 Patrick Frejborg 
Internet Draft                                            May 28, 2009 
Intended status: Experimental                                         
Expires: November 2009 
                                   
 
                        Hierarchical IPv4 Framework 
                        draft-frejborg-hipv4-02.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 28, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).  
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights 
   and restrictions with respect to this document.





 
 
 
Frejborg 
 




Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   Abstract 

   This draft describes a framework how the current IPv4 address 
   structure can be extended towards a similar hierarchical numbering 
   structure as used in the Public Switched Telephone Network and bring 
   a new level of hierarchy to the routing architecture of Internet. The 
   hierarchical IPv4 framework is backwards compatible with the current 
   IPv4 framework; it will also discuss a method to decouple the 
   location and identifier functions, future applications can make use 
   of the separation. The framework requires extensions to the existing 
   Domain Name System architecture, the existing IPv4 stack of the end 
   systems (hosts) and to routers in the Internet. The framework can be 
   implemented incrementally to the hosts, databases, and routers. 

 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Requirements Notation.........................................3 
   2. Introduction..................................................4 
   3. An overview of the hIPv4 framework............................5 
   4. Mandatory extensions to current architectures (unicast)......11 
   5. The header of a hIPv4 datagram...............................12 
   6. Life of a hIPv4 connection...................................12 
   7. Overlapping Source and Destination ELOC prefixes/ports.......15 
   8. Traceroute considerations....................................16 
   9. Multicast considerations.....................................16 
   10. Traffic engineering considerations..........................17 
   11. Large encapsulated datagrams................................17 
   12. Mobility considerations.....................................18 
   13. Affected Applications and Implications......................19 
   14. The Future Role of the LSR..................................20 
   15. Transition considerations...................................21 
   16. Security Considerations.....................................24 
   17. IANA Considerations.........................................24 
   18. Conclusion..................................................24 
   19. References..................................................24 
      19.1. References.............................................24 
      19.2. Informative References.................................25 
   20. Acknowledgements............................................25 
   Appendix A. Future IPv4 address allocation and routing policies.26 
 




 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

1.   Requirements Notation 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this   
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 









































 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

2. Introduction 

   The hierarchical IPv4 (hIPv4) framework has been developed to address 
   the issues discussed in the [IAB report] from the Routing and 
   Addressing Workshop that was held by the Internet Architecture Board 
   (IAB) on October 18-19, 2006, in Amsterdam, Netherlands.  

   The current addressing (IPv4) and the future addressing (IPv6) 
   schemes of Internet are single dimensional by their nature. This 
   limitation, i.e. the single level addressing scheme, has created some 
   roadblocks for further growth of Internet. If we compare Internet's 
   current addressing schemes to other global addressing or location 
   schemes we can notice that the other schemes use several levels in 
   their structures. E.g. the postal system uses street address, city 
   and country to locate a destination. Also to locate a geographical 
   site we are using longitude and latitude in the cartography system. 
   The other global network, the Public Switched Telephone Network 
   (PSTN), have been build upon a three level numbering scheme that have 
   enabled a hierarchical signaling architecture. By expanding the 
   current IPv4 addressing scheme from a single level to a two level 
   addressing structure most of the issues discussed in the IAB report 
   can be solved. A convenient way to understand the two level 
   addressing scheme of the hIPv4 framework is to compare it to the PSTN 
   numbering scheme (E.164) which uses country codes, national 
   destination codes and subscriber numbers. The Area Locator (ALOC) 
   prefix in the hIPv4 addressing scheme can be considered similar as to 
   the country code in PSTN, i.e. the ALOC prefix locates an area in 
   Internet, the area is called an ALOC realm. The Endpoint Locator 
   (ELOC) prefixes in hIPv4 can be compared to the subscriber numbers in 
   PSTN, i.e. the ELOC is locally unique at the attached ALOC realm - 
   the ELOC can also be attached simultaneously to several ALOCs realms 
   (multi-homing).  

   By inserting the ALOC and ELOC elements as a shim header (similar as 
   in [MPLS] and [RBridge] architectures) between the IPv4 and the 
   transport protocol headers, a hIPv4 header is created. But from the 
   network point of view, the hIPv4 header "looks like" an IPv4 header 
   and thus the current forwarding plane do not need to be upgraded 
   though some minor changes are needed in the control plane (i.e. ICMP 
   extensions). 

   Another important influence source are the report and presentations 
   from the [Dagstuhl] workshop that declared "a future Internet 
   architecture must hence decouple the functions of IP addresses as 
   names, locators, and forwarding directives in order to facilitate the 
   growth and new network-topological dynamisms of the Internet".  

 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   Thus, an identifier element needs to be added to the hIPv4 framework 
   to provide a path for future applications to be able to remove the 
   current dependency of the underlying network layer addressing scheme 
   (local and remote IP address tuples). Host Identify Protocol [HIP] is 
   proposing a new namespace that will decouple the locator and 
   identifier realms from each other. In this document we will focus 
   only on locators but discuss where and why HIP could fit in the hIPv4 
   framework. 

   Some of the design goals of this proposal include: 

   1. The hierarchical IPv4 framework must be backwards compatible with 
      the current IPv4 framework. 

   2. Minimize introduction of totally new protocols or signaling 
      architectures, instead use well-proven protocols and insert 
      extension to protocols where needed. 

   3. Create a hierarchical IPv4 addressing structure which enables a 
      more localized allocation of IPv4 address blocks and therefore the 
      routing table size in the "default-free zone" (DFZ) will be 
      reduced.  

   4. Remove the single IPv4 address space constraint; reuse IPv4 
      address blocks by a hierarchy. 

   5. Improve site mobility, i.e. a site wishes to changes its 
      attachment point to Internet without changing its IPv4 address 
      block.  

   6. Make use of the current forwarding plane (IPv4); introduce a new 
      forwarding plane for only a few routers in an Autonomous System or 
      group of Autonomous Systems.  

   7. Reduce the amount of Network Address Translation (NAT) need for 
      IPv4-to-IPv4 traffic. 

   8. Provide a smooth transition path to the hierarchical IPv4 
      framework. 

3. An overview of the hIPv4 framework 

   In this section we will discuss the roles of the new elements, 
   introduced by the hIPv4 framework, and their dependencies.  

   As mentioned in the introduction section the role of an Area LOCator 
   (ALOC) prefix is similar as to a country code in PSTN. I.e. the ALOC 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   prefix provides a location functionality of an area within an 
   Autonomous System (AS), or an area spanning over a group of AS, in 
   Internet. An AS can have several ALOC prefixes assigned, e.g. due to 
   traffic engineering requirements. The ALOC prefix will be used for 
   routing and forwarding purposes in Internet, thus the ALOC prefix 
   must be globally unique and is allocated from an IPv4 address block. 
   This globally unique IPv4 address block is called the Global Locator 
   Block (GLB). 

   When an area within an AS (or a group of AS) are assigned an ALOC 
   prefix the area has the potential to become an ALOC realm. In order 
   to establish an ALOC realm more elements, further than the ALOC 
   prefix, are needed. One or multiple Locator Swap Routers (LSR) must 
   be attached to the ALOC realm. A LSR element is a node capable of 
   swapping the values of the IPv4 header and the new shim header, 
   called the locator header. The swap mechanism of the headers is 
   described in detail in section 6, step 4. Today's routers do not 
   support the LSR functionality. Therefore the new functionality will 
   most likely be developed on an external device attached to a router 
   belonging to the ALOC realm. The external LSR might be a computer 
   with two interface attached to a router, the first interface 
   configured with the prefix of the ALOC and the second interface with 
   any IPv4 prefix. The LSR do not make us of dynamic routing protocols, 
   neither a forwarding information base (FIB) is needed - the LSR is 
   producing a service, i.e. swapping headers. The swap mechanism is 
   applied on per datagram basis and the information needed to carry out 
   the swap is included in the header of the hIPv4 datagram. Thus a 
   computer with enough computing and I/O resources is sufficient to 
   take the role as a LSR. Later on, the LSR functionality might be 
   integrated into the forwarding plane of a router. One LSR can not 
   handle all the incoming traffic designated for an ALOC realm; it 
   would also create a potential single point of failure in the network. 
   Therefore, several LSRs shall be installed in the ALOC realm and the 
   LSRs shall use the ALOC prefix as their locator and the routers are 
   announcing the ALOC prefix as an Anycast address within the local 
   ALOC realm. Also, the ALOC prefix is advertised throughout the DFZ by 
   BGP mechanisms. The placement of the LSRs in the network will 
   influence on the ingress traffic to the ALOC realm, the LSR is 
   providing "nearest routing" functionality. 

   Since the forwarding paradigm of multicast datagrams is quite 
   different from forwarding unicast datagrams the multicast 
   functionality will have an impact on the LSR. Also, the multicast LSR 
   (mLSR) functionality is not available on today's routers, an external 
   device is needed, and later on the functionality might be integrated 
   to the routers. The mLSR shall take the role of an Anycast RP with 
   MSDP and PIM capabilities, but to forward datagrams a FIB is not 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   required. As with the LSR, the multicast hIPv4 datagrams are carrying 
   all needed information in their headers in order to apply the swap, 
   for details see section 9.  

   The ALOC realm is not yet fully constructed, we can now locate the 
   ALOC realm in Internet but to locate the hosts attached to the ALOC 
   realm a new element is needed, i.e. the Endpoint Locator (ELOC). As 
   mentioned in the introduction section the ELOC prefixes can be 
   considered similar as to the subscriber numbers in PSTN. Actually, 
   the ELOC is not a new element; the ELOC is a redefinition of the 
   current IPv4 address configured at a host. The redefinition is 
   applied because when the hIPv4 framework is fully implemented the 
   global uniqueness of the IPv4 addresses are no longer valid and a 
   more regional address allocation policy of IPv4 addresses can be 
   deployed as discussed in Appendix A. The ELOC prefix will only be 
   used for routing and forwarding purposes inside the local and remote 
   ALOC domain, the ELOC prefix is not used in the intermediate ALOC 
   domains. When a client is establishing a connection to a server 
   residing outside the local ALOC realm the destination IP address 
   field in the IPv4 header of an outgoing datagram is no longer the 
   remote ELOC prefix - instead the remote ALOC prefix is installed in 
   the destination IP address field of the IPv4 header. Because the 
   destination IP address is an ALOC prefix, the intermediate ALOC 
   realms do not need to carry the ELOC prefixes of other ALOC realms in 
   their RIB - it is sufficient for the intermediate ALOC realms to 
   carry only the ALOC prefixes. Outcome is that the RIB and FIB tables 
   at each ALOC realm will be reduced when the hIPV4 framework is fully 
   implemented. The ALOC prefixes are still globally unique and must be 
   installed in the DFZ - thus the service provider can't control the 
   growth of the ALOC prefixes but she/he can control the amount of 
   local ELOC prefixes in her/his local ALOC realm. 

   When the hIPv4 datagram arrives at the remote ALOC realm it will be 
   forwarded to the nearest LSR, since the destination IPv4 address is 
   the remote ALOC prefix. When the LSR has swapped the hIPv4 header, 
   the destination IP address field in the IPv4 header is the remote 
   ELOC, thus the hIPv4 datagram will be forwarded to the final 
   destination at the remote ALOC realm. A host using an ELOC prefix can 
   be attached simultaneously to two different ALOC realms without the 
   requirement to deploy a classical multi-homing solution, for details 
   see section 12.  

   Next, how can we locate the remote ELOC (host) and remote ALOC realm 
   in Internet, also how to assemble the header of the hIPv4 datagram? 
   Another matter is that the addressing structure is no longer single 
   dimensional; instead a second level has been added on top of the old 
   one. It is obvious that the Domain Name System needs to support a new 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   record type so that the ALOC information can be distributed to the 
   hosts. To construct the header of the hIPv4 datagram either the host 
   or an intermediate node (e.g. a proxy) should be used. A proxy 
   solution is complicated, the proxy needs to listen to DNS messages 
   and a cache solution does have scalability issues.  

   A better solution is to extend the current IPv4 stack at the hosts so 
   that the ALOC and ELOC elements are incorporated at the host's stack, 
   backwards compatibility must be preserved. Most of the application 
   will not be aware of the extensions - other applications, such as 
   Mobile IP, SIP, IPsec AH and so on (see section 13) will suffer and 
   can not be used outside their ALOC realm when the hIPv4 framework is 
   fully implemented - unless the applications are upgraded. The reason 
   is that these applications are depending upon the underlying network 
   addressing structure to e.g. identify an endpoint. Since these 
   applications needs to be modified when a new addressing scheme is 
   deployed we should investigate what advantages we can gain by 
   introducing identifier functionality to the hIPv4 framework. Thus, 
   the Host Identifier Protocol [HIP] is briefly discussed in this 
   document. The introduction of HIP solves the "identical connection 
   situation", discussed in section 7. HIP will also enhance mobility 
   and multi-homing solutions, see section 12.
























 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   Definitions of terms 

   Regional Internet Registry (RIR): 

      Is an organization overseeing the allocation and registration of 
      Internet number resources within a particular region of the world. 
      Resources include IP addresses (both IPv4 and IPv6) and autonomous 
      system numbers. 

   Locator:  

     A locator is a name for a point of attachment within the topology 
     at a given layer.  Objects that change their point of attachment(s) 
     will need to change their associated locator(s). In the hIPv4 
     framework two types of locators have been defined, Area Locator 
     (ALOC) and Endpoint Locator (ELOC). 

   Global Locator Block (GLB): 

      An IPv4 address block that is globally unique. 

   Area Locator (ALOC):  

      An IPv4 address assigned to locate an ALOC realm in Internet. The 
      ALOC is assigned by a RIR to a service provider or a multi-homed 
      enterprise. The ALOC is globally unique because it is allocated 
      from the GLB.  

   Endpoint Locator (ELOC):  

      An IPv4 address assigned to locate a host in an ALOC realm. The 
      ELOC block is assigned by a RIR to a service provider or to an 
      enterprise. The ELOC block is only unique in a geographical region 
      or globally unique in a business area defined by the RIRs. The 
      final policy of uniqueness shall be defined by the RIRs. 

   ALOC realm: 

      An area in the Internet with at least one attached Locator Swap 
      Router (LSR), also an ALOC must be assigned to the ALOC realm. The 
      RIB of an ALOC realm holds both local ELOC prefixes and global 
      ALOC prefixes. An ALOC realm exchanges only ALOC prefixes with 
      other ALOC realms.  

       

       
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009               [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   Locator Swap Router (LSR): 

      A router or host which is capable to process the hIPv4 header; 
      once the header is processed the LSR will forward the datagram 
      upon the IPv4 destination address. The LSR must have the ALOC 
      assigned as its locator. 

   Locator header:  

      An 8 byte field consisting of ALOC and ELOC values 

   hIPv4 header:  

      A locator header is inserted between the IPv4 header and the 
      header of the transport protocol, the new header combination is 
      called a hIPv4 header. 

   Identifier: 

      An identifier is the name of an object at a given layer;    
      identifiers have no topological sensitivity, and do not have to 
      change, even if the object changes its point(s) of attachment 
      within the network topology.  

   Provider Independent Address Space (PI-addresses):    

      An IPv4 address block which is assigned by a Regional Internet 
      Registries directly to an end-user organization 

   Provider Aggregatable Address Space (PA-addresses): 

      an IPv4 address block assigned by a Regional Internet Registry to 
      an Internet Service Provider which can be aggregated into a single 
      route advertisement  












 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

4. Mandatory extensions to current architectures (unicast) 

   To implement the hierarchical IPv4 framework some basic rules are 
   needed: 

   1. The DNS architecture must support a new extension, i.e. an A type 
      Resource Record should be able to carry an ALOC prefix. 

   2. The hIPv4 capable host shall have information about the local ALOC 
      value; the local ALOC value can be configured manually or provided 
      via a new DHCP option. 

   3. A globally unique IPv4 address block shall be reserved; this block 
      is called the Global Locator Block (GLB). A service provider can 
      have one or several ALOC prefixes allocated from the GLB. A multi-
      homed enterprise might allocate an ALOC prefix from the GLB. 

   4. ALOC prefixes are announced via current BGP protocol to adjacent 
      service providers and multi-homed enterprises, the ALOC prefixes 
      are installed in the RIB of the DFZ. When the hIPV4 framework is 
      fully implemented only ALOC prefixes are announced between the 
      service providers and multi-homed enterprises.  

   5. A hIPv4 capable ALOC realm must have one or several LSRs attached 
      to its realm. The ALOC prefix is configured as an Anycast IP 
      address on the LSR. The Anycast IP address is installed to 
      appropriate routing protocols in order to be distributed to the 
      DFZ. 

   6. The IPv4 socket API at end hosts must be extended to support local 
      and remote ALOC prefixes. The modified IPv4 socket API must be 
      backwards compatible with the current IPv4 socket API. The 
      outgoing hIPv4 datagram must be assembled by the hIPv4 stack with 
      the local IP address from the socket as the source IP address and 
      the remote ALOC prefix as the destination IP address in the IPv4 
      header. The local ALOC prefix is inserted in the ALOC field of the 
      locator header. The remote IP address from the socket API is 
      inserted in the ELOC field of the locator header. 








 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

5. The header of a hIPv4 datagram 

   0                   1                   2                   3  
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |Version|  IHL  |Type of Service|          Total Length         | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |         Identification        |Flags|      Fragment Offset    | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |  Time to Live |    Protocol   |         Header Checksum       | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                       Source Address                          | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                     Destination Address                       | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                    Options                    |    Padding    | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                          Area Locator                         | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                         Endpoint Locator                      | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
   Area Locator: 32 bits 

   An IPv4 address, the ALOC is assigned by a RIR to a service provider 
   or a multi-homed enterprise with an Autonomous System (AS) number. 
   The ALOC is globally unique because it is allocated from the GLB.  

   Endpoint Locator: 32 bits 

   An IPv4 address, the ELOC block is assigned by a RIR to a service 
   provider or to an enterprise. The ELOC block is only unique in a 
   geographical region or globally unique in a business area defined by 
   the RIRs. The final policy of uniqueness shall be defined by the 
   RIRs. 

    

6. Life of a hIPv4 connection 

   This section provides an example of a hIPv4 connection between two 
   IPv4 hosts; a client and a server residing in different ALOC realms. 

   When the hIPv4 stack is assembling the datagram for transport the 
   hIPv4 stack shall decide if a legacy IPv4 or hIPv4 header is used 
   upon the ALOC information received by a DNS reply. If the client's 
   (local) ALOC value equals the server's (remote) ALOC value there is 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   no need to use the hIPv4 header, because both the client and server 
   reside in the local ALOC realm. The datagram is routed upon the IPv4 
   header since the datagram will not exit the local ALOC realm. When 
   the local ALOC prefix doesn't match the remote ALOC prefix a hIPv4 
   header must be assembled because the datagram needs to be routed to a 
   remote ALOC realm.  

   In the current IPv4 framework, both TCP and UDP protocols calculate 
   their header checksum values with the help of a pseudoheader. The 
   pseudoheader calculation includes value from the IP header, i.e. 
   source IP address, destination IP address and value of the protocol 
   field. By this mechanism more reliability is achieved. To preserve 
   current reliability level the hIPv4 stack shall also include the 
   locator header when calculation of the TCP and UDP pseudoheader is 
   applied. Therefore, a mechanism to identify when to include the 
   values of the locator header in the pseudoheader calculation is 
   needed.  

   TCP and UDP pseudoheader checksum calculation shall be extended to 
   include the locator header. Because routers and hosts are still using 
   the IPv4 framework the devices must detect when a hIPv4 header is 
   used. IPv4 uses protocol values for TCP, UDP, ICMP, GRE, IP-in-IP and 
   so on. It is recommended that new values are reserved for the current 
   IPv4 protocols in the hIPv4 framework. The new protocol values will 
   act as an indicator of the usage of the hIPV4 header. The IPv4 socket 
   API will not be aware of the new protocol values; it is the hIPv4 
   stack at the client that changes the protocol value when a remote 
   ALOC realm connection is established. When the datagram has reached 
   the server the hIPv4 stack changes the protocol value to the 
   appropriate IPv4 value for the socket API. Therefore the application 
   is not aware of new protocol values. 

   How a hIPV4 connection is established follows: 

   1. The client queries the DNS server; the hIPv4 stack notice that the 
      local and remote ALOC doesn't match and therefore must use the 
      hIPv4 header for the connection. The hIPv4 stack of the client 
      must assemble the datagram in the following way: 

       a. change the protocol value to match appropriate hIPv4 value 

       b. local IP address from API -> source IP address field 

       c. remote IP address from API -> ELOC field 

       d. local ALOC prefix -> ALOC field 

 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

       e. remote ALOC prefix-> destination IP address 

   2. Apply checksum calculations, include locator header values for the 
      pseudoheader calculation, when completed the datagram is 
      transmitted.  

   3. The hIPv4 datagram is routed throughout Internet upon the 
      destination IP address of the IPv4 header.  

   4. The hIPv4 datagram will reach the closest LSR of the remote ALOC 
      realm. When the LSR notice that the datagram matches the given 
      local ALOC value the LSR must: 

       a. verify IP and TCP/UDP checksums, include locator header values 
          for the pseudoheader calculation 

       b. replace the source address in the IPv4 header with the ALOC 
          value of the locator header 

       c. replace the destination address in the IPv4 header with the 
          ELOC value of the locator header 

       d. replace the ALOC value in the locator header with the 
          destination IP address of the IPv4 header 

       e. replace the ELOC value in the locator header with the source 
          IP address of the IPv4 header 

       f. decrease TTL with one 

       g. calculate IP and TCP/UDP checksums, include locator header 
          values for the pseudoheader calculation  

       h. forward the datagram upon the destination IP address of the 
          IPv4 header 

   5. The swapped hIPv4 packet is now routed inside the remote ALOC 
      realm upon the new destination IP address of the IPv4 header to 
      the final destination. 

   6. The server receives the hIPv4 datagram, the hIPv4 stack must 
      verify IP and TCP/UDP checksums, include locator header values for 
      the pseudoheader calculation 

   7. The hIPv4 stack of the server must present to the extended IPv4 
      socket API the following: 

 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

       a. change the protocol value to match appropriate IPv4 value 

       b. source IP address -> remote ALOC 

       c. destination IP address ->  local IP address 

       d. ALOC -> local ALOC 

       e. ELOC -> remote IP address 

   8. The server's application will respond to the client and the 
      returning datagram will take almost the same steps, which are 
      steps 1 to 6, as when the client started the session. In step 1 
      the server doesn't need to do a DNS lookup since all information 
      is provided by the datagram. 

7. Overlapping Source and Destination ELOC prefixes/ports 

   Because an ELOC prefix is only significant within the local ALOC 
   realm there is a slight possibility that a connection between two 
   hosts residing in separate ALOC realms might use the same source and 
   destination ELOC prefixes. But the connection is still unique because 
   the two processes communicating over the transport protocol form a 
   logical connection which is uniquely identifiable by the five tuples 
   involved, i.e. by the combination of <protocol, local IP address, 
   local port, remote IP address, remote port>. 

   The connection might no longer be unique when two clients with the 
   same source ELOC prefix residing in two separate ALOC realms are 
   accessing a server locate in a third ALOC realm. In this scenario a 
   possibility exists that the clients will use the same local port 
   value. This situation will cause an "identical connection situation" 
   for the application layer. To overcome this scenario the hIPv4 stack 
   must accept only one unique connection with the help of the ALOC 
   information. If there is an "identical connection situation" - i.e. 
   both clients uses the same values in the five tuples <protocol, local 
   IP address, local port, remote IP address, remote port> - the hIPv4 
   stack shall allow only the first established connection to continue, 
   the following connections must be prohibited and the clients are 
   informed by ICMP notification about the "identical connection 
   situation". 

   With the introduction of HIP, which is inserted between the network 
   and transport layer, the "identical connection situation" can be 
   avoided because the application can either identify the remote 
   endpoint via the globally unique Host Identifier or the Local Scope 
   Identifier. 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

8. Traceroute considerations 

   As long as the traceroute is executed inside the local ALOC realm 
   normal IPv4 traceroute mechanism can be used. As soon as the 
   traceroute exits the local ALOC realm the locator header shall be 
   used in the notifications. Therefore extension to ICMP protocol shall 
   be implemented, the extensions shall be compatible with [RFC4884]. 

9. Multicast considerations 

   Since source and destination IPv4 prefixes are only installed in the 
   RIB of the local ALOC realm there is a constraint with Reverse Path 
   Forwarding (RPF) which is used to ensure loop-free forwarding of 
   multicast packets. The source IP address of a multicast group (S,G) 
   is used against the RFP check. The source IP address can no longer be 
   used as a RFP checkpoint outside the local ALOC realm.  

   To enable RPF globally for a (S,G), the multicast enabled LSR (mLSR) 
   must at the source ALOC realm replace the source IP address with the 
   local ALOC prefix for inter-ALOC multicast streams. This can be 
   achieved if the local LSR act also as an Anycast Rendezvous Point 
   with Multicast Source Discovery Protocol (MSDP) and Protocol 
   Independent Multicast capabilities; with these functionalities the 
   LSR becomes a multicast enabled LSR (mLSR). The sender register at 
   the mLSR and a source tree is established between the sender and the 
   mLSR. When an inter-ALOC realm receiver subscribes to the multicast 
   group the mLSR have to swap the IPv4 multicast datagram in the 
   following way: 

       a. verify IP and UDP checksums, include locator header values for 
          the pseudoheader calculation 

       b. source IP address -> local ALOC 

       c. destination IP address : no changes 

       d. ALOC : no changes 

       e. ELOC : no changes 

       f. decrease TTL with one 

       g. calculate IP and UDP checksums, include locator header values 
          for the pseudoheader calculation  

       h. forward the datagram to the shared multicast tree 

 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   In order for the mLSR to function as described above the sender must 
   assemble the multicast hIPv4 datagram in the following way:  

       a. change the protocol value to match appropriate hIPv4 value 

       b. local IP address from API -> source IP address (S) 
                                    -> ELOC 

       c. remote IP address from API -> destination IP address (G) 

       d. local ALOC -> ALOC 

       e. remote ALOC : not applicable 

   The downstream routers from the mLSR to the receiver will use the 
   source IP address (which value is the source ALOC prefix after the 
   mLSR) in the IPv4 header for RPF verification. In order for the 
   receiver to create RTCP receiver reports all information is provided 
   in the hIPv4 header of the datagram. 

   Because Source Specific Multicast (SSM) and IGMPv3 uses IP addresses 
   in the payload both protocols needs to be modified to support the 
   hierarchical IPv4 framework. 

10. Traffic engineering considerations 

   When hIPv4 framework is fully implemented ingress load balancing to 
   an ALOC realm can be influenced by the placement of LSRs at the 
   realm; a LSR provides "nearest routing" scheme. Also, if RIR policies 
   allows, a service provider can have several ALOC assigned, hence 
   traffic engineering and filtering can be done with the help of ALOC 
   prefixes. E.g. sensitive traffic can be aggregated under one ALOC 
   prefix which is not fully distributed into the DFZ of Internet. If 
   needed an ALOC Traffic Engineering solution between ALOC realms might 
   be developed, i.e. create explicit paths that can be engineered via 
   specific ALOC prefixes. Further studies are needed; first it should 
   be evaluated if there is demand for such a solution. 

11. Large encapsulated datagrams 

   Adding the locator header to an IPv4 datagram in order to create a 
   hIPv4 datagram will increase the size of it but since the datagram is 
   assembled at the host it will not add complications of current Path 
   MTU Discovery (PMTUD) mechanism in the network. The intermediate 
   network between two hosts will not see any difference in the size of 
   datagram; IPv4 and hIPv4 datagram sizes are the same from the network 
   point of view. 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

12. Mobility considerations 

   This section will consider two types of mobility solutions, site 
   mobility and host mobility. 

   Site mobility definition: 

      a site wishes to changes its attachment point to the Internet 
      without changing its IP address block  

   Today multi-homing is the most common solution for enterprises that 
   wishes to achieve site mobility. Multi-homing is one of the key 
   findings behind the growth of the DFZ RIB, see the [IAB report], 
   section 2.1 and 3.1.2. The hIPv4 framework can provide a solution for 
   enterprises to have site mobility without the requirement of 
   implementing a classical multi-homed solution. This new multi-homed 
   solution utilizing PI addresses is depended upon the forthcoming IPv4 
   address allocation policy which is discussed in Appendix A. If the 
   geographical region based IPv4 address block allocation is deployed 
   the enterprise can be concurrently attached to two different Internet 
   service providers (ISP) without the need to implement AS border 
   routing. The ISPs provide their globally unique ALOC prefixes for the 
   enterprise and the IPv4 address block of the enterprise is 
   geographically unique, a PI IPv4 address block. The enterprise can 
   change on per host basis the local ALOC prefix, i.e. from the 
   previous ISP's ALOC prefix to the new ISP's ALOC prefix. Connections 
   initiated at the enterprise needs to be routed to the correct ISP, 
   i.e. the border router of the enterprise needs to apply policy based 
   routing upon the ALOC prefix in the locator header. For connections 
   initiated from the Internet the DNS record for a host needs to be 
   updated, also the local ALOC prefix on the host needs be changed to 
   achieve a symmetric path. Since the border router is enforcing policy 
   based routing upon the ALOC prefix of the locator header the server 
   can apply basic session load balancing over the two ISPs based upon 
   from which ISP the connection has been initiated, i.e. if the server 
   have two valid DNS records with two different ALOC prefixes. The 
   updating rate of DNS records is considered slow but recent studies 
   have shown that this is no longer the case, updates at rates as high 
   as once per second can be achieved, see [DynamicDNS]. Conclusion is 
   that a single-homed enterprise can achieve smooth transition from one 
   ISP to another by only changing the ALOC prefix on the hosts and at 
   DNS records - the local IP addressing (ELOC) scheme remains intact. 
   Also a single-homed enterprise can become multi-homed without 
   implementing AS border routing or to have an own ALOC prefix 
   assigned. If a better session load balancing scheme is required the 
   application should be migrated to a modern transport protocol, i.e. 
   [SCTP], or migrated to make us of HIP which is providing support for 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   multi-homing; both SCTP and HIP might require changes at the 
   application level. 

   Host mobility definition: 

     a host moves relatively rapidly between different networks, 
     changing its IP layer network attachment point  

   Mobile IP [MIP] is used today for IPv4 hosts in order to provide 
   mobility. Mobile IP is an overlay protocol; it is also an application 
   that uses IP addresses in its payload. It is obvious that hIPv4 
   extensions need to be added to the MIP framework. 

   Because hIPv4 framework requires changes to the current IPv4 stack it 
   should be investigate if HIP can be integrated to the hIPv4 stack. 
   The use of HIP is decoupling the application from the IP addressing 
   scheme of the underlying network layer and thus it will be easier to 
   design applications that are more optimized for host mobility. 

13. Affected Applications and Implications 

   There are several applications that are inserting IPv4 address 
   information in the payload of a datagram. Some applications uses the 
   IPv4 address information to create new connections or for 
   identification purposes. This section is trying to list the 
   applications that need to be enhanced; however, this is by no means a 
   comprehensive list. The applications can be divided in four main 
   categories: 

   o  Applications based on raw sockets, a raw socket is receiving 
      datagrams containing the complete header in comparison to the 
      other sockets that only receives the payload.  

   o  Applications needed to enable the hIPv4 framework, i.e. DNS and 
      DHCP databases which must be extended to support ALOC prefixes. 

   o  Applications that insert IPv4 addresses to the payload and uses 
      the IPv4 address for setting up new connections or for some kind 
      of identification. The application belonging to this category can 
      not set up connections to other ALOC domains until extensions have 
      been incorporated. Within the local ALOC domain there are no 
      restrictions since the current IPv4 scheme is still valid. The 
      following applications have been identified: 

        o SIP; IPv4 addresses are inserted in the SDP, Contact and Via 
          header 

 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

        o Mobile IP; the mobile node uses several IPv4 addresses during 
          the registration process 

        o IPsec AH; designed to detect alterations at the IPv4 packet 
          header 

        o RSVP; RSVP messages are sent hop-by-hop between RSVP-capable 
          routers to construct an explicit path 

        o ICMP; notifications needs to be able to incorporate ALOC 
          information and assemble the hIPv4 header in order to be 
          routed back to the source 

        o Source Specific Multicast; the receiver must specify the 
          source address of the sender 

        o IGMPv3; a source-list is included in the IGMP reports 

        o Applications related to security, such as firewalls, must be 
          enhanced to support ALOC prefixes and the new protocol 
          parameters  

   o  Applications that will function with FQDN but many uses an IPv4 
      addresses instead, such as ping, traceroute, telnet and so on. The 
      CLI syntax needs to be upgraded to support ALOC and ELOC 
      information via the extended socket API. 

14. The Future Role of the LSR  

   The LSR was added to the framework in order to provide a smooth 
   transition from the current IPv4 framework to the hierarchical IPv4 
   framework, i.e. a major forklift of the current forwarding plane is 
   avoided by the introduction of the LSR element. In the future, the 
   LSR can be left as such in the network, if preferred, or the LSR 
   functionality can be expanded towards the edge when routers are 
   upgraded due to their natural lifecycle process. Once an upgrade of a 
   router is required because of e.g. increased demand for bandwidth, 
   the modified forwarding plane might support concurrently IPv4 and 
   hIPv4 forwarding - and the LSR functionality can be pushed towards 
   the edge (the ultimate goal is to have LSR functionality integrated 
   in the hosts). This is accomplished by adding extension to the 
   current routing protocols, both IGP and BGP. When a LSR receives a 
   hIPv4 datagram where the destination IPv4 address matches the local 
   ALOC prefix the LSR shall - contrary to the tasks defined in section 
   6, step 4 - lookup the ELOC field in the locator header and compare 
   this value against the FIB. If the next-hop entry is LSR capable the 
   datagram shall be forwarded upon the ELOC value. If the next-hop is a 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   legacy IPv4 router the LSR must apply the tasks defined in section 6, 
   step 4 and once completed forward the datagram upon the new IPv4 
   destination address. 

   Once the routers from the first ingress LSR to the final destination 
   host is upgraded to support hIPv4 forwarding there exist no longer a 
   need to implement LSR functionality in the network of the remote ALOC 
   realm, the datagram is forwarded as such to the host's extended 
   stack. The hIPv4 stack must check that the ELOC value matches its 
   local IPv4 address, because the destination IPv4 address matched the 
   local ALOC prefix. Then the hIPv4 stack of the destination must 
   present to the extended IPv4 socket API the following: 

       a. change the protocol value to match appropriate IPv4 value 

       b. source IP address -> no change 

       c. destination IP address ->  not applicable 

       d. ALOC -> remote ALOC 

       e. ELOC -> destination IP address 

   Multicast LSR (mLSR) functionality remains in the network; it is an 
   extension to the Anycast RP with MSDP element. For connections inside 
   the ALOC domain legacy IPv4 forwarding plane is kept in place. 

15. Transition considerations 

   The hIPv4 framework is not introducing any new protocols that would 
   be mandatory to carry out the transition from IPv4 to hIPv4; instead 
   extensions are added to existing protocols. The introduction of an 
   identifier require a new protocol, i.e. HIP, which is currently in 
   experimental status - the lack of the new identifier protocol will 
   not create a roadblock to carry out the transition to hIPv4. Note, 
   experimental deployments of HIP are available today and hIPv4 is only 
   a theoretical study.  

   The hIPv4 framework requires extensions to the current IPv4 stack, 
   databases and to some applications that use IP addresses in the 
   payload but the current forwarding plane in Internet remains intact 
   apart from that a new forwarding element (the LSR) is required to 
   create an ALOC realm. Extensions to the IPv4 stack, databases, 
   applications that uses IP addresses in the payload and routers can be 
   deployed in parallel with the current IPv4 framework. Even genuine 
   hIPv4 connections can be established between hosts though the current 
   single dimensional Internet structure is still present. When will the 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   single dimensional routing architecture then be upgraded to a two 
   level architecture? The author thinks there are two possible tipping 
   points: 

   o  When the RIB of DFZ is getting close to the capabilities of 
      current forwarding plane - who will pay for the upgrade? Or will 
      the service provider only accept ALOC prefixes from other service 
      providers and avoid capital expenses? 

   o  When the depletion of IPv4 addresses is causing enough problems 
      for enterprises 

   The biggest risk why hIPv4 framework will not succeed is the short 
   timeframe before the expected depletion of the IPv4 address space 
   occurs. Also, will enterprise give up their global allocation of the 
   current IPv4 address block they have gained? Another risk is, will 
   the enterprises and residences carry out an upgrade of their hosts 
   and security nodes?  

   The media has announced several times the meltdown of Internet and 
   the depletion of IPv4 addresses - but the potential chaos has been 
   postponed several times and the general public has lost their 
   interest in these announcements. Perhaps other approaches could be 
   worthwhile to study, instead try to find other valuable arguments 
   that the general public could be interested in, such as: 

   o  Not all hosts needs to be upgraded, only those hosts that are 
      directly attached to the Internet. These kinds of hosts are 
      portable laptops, smart mobile phones, proxies, and DMZ/frontend 
      servers. But the most critical servers, the backend servers where 
      enterprises keep their most critical business applications do not 
      need to be upgraded; the backend servers should not be reached at 
      all from Internet - only from the Intranet - and this 
      functionality can be achieved with the hIPv4 framework, since it 
      is backwards compatible with the current IPv4 stack. 

   o  Mobility, it is estimated that the demand for applications that 
      performs well over the wireless access network will increase. 
      Introduction of HIP opens up a new possibility to create new 
      solutions and applications that are optimized for mobility. HIP 
      requires an upgrade of the hosts' stack; if possible the hIPv4 
      stack should also contain HIP features. Applications designed for 
      mobility could bring competitive benefits for the enterprises. 




 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   o  The intermediate nodes in the network do not need to be upgraded, 
      the current forwarding plane can still be used and the hIPv4 
      datagram is capable to traverse most of the current NAT 
      implementations. The benefit is that the current network equipment 
      can be preserved at the service providers, enterprises and 
      residences. That means that the carbon footprint is a lot lower 
      compared to other solutions. Many enterprises do have green 
      programs and many residential users are concerned with the global 
      warming issue. 

   o  The migration from IPv4 to IPv6 will increase the RIB and FIB 
      throughout DFZ, will it require a new upgrade of the forwarding 
      plane as discussed in the IAB report is unclear. Most likely an 
      upgrade is needed, the outcome of deploying IPv4 and IPv6 
      concurrently is that the routers need to have larger memories for 
      the RIB and FIB - every globally unique prefix is installed in the 
      routers that are participating in the DFZ. Since the enterprise is 
      reserving one or several RIB/FIB entries on every router in the 
      DFZ it means that the enterprise is increasing the power 
      consumption of Internet, thus increasing the carbon footprint. And 
      many enterprises are committed to green programs - if hIPv4 gets 
      deployed, the power consumption of Internet will not grow as much 
      as compared in an IPv4 to IPv6 transition scenario.  

   o  Another issue, if the migration from IPv4 to IPv6 occurs, is that 
      the routers in the DFZ most likely need to be upgraded to more 
      expensive routers - as discussed in the IAB report. In the wealthy 
      part of the world, where a large penetration of Internet users is 
      already present, the service provider can pass along more easily 
      the costs of the upgrade to their subscribers - with a 
      "wealthy/high penetration" ratio the cost will not grow that much 
      that the subscribers would abandon Internet. But in the less 
      wealthy part of the world, where there is usually a lower 
      penetration of subscribers, the cost of the upgrade cannot that 
      easily be covered - a "less wealthy/low penetration" ratio could 
      have a dramatic increase on the cost that needs to be passed along 
      to the subscribers. And thus fewer subscribers could afford to get 
      connected to the Internet. For the global enterprises and the 
      enterprises in the less wealthy part of the world, this scenario 
      could mean less potential customers and there could be situations 
      when the nomads of the enterprises can't get connected to 
      Internet. This is also not fair; every human being should have a 
      fair chance to be able to enjoy the Internet experience - and the 
      wealthy part of the world should take this right into 
      consideration. Many enterprises are committed to Corporate Social 
      Responsibility programs. 

 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

16. Security Considerations 

   Hijacking of a single ELOC prefix by longest match from another ALOC 
   realm is no longer possible since the prefixes are separated by a 
   locator, the ALOC. To apply a hijack of a certain prefix the whole 
   ALOC realm must be routed via a bogus ALOC realm. Studies should be 
   carried out with the Secure Inter-Domain Routing (SIDR) workgroup if 
   the ALOC prefixes can be protected from hijacking. 

17. IANA Considerations 

   TBD 

18. Conclusion 

   This document provides a high level overview of the hierarchical IPv4 
   framework which could be build in parallel with the current single 
   dimensional Internet by implementing extensions at several 
   architectures. Implementation of the hIPv4 framework will not require 
   a major service window break in the Internet, neither at the internal 
   networks of enterprises. Basically, the hIPv4 framework is an 
   evolution of the current IPv4 framework. For connections inside an 
   ALOC realm the IPv4 framework can be used in the future and for 
   inter-ALOC realm connections the hIPv4 framework is needed. 

   Though there is a long journey ahead and many things that need to be 
   sorted out the hierarchical IPv4 framework looks promising. The 
   transition can be attractive for the enterprises since the hIPv4 
   framework doesn't create a catch-22 situation, it introduces 
   functionalities (related to site mobility) that could better serve 
   their business models, it slows down the expected growth of 
   Internet's carbon footprint and it is inline with the Corporate 
   Social Responsibility programs that many enterprises have 
   implemented. 

    

19. References 

   19.1. References 

   [IAB report] Meyer, D., Zhang, L., Fall, K., "Report from the IAB 
             Workshop on Routing and Addressing", RFC 4948, September 
             2007 



 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   [MPLS]   Rosen, E., Tappan, D., Fedorkow, G., Rekther, Y.,  
             Farinacci, D., Li, T., Conta, A., "MPLS Label Stack 
             Encoding", RFC 3032, January 2001 

   [RFC4884] Bonica, R., Gan, D., Tappan, D., Pignataro, C. "Extended 
             ICMP to support Multi-Part Messages", RFC 4884, April 2007 

   [RFC1918] Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, B., Karrenberg, D., de Groot, G.J., 
             Lear, E. "Address Allocation for Private Internets", RFC 
             1918, February 1996 

   [HIP]    Moskowitz, R., Nikander, P. "Host Identity Protocol (HIP) 
             Architecture", RFC 4423, May 2006 

   [SCTP]   Stewart, R. "Stream Control Transmission Protocol", RFC 
             4960, September 2007 

   [MIP]    Perkins, C. "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344, 
             August 2002 

    

   19.2. Informative References 

   [RBridge] Perlman, R., "RBridges, Transparent Routing", Infocomm, 
             2004  

   [DynamicDNS] Pappas, A., Hailes, S., Giaffreda, R., "Mobile Host 
             Location Tracking through DNS", University College London 
             and BTexact Technologies, 2002 

   [Dagstuhl] Arkko, J., Braun, M.B., Brim, S., Eggert, L., Vogt, C., 
             Zhang, L. "Perspectives Workshop: Naming and Addressing in 
             a Future Internet", Dagstuhl, 2009 

    

    

20. Acknowledgements 

   The author would like to acknowledge Aki Anttila and Antti Jarvenpaa 
   for giving helpful feedback.  




 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

Appendix A. Future IPv4 address allocation and routing policies 

   This section is not part of the draft, it is used to discuss and 
   study how the hIPv4 framework could influence on the IPv4 address 
   allocation and routing policies to ensure that the new framework will 
   enable some re-usage of IPv4 address blocks. It is the Regional 
   Internet Registries (RIRs) that shall define the final policies. 

   When the hIPv4 framework is fully implemented every ALOC realm can 
   have a full IPv4 address space - except the GLB - to allocate ELOC 
   prefix blocks from. There are some implications though. In order for 
   an enterprise to achieve site mobility, i.e. to change service 
   provider without changing its IP addressing scheme, the enterprise 
   should implement an Autonomous System (AS) solution with ALOC prefix 
   at the attachment point to the service provider. Larger enterprises 
   do have the resources to implement AS border routing; most of the 
   large enterprises have already implemented multi-homing solutions. 
   The small and midsize enterprises (SME) may not have the resources to 
   implement AS border routing, or the implementation introduces 
   unnecessary costs for the SME. Also if every SME needs to have an 
   ALOC prefix it will have an impact on the RIB at the DFZ, the RIB 
   will be populated with a huge amount of ALOC prefixes.  

   It is clear that a compromise is needed. A SME is usually single-
   homed and the SME should be able to reserve a PI address block from 
   the RIR without the need to be forced to create an ALOC realm, i.e. 
   implement a LSR solution and AS border routing. The PI address block 
   is no longer globally unique, the SME can only reserve the PI address 
   block for the country or countries where it is active or has it 
   attachment point to Internet. The attachment point rarely changes to 
   another country; therefore it is sufficient that the PI address block 
   is locally unique. When the SME is replacing its Internet service 
   provider the SME do not have to change its ELOC addressing scheme - 
   only the local ALOC prefix at the hosts are changed. The internal 
   traffic at an SME does not use the ALOC prefix, the internal routing 
   is applied by the IPv4 header and thus the internal routing and 
   addressing architectures are preserved.  

   Mergers and acquisitions of SME can cause IP address conflicts, 
   because the PI address block is hereafter only locally unique. If a 
   SME in country A overtakes a SME in country B there is a slight 
   chance that both SME can have overlapping IPv4 addresses. An idea to 
   address this scenario is to categorize the SME upon their business 
   areas. It is highly unlikely that a SME in, e.g. agriculture business 
   area will ever acquire a SME in the medical business area, or vice 
   versa. When a SME applies for a PI address block the RIR could verify 
   to which business area the SME operates in and do a global check in 
 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 26] 

Internet-Draft       Hierarchical IPv4 Framework              May 2009 
    

   order to give the SME a globally unique IP address block from that 
   business area. Large enterprises also merge, but since the large 
   enterprises are usually multi-homed the merger of networks can be 
   rapidly carried out with the help of ALOC realm routing. During a 
   merger usually the infrastructure of a company is slowly incorporated 
   to the other company's infrastructure, this integration usually 
   requires redesign of the network architecture and therefore in most 
   cases the ALOC realm routing can be removed. 

   Finally, residential users will receive only PA addresses. When a 
   residential user changes a service provider the residential user has 
   to replace the IP addresses. A PA IP address block is no longer 
   globally unique, every Internet service provider can use the PA 
   address blocks at their ALOC realms. 

   The hIPv4 framework will provide re-usage of IPv4 address blocks, the 
   globally unique reservation of IPv4 address block shall be replaced 
   by a geographical region and/or business area specific allocation. 
   The biggest challenge is when merger and acquisitions are carried 
   out, there is a possibility that overlapping of IP addresses could 
   still happen but the hIPv4 framework reduces this problem to a 
   minimum compared what is seen today during mergers with the usage of 
   private IP addresses [RFC1918]. 

    

 

Authors' Addresses 

   Patrick Frejborg 
   Email: pfrejborg@gmail.com 














 
 
Frejborg              Expires November 28, 2009              [Page 27] 

