


Network Working Group                                            M. Jork
Internet-Draft                                                Reef Point
Expires: January 7, 2008                                        A. Atlas
                                                                  Google
                                                                 L. Fang
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                            July 6, 2007


                        LDP IGP Synchronization
                       draft-jork-ldp-igp-sync-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).











Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


Abstract

   In networks depending on edge-to-edge establishment of MPLS
   forwarding paths via LDP, blackholing of traffic can occur in
   situations where the IGP is operational on a link and thus the link
   is used for IP forwarding but LDP is not operational on that link for
   whatever reason.  This document describes a mechanism to avoid
   traffic loss due to this condition without introducing any protocol
   changes.










































Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


1.  Introduction

   LDP [RFC3036] establishes MPLS LSPs along the shortest path to a
   destination as determined by IP forwarding.  In a common network
   design, LDP is used to provide label switched paths throughout the
   complete network domain covered by an IGP such as OSPF [RFC2328] or
   IS-IS [ISO.10589.1992], i.e. all links in the domain have IGP as well
   as LDP adjacencies.

   A variety of services a network provider may want to deploy over an
   LDP enabled network depend on the availability of edge to edge label
   switched paths.  In a L2 or L3 VPN scenario for example, a given PE
   router relies on the availability of a complete MPLS forwarding path
   to the other PE routers for the VPNs it serves.  This means that
   along the IP shortest path from one PE router to the other, all the
   links need to have operational LDP sessions and the necessary label
   binding must have been exchanged over those sessions.  If only one
   link along the IP shortest path is not covered by an LDP session, a
   blackhole exists and services depending on MPLS forwarding will fail.
   This might be a transient or a persistent error condition.  Some of
   the reasons for it could be

   o  a configuration error,

   o  an implementation bug,

   o  the link has just come up and has an IGP adjacency but LDP has
      either not yet established an adjacency or session or distributed
      all the label bindings.

   The LDP protocol itself has currently no means to indicate to a
   service depending on it whether there is an uninterrupted label
   switched path available to the desired destination or not.


















Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


2.  Proposed Solution

   The problem described above exists because LDP is tied to IP
   forwarding decisions but no coupling between the IGP and LDP
   operational state on a given link exists.  If IGP is operational on a
   link but LDP is not, a potential network problem exists.  So the
   solution described by this document is to prevent a link from being
   used for IP forwarding as long as LDP is not fully operational.  This
   has some similarity to the mechanism specified in [RFC3137] which
   allows an OSPF router to advertise that it should not be used as a
   transit router.  One difference is that [RFC3137] raises the link
   costs on all (stub) router links, while the mechanism described in
   here applies on a per-link basis.

   In detail: when LDP is not "fully operational" (see below) on a given
   link, the IGP will advertise the link with maximum cost to avoid any
   transit traffic over it if possible.  In the case of OSPF this cost
   is LSInfinity (16-bit value 0xFFFF) as proposed in [RFC3137].  Note
   that the link is not just simply removed from the topology because
   LDP depends on the IP reachability to establish its adjacency and
   session.  Also, if there is no other link in the network to reach a
   particular destination, no additional harm is done by making this
   link available for IP forwarding at maximum cost.

   LDP is considered fully operational on a link when an LDP hello
   adjacency exists on it, a suitable associated LDP session (matching
   the LDP Identifier of the hello adjacency) is established to the peer
   at the other end of the link and all label bindings have been
   exchanged over the session.  The latter condition can not generally
   be verified by a router and some heuristics may have to be used.  A
   simple implementation strategy is to wait some time after LDP session
   establishment before declaring LDP fully operational in order to
   allow for the exchange of label bindings.  This is typically
   sufficient to deal with the link when it is being brought up.  LDP
   protocol extensions to indicate the complete transmission of all
   currently available label bindings after a session has come up are
   conceivable but not addressed in this document.

   The mechanism described in this document does not entail any protocol
   changes and is a local implementation issue.  However, it is
   recommended that both sides of a link implement this mechanism to be
   effective and to avoid asymmetric link costs which could cause
   problems with IP multicast forwarding.

   The problem space and solution specified in this document have also
   been discussed in an IEEE Communications Magazine paper [LDP-Fail].





Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


3.  Applicability

   Example network scenarios that benefit from the mechanism described
   in here are MPLS VPNs and BGP-free core network designs where traffic
   can only be forwarded through the core when LDP forwarding state is
   available throughout.

   In general, the proposed procedure is applicable in networks where
   the availability of LDP signaled MPLS LSPs and avoidance of
   blackholes for MPLS traffic is more important than always choosing an
   optimal path for IP forwarded traffic.  Note however that non-optimal
   IP forwarding only occurs for a short time after a link comes up or
   when there is a genuine problem on a link.  In the latter case an
   implementation should issue network management alerts to report the
   error condition and enable the operator to address it.

   The usefulness of this mechanism also depends on the availability of
   alternate paths with sufficient bandwidth in the network should one
   link get costed out due to unavailability of LDP service over it.

   On broadcast links with more than one IGP/LDP peer, the cost-out
   procedure can only be applied to the link as a whole and not an
   individual peer.  So a policy decision has to be made whether the
   unavailability of LDP service to one peer should result in the
   traffic being diverted away from all the peers on the link.


























Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


4.  Interaction With TE Tunnels

   In some networks, LDP is used in conjunction with RSVP-TE which sets
   up traffic-engineered tunnels.  The path computation for the TE
   tunnels is based on the TE link cost which is flooded by the IGP in
   addition to the regular IP link cost.  The mechanism described in
   this document should only be applied to the IP link cost to prevent
   any unnecessary TE tunnel reroutes.

   In order to establish LDP LSPs across a TE tunnel, a targeted LDP
   session between the tunnel endpoints needs to exist.  This presents a
   problem very similar to the case of a regular LDP session over a link
   (the case discussed so far): when the TE tunnel is used for IP
   forwarding, the targeted LDP session needs to be operational to avoid
   LDP connectivity problems.  Again, raising the IP cost of the tunnel
   while there is no operational LDP session will solve the problem.
   When there is no IGP adjacency over the tunnel and the tunnel is not
   advertised as link into the IGP, this becomes a local issue of the
   tunnel headend router.
































Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


5.  Security Considerations

   A DoS attack that brings down LDP service on a link or prevents it
   from becoming operational on a link will now additionally cause non-
   optimal IP forwarding within the network.  However, as discussed
   above this is considered beneficial as it prevents MPLS traffic from
   being dropped.












































Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


7.  References

   [RFC3036]  Andersson, L., Doolan, P., Feldman, N., Fredette, A., and
              B. Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 3036, January 2001.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC3137]  Retana, A., Nguyen, L., White, R., Zinin, A., and D.
              McPherson, "OSPF Stub Router Advertisement", RFC 3137,
              June 2001.

   [ISO.10589.1992]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Intermediate system to intermediate system intra-domain-
              routing routine information exchange protocol for use in
              conjunction with the protocol for providing the
              connectionless-mode Network Service (ISO 8473)",
              ISO Standard 10589, 1992.

   [LDP-Fail]
              Fang, L., Atlas, A., Chiussi, F., Kompella, K., and G.
              Swallow, "LDP Failure Detection and Recovery", IEEE
              Communications Vol.42 No.10, October 2004.




























Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Markus Jork
   Reef Point Systems
   8 New England Executive Park
   Burlington, MA  01803
   US

   Phone: +1 781 359 5071
   Email: mjork@reefpoint.com


   Alia Atlas
   Google, Inc.
   One Broadway, 7th Floor
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   US

   Email: akatlas@google.com


   Luyuan Fang
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   300 Beaver Brook Road
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   US

   Email: lufang@cisco.com























Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           LDP IGP Synchronization               July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Jork, et al.             Expires January 7, 2008               [Page 11]

