



Network Working Group                             P. Pillay-Esnault, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                  A. Clemm
Intended status: Informational                                    Huawei
Expires: September 14, 2017                                 D. Farinacci
                                                             lispers.net
                                                                D. Meyer
                                                                 Brocade
                                                          March 13, 2017


Requirements for Generic Resilient Identity Services in Identity Enabled
                                Networks
                     draft-padma-ideas-req-grids-00

Abstract

   This document describes requirements for the Generic Resilient
   Identity Services infrastructure for Identity-Enabled Networks.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 14, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Specification of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Definition of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Requirements for Generic Resilient Identity Services (GRIDS)    5
     5.1.  Mapping Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Identity Services and Identifiers . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.3.  Subscription Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.4.  Distribution and Redundancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.5.  Scale and Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.6.  GRIDS Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.7.  Ability to support multiple instances . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.8.  GRIDS Extensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       5.8.1.  Grouping Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.8.2.  Metadata Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   This document specifies requirements for Generic Resilient ID
   Services (GRIDS) that provide a cornerstone of Identity-Enabled
   Networks.  GRIDS includes services to maintain mappings between
   Identifiers and Locators and to resolve mappings by Identifier.  In
   addition, GRIDS includes services to manage the lifecycle of
   Identifiers as used in an Identity-Enabled Network, specifically
   services to register Identifiers.

   There are additional services that GRIDS can be extended with.
   Examples include services to maintain metadata about endpoints that
   are referenced by Identifiers as well as support for Identity-based
   network access control.  However, in order to not overburden GRIDS
   development, this document focuses on core requirements that will be
   mandatory to support for GRIDS.  Requirements for add-on features
   will be specified in future documents.





Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   The requirements are rooted in and derived from the problem statement
   and use case documents for Identity Enabled Networks
   [IDEAS-PS][IDEAS-USE].

2.  Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Definition of Terms

   This document makes use of terms which for the most part have been
   already defined in the problem statement draft of IDEAS [IDEAS-PS].
   They are included here for reader convenience.  In case of any
   discrepancies between the two drafts, the problem statement draft
   overrides.

      E.164: An ITU-T recommendation that defines the international
      public telephone numbering plan.

      Entity : An entity is a communication endpoint.  It can be a
      device, a node, or a (software) process, that needs to be
      identified.  An entity may have one or multiple Identifiers
      simultaneously.  An entity is reached by the resolution of one or
      more of its Identifiers to one or more Locators.

      Entity Collection: A set of entities with its own Identifier,
      e.g., a multicast group, or an ad-hoc vehicular network that needs
      to be uniquely identified (e.g., a train entity may represent a
      Closed User Group (CUG) and may contain all the passengers'
      devices that share the same fate for connectivity).

      Generic Resilient Identity Services (GRIDS): GRIDS is a set of
      services to manage the lifecycle of IDs, to map and resolve
      Identifiers and Locators, and to associate metadata (META) with
      entities and entity collections.  It is a distributed system that
      stores the ID, the associated LOC(s), and metadata (META) in the
      form of tuples (ID, LOC, and META).

      GRIDS-IS (GRIDS Identity Services): The subset of GRIDS that is
      responsible for managin the lifecycle of Identifiers and
      Identities.

      GRIDS-MS (GRIDS Mapping Services): The subset of GRIDS that is
      responsible for mapping and resolving Identifiers and Locators.





Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


      GRIDS-SS (GRIDS Subscription Services): The subset of GRIDS that
      lets clients subscribe to information updates.

      Identifier (ID): denotes information to unambiguously identify an
      entity within a given scope.  There is no constraint on the
      format, obfuscation or routability of an ID.  The ID may or may
      not be present in the packet whose format is defined by ID-based
      protocols.

      Identifier-based (ID-based): When an entity is only reachable
      through one or more communication access then a protocol or a
      solution is said to be ID-based if it uses an ID-LOC decoupling
      and a mapping system (MS) as base components of the architecture.

      Identity: the essence of "being" of a specific entity.  An
      Identity is not to be confused with an Identifier: while an
      Identifier may be used to refer to an entity, an Identifier's
      lifecycle is not necessarily tied to the lifecycle of the Identity
      it is referencing.  On the other hand, the Identity's lifecycle is
      inherently tied to the lifecycle of the entity itself.

      Identity-capable (ID-capable): An application is said to be ID-
      capable if it makes use of an Identifier of an entity to establish
      communication.  For example, an application that initiates its
      sessions using an ID.  An application may use an IP-address as a
      proxy for an ID if the network resolves this ambiguity.  We regard
      such an application as being ID-capable.

      IDentity Enabled Networks (IDEAS): IDEAS are networks that support
      the Identifier/Locator decoupling.  Reaching an entity is achieved
      by the resolution of Identifier(s) to Locator(s).

      IMEI: International Mobile Equipment Identity, a unique digit code
      used to identify a mobile device.

      Locator (LOC): denotes information that is topology-dependent and
      which is used to forward packets to a given entity attached to a
      network.  An entity can be reached using one or multiple Locators;
      these Locators may have a limited validity lifetime.

      Metadata (META): Metadata is data about an Identity.  The metadata
      may contain information such as the nature of the entity for
      example.

      Scope: denotes the domain of applicability or usability of an ID.
      A scope may be limited (e.g., considered local with geographic
      proximity, or private within an administrative domain) or be
      global.



Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


      User Equipment (UE): A user equipment is an entity per definition
      in [IDEAS-PS]

      5G: Fifth generation wireless broadband technology [NEWS-3GPP].

4.  Background

   The key components of GRIDS are GRIDS Mapping Services, or GRIDS-MS,
   and GRIDS Identity Services, or GRIDS-IS.

   GRIDS-MS provides services to maintain and resolve mappings between
   Identifiers and Locators.

   GRIDS-IS provides services to register Identifiers and maintain
   bindings between Identifiers and Identities.

   In the following, requirements are denoted by REQ-xx=n, where "xx"
   refers to a specific requirements section and "n" refers to the
   number of the requirement.  In some cases, optional requirements are
   specified and designated as OPT-xx-n.  Non-requirements (i.e. aspects
   that might be considered candidates for requirements, but that are
   specifically not required to be supported at this point for various
   reasons) are designated as NON-REQ-xx-n.

5.  Requirements for Generic Resilient Identity Services (GRIDS)

5.1.  Mapping Services

   REQ-MS-10: GRIDS-MS needs to maintain mappings between Identifiers
   and Locators.

   REQ-MS-20: GRIDS-MS needs to provide services that allow clients to
   resolve a Locator for a given Identifier.

   REQ-MS-30: GRIDS-MS MUST be able to support different models for
   authoritative mapping ownership, authorizing only the legitimate
   owner (or an entity acting on the owner's behalf) to update mapping
   data.  Specifically, GRIDS-MS MUST be able to support (1) a model in
   which clients of a certain Identity can update mapping data for their
   Identifier, and (2) a model in which clients with a certain Locator
   can update mapping data with that Locator.

   REQ-MS-40: GRIDS-MS MUST be able to support policy-based
   authorization for access to mapping services and to mapping
   information associated with specific Identities.

   Not every client will be entitled to every piece of mapping
   information.  This allows GRIDS to be set up such that information is



Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   only available on a "need-to-know" basis to clients, facilitating the
   protection of private information for systems involved.

5.2.  Identity Services and Identifiers

   REQ-IS-10: GRIDS MUST support IDs with the following characteristics

   o  Variable length ID

   o  Fixed length

   o  Structured

   o  Unstructured

   REQ-IS-20: GRIDS MUST provide proper separation between the concepts
   of "Identity" and "Identifier".

   An Identity is synonymous to the being of an entity that can
   communicate in an Identity-Enabled Network.  Identity information
   needs to be strongly secured and is generally kept private.  Identity
   is represented by a special type of Identifier that is never exposed
   over-the-wire in regular data plane communications in the network.
   An Identifier, on the other hand, is a reference to an Identity
   respectively associated Entity.  An Identifier will in generally be
   public and constitutes how an Identity will be known to others,
   including other Entities that wish to communicate with the Entity
   designated by the Identifier.  Identifiers MAY also be included in
   data plane packets.  An example of an Identity would be the IMEI that
   is associated with a cell phone that is assigned by the equipment
   manufacturer.  An example of an Identifier, on the other hand, would
   be the E.164 telephone number that is associated with the device.  An
   Identity can be associated with multiple Identifiers.  A Locator is a
   concept that is associated with an Identity; however, Locators are
   resolved by Identifier.  In other words, an Identity's Locator is the
   same and returned regardless which Identifier is used in a mapping or
   resolution request to refer to it.

   REQ-IS-30: GRIDS MUST support IDs that refer to User Endpoints of a
   given Identity.

   REQ-IS-40: GRIDS MUST support a model in which multiple Identifiers
   can be associated with the same Identity.  Identifier referring to
   the same Identity will resolve to the same Locator.  GRIDS-IS MUST
   NOT have inherent limitations with regards to the number of
   Identifiers that may be simultaneously associated with the same
   Identity.




Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   REQ-IS-50: GRIDS-IS MUST support the secure registration of new
   Identities.

   "Secure" refers to mechanisms such as strong encryption and mutual
   authentication.

   REQ-IS-60: GRIDS-IS MUST support the secure unregistration /
   revocation of an Identity

   REQ-IS-70: GRIDS-IS MUST support the registration of new Identifiers
   (independent of the associated Identity)

   REQ-IS-80: GRIDS-IS MUST support the unregistration / revocation of
   Identifiers (independent of unregistration of the associated
   Identity)

   REQ-IS-90: GRIDS MUST allow for the possibility to support other IDs
   (i.e.  IDs not tied to the Identity of a User Endpoint) in the
   future, such as Group IDs (see also GRIDS Extensions).

   REQ-IS-100: GRIDS-IS MUST support a model in which Identifiers are
   registered by a client representing the Identity that the ID is
   associated with (e.g., a User Endpoint).  GRIDS-IS MUST provide
   mechanisms that prevent usage of identifiers in ways that result in
   amgibuities with regards to determining an Identifier's associated
   Identity.  To this end, GRIDS-IS MUST either prevent duplicate
   assignment of IDs, specifically assignment of the same ID to multiple
   Identities, or in case duplicate assignment occurs, ensure that an
   ID's associated Identity is clear depending on the context, such as a
   local scope.

   It is to be determined whether GRIDS-IS should prevent recycling of
   IDs that had been assigned previously, even if since unregistered, or
   if it should provide a warning when such an ID is reassigned.

   REQ-IS-110: GRIDS-IS MUST support a model in which Identifiers are
   assigned and registered by an authority.

5.3.  Subscription Services

   REQ-SS-10: GRIDS-SS MUST allow clients to subscribe to updates for
   information that they are entitled to resolve.  Specifically, GRIDS-
   SS MUST provide support for pushing updates about Locators for
   mappings that are of interest to a client with minimal incurred
   delay.






Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


5.4.  Distribution and Redundancy

   REQ-DR-10: GRIDS MUST be robust and very highly available.

   REQ-DR-20: Any maintenance or upgrades to GRIDS MUST NOT affect
   availability of GRIDS services.

   REQ-DR-30: GRIDS MUST support implementation using a distributed and
   redundant architecture.  Specifically, failure of individual
   components MUST NOT bring down GRIDS as a whole.

   As this is a requirements document, this document does not mandate a
   particular implementation architecture.  That said, it should be
   noted that for any mapping system to be successful, it will need to
   be robust, distributed and provide redundancy.  The mapping system
   design and architecture must avoid being single points of failure and
   MUST enforce resiliency.

   Furthermore, it should be noted that the format of the Identifier may
   or may not play a role in how any underlying servers used to
   implement GRIDS might be distributed.  It is conceivable that such
   distribution and placement of GRIDS components and data maintained by
   GRIDS will be affected by usage patterns.

5.5.  Scale and Performance

   REQ-SP-10: GRIDS MUST support very large scale.

   It is anticipated that GRIDS MUST be able to handle from the start
   billions of distinct Identifiers and mapping entries and allow for
   substatiantial future growth.  While this document makes no
   statements about GRIDS architecture, it should be noted that GRIDS
   will likely not be provided by monolithic infrastructure but by means
   of multiple distributed and interconnected components.

   REQ-SP-20: GRIDS MUST scale in a way such that increases in the
   number of Identifiers and mapping entries do not negatively degrade
   performance.  Performance characteristics SHOULD be independent of
   scale.  If such constant scale performance characteristics cannot be
   provided, performance MUST NOT degrade worse than on logaritmically
   based on the number of Entities.

   REQ-SP-30: A characterization of GRIDS performance at scale, as well
   as associated GRIDS performance objectives, MUST include the
   following parameters:






Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   o  TR: Time to resolve a Locator by Identifier, in three variants to
      characterize normal case, performance determinism, and "bottom
      case" behavior:

      *  mean

      *  variation

      *  bottom percentile

   o  TM: Time to update a mapping entry (i.e. time until mapping entry
      first registers with GRIDS), in three variants to characterize
      normal case, performance determinism, and "bottom case" behavior:

      *  mean

      *  variation

      *  bottom percentile

   o  TS: Time for mapping entry update to propagate to subscribers of a
      given mapping (i.e. clients who are subscribed to be notified of
      mapping updates of a given Identifier), in three variants to
      characterize normal case, performance determinism, and "bottom
      case" behavior:

      *  mean

      *  variation

      *  bottom percentile

   o  SRT: Sustained resolution throughput for resolution requests, in
      multiple variants to distinguish overall throughput and throughput
      as perceived by individual clients:

      *  overall

      *  for individual client

   o  SRM: Sustained mapping update throughput, in multiple variants to
      distinguish overall throughput and throughput as perceived by
      individual clients:

      *  overall

      *  for individual client




Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   REQ-SP-40: Characterization of performance MUST furthermore include
   information on scale at which the performance numbers are observed,
   such as number of Identifiers.

   It is acknowledged that specific implementations may differ in terms
   of performance characteristics they can accomplish.  Specific
   performance objectives against these parameters MAY be articulated at
   a later point.  It is possible that such objectives will depend on
   the use case and that such use cases could result in specific
   qualification requirements imposed on GRIDS implementations for
   particular deployment scenarios.  Furthermore, it is acknowledged
   that additional performance parameters can be articulated in addition
   to the ones specified here.

   It should be noted that this document does not mandate a particular
   implementation architecture.  However, in order to be able to meet
   the ambitious performance and scale requirements imposed by GRIDS, we
   note that an architecture that leverages principles of distribution,
   hierarchy, and aggregation may help to achieve these goals.
   Specifically, we note that in order to meet low latency goals,
   architectural considerations SHOULD include support for predictive
   and proactive dissemination and caching of data to locations that are
   close to clients that need to consume and interact with it.
   Conceivably, this may also involve application of data analytics and
   machine learning techniques.

5.6.  GRIDS Security

   REQ-SEC-10: GRIDS needs to be robust against direct and indirect
   attacks.  If any component of GRIDS is attacked, the system needs to
   degrade gracefully.

   REQ-SEC-20: GRIDS The addition and removal of components of the
   mapping system must be performed in a secure matter so as to not
   violate the integrity and operation of the system and service it
   provides.

   REQ-SEC-30: GRIDS MUST authorize any requests directed at it.  This
   includes requests that alter data maintained by GRIDS, as well as
   requests to retrieve data from GRIDS.

   REQ-SEC-40: GRIDS MUST authenticate clients.

   REQ-SEC-50: GRIDS MUST support some sort of audit trails.
   Specifically, GRIDS SHOULD log any requests being served and retain
   such logs, themselves properly secured, for a minimum (to-be-
   determined) time interval.  In addition, GRIDS SHOULD at a minimum
   support per-client statistics (such as counter and rate information



Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   about resolution requests) and per-Identifier statistics (such as
   counters for accesses involving a specific Identifier).

   REQ-SEC-60: Any Identity information MUST be encrypted.
   Specifically, Identity information MUST NOT (i.e., must never) be
   transmitted in the clear between GRIDS and a client.  (Note the
   distinction between "Identity" and "Identifier".  While Identity
   information MUST be protected and highly security sensitive, the same
   stringent requirements generally do not apply to Identifiers.)

   In addition, Identity information MUST NOT be included in dataplane
   communications.

   OPT-SEC-70: Encryption of GRIDS messages is optional.  Specifically,
   it is optional to provide confidentiality of the requesters and the
   information they are requesting.  (Note the exception regarding
   Identity information; Identity information MUST always be encrypted).

   REQ-SEC-80: GRIDS MUST support cryptographic signing of information
   that it provides to allow clients to verify if the provided
   information is authentic.

   REQ-SEC-90: GRIDS MUST support message rate-limiting and other
   heuristics must be part of the foundational support of the mapping
   system to protect GRIDS from sudden overloaded conditions and
   mitigate the effects of potential attacks.

5.7.  Ability to support multiple instances

   REQ-MI-10: GRIDS SHOULD be deployable in a private space and provide
   data isolation.  For example, GRIDS MUST NOT require a company to
   expose all of its ID as public IDs if the company does not wish to do
   so.

   Because Identifiers are unique only within a given GRIDS instance, it
   should be noted that by using multiple isolated instances of GRIDS,
   it is conceivable that overlapping IDs can be supported.  However
   this is not encouraged.  One way in which this can be avoided is by
   by allocating private ranges for experimental use in the ID name
   space, and requiring GRIDS to not assign any IDs in an allocated
   Identifier space.

5.8.  GRIDS Extensions

   GRIDS MUST be designed in such a way to allow future extensions.  The
   following are examples of extensions that GRIDS will likely have to
   support (and which likely will be specified) in the future, but whose
   support is not required from the outset.



Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


5.8.1.  Grouping Support

   GRIDS MAY support Group IDs that represent groupings of User
   Endpoints.  There are multiple applications as well as multiple types
   of groupings, for example administrative groupings (used to
   facilitate management), groupings that represent collections of User
   Endpoints that temporarily or permanently share the same fate (such
   as devices in the same railroad car that all use a communications
   gateway with the same locator), and groupings that represent
   multihomed endpoints (which include endpoints that mutually protect
   each other in case of failures).

   For Group IDs to be supported, GRIDS will have to support
   requirements that include the following:

   o  Resolution of a group Identifiers returns list of all Locators of
      Identifiers in the ID Group

   o  Group ID Management Services: Adding and Removing IDs from the
      group, as well as querying group members

5.8.2.  Metadata Support

   A mapping server could be a place to store metadata of interest that
   will facilitate deploying new capabilities such as context awareness
   in next generation applications and protocols.  As always there are
   tradeoffs on the type of metadata stored and its usage.  It is
   assumed that the metadata use is directly related to the use cases
   described in the document.  For this reason, GRIDS MAY support
   metadata extensions that allow to associate metadata with a given
   Identity.  For metadata to be supported, GRIDS will have to support
   requirements that include the following:

   o  Metadata Management Services that allow a client to associate
      metadata with a given Identity

   o  Metadata Retrieval Services that allow a client to retrieve
      metadata for a given Identifier

   o  Support for the definition and enforcement of policies that guide
      who is authorized to access (retrieve and modify) metadata

   o  Support for differentiation for different types of metadata, for
      example, public metadata that is generally accessible (such as the
      type of endpoint of a given Identity) vs private metadata that is
      accessible only on a need-to-know basis.





Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


6.  Security Considerations

   Due to the sensitivity of Identity tied to Identifier and location
   data there is a need to pay attention to security ramifications.  In
   particular, the security goals should include confidentiality,
   possible encryption for integrity of sensitive data and privacy.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

8.  Contributors

   This present document is based on an extract of the first version of
   the draft.  The authors and their affiliations on the original
   document are: D.  Farinacci (lispers.net), D.  Meyer (Brocade), D.
   Lake (Cisco Systems), T.  Herbert (Facebook), M.  Menth (University
   of Tuebingen), Dipenkar Raychaudhuri (Rutgers University), Julius
   Mueller (ATT) and Padma Pillay-Esnault (Huawei).

   There are two companion documents also extracted from the -00 version
   of this document: Problem Statement in IDEAS [IDEAS-PS] and GRIDS
   Requirements [IDEAS-USE] which regroups all the authors above.

   Uma Chunduri

   Rutgers University: Parishad Karimi and Shreyasee Mukherjee

9.  Acknowledgments

   This document was produced using Marshall Rose's xml2rfc tool.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  Informative References









Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   [IDEAS-PS]
              Pillay-Esnault, P., Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C.,
              Fioccola, G., and A. Nennker, "Problem Statement for
              Identity Enabled Networks", March 2017,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-padma-ideas-
              problem-statement/>.

   [IDEAS-USE]
              Pillay-Esnault, P., Farinacci, D., Herbert, T., Jacquenet,
              C., Lake, D., Menth, M., Meyer, D., and D. Raychaudhuri,
              "Use Cases for Identity Enabled Networks", March 2017,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-padma-ideas-use-
              cases-00/>.

   [NEWS-3GPP]
              3GPP, "3GPP News",
              <http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news>.

Authors' Addresses

   Padma Pillay-Esnault (editor)
   Huawei
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara,  CA 95050
   USA

   Email: padma.ietf@gmail.com


   Alexander Clemm
   Huawei
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara,  CA 95050
   USA

   Email: ludwig@clemm.org


   Dino Farinacci
   lispers.net
   San Jose  California
   USA

   Email: farinacci@gmail.com







Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                                                March 2017


   Dave Meyer
   Brocade

   Email: dmm@1-4-5.net















































Pillay-Esnault, et al. Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 15]
