Internet Engineering Task Force                               SIGTRAN WG
Internet Draft                                  G. Sidebottom, J. Yoakum
draft-sidebottom-ips7-00.txt                              Nortel Networks
June 18, 1999
Expires: January 2000


                  Open Architecture for IP/SS7 Interworking

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are
working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


                                 ABSTRACT


         This memo defines an open architecture for interworking of
         Internet and PSTN Signaling System 7 control networks, including
         services, supporting protocols and internal Signaling Gateway
         functions.

1 Introduction

This memo defines an open architecture for IP/SS7 interworking,
identifying services that would be provided by an IP/SS7 (IPS7)
Signaling Gateway (SG), the supporting protocols needed - some
of which are being addressed through the SIGTRAN Working Group -
and supporting internal SG functions, which are not subject to
standardization.  This memo is being submitted in hopes of 
providing direction for future protocol work in IETF.





Sidebottom                                                      [Page 1]

Internet Draft                  IPS7                       June 18, 1998


2. IP-to-SS7 (IPS7) Basic Services

The following sections identify a set of services that should
be provided by the SG and other IPS7 supporting systems in 
order to provide high performance, high availability interworking
of IP and SS7 networks and applications.


2.1 Networking Control Services

The following are services dealing with network control to 
support transport of messages between IPS7 systems.

- Transport Path Availability Management (TPAM)

Management of IP transport paths between SGs and IP
telephony elements to support high availability of services.
transport paths between SGs and IP telephony elements

- IP Node Maintenance (IPNM)

Capability to coordinate availability and failure recovery 
of the SGs and associated IP telephony elements such as MGCs 
in addition to the transport elements.

- SS7 Network Management (SSNM)

Capability of extending SS7 MTP signaling network management
principles to MGCs and other IP telephony elements to enable
seamless end-to-end management.

2.2 Call Control Services

The following are services provided for interworking of call
control signaling between SS7 and IP applications.

- ISUP Tunneling (ITUN)

Signaling gateway (SG) functionality and signaling gateway-media
gateway controller (MGC) protocol to support the encapsulation
and transfer of ISUP messages between SGs and MGCs

- Call Control Gateway Function (CCGF)

Provides gateway functionality between different call control
protocols used in the IP and PSTN domains.



Sidebottom                                                      [Page 2]

Internet Draft                  IPS7                       June 18, 1998


2.2 Intelligent Network Services

The following are services provided in support of Intelligent
Network or equivalent services being provided across both IP
and PSTN domains.

- SCCP/TCAP Tunneling (STUN)

SG functionality and SG-IP telephony element protocol to
support the encapsulation and transfer of SCCP/TCAP messages
between SGs and MGCs or other IP telephony elements

- Service Control Gateway Function (SCGF)

Provides Intelligent Network (IN) services level gateway
functionality between the IP and PSTN domains

- TCAP Transactions over IP (TCIP)

Protocol supporting the transport of TCAP transactions directly
over IP between MGCs and IP telephony elements


3. Supporting Protocols

There are a number of protocols now being defined, and more that
will need to be defined in order to support IPS7 interworking,
including both transport and functional protocols.

3.1 SIGTRAN Activities

- Signaling Common Transport Protocol (SCTP)

An IP transport protocol to support the reliable, ordered
delivery of PSTN signaling payloads and supporting protocols.
Currently an activity in the SIGTRAN Working Group.

This protocol should support functions such as:

     - Reliable Transport of Signaling Protocols (RTSP)

     Compensation for IP network limitations (e.g., packet loss, 
     device failure) sufficient to meet SS7 performance requirements

     - Signaling Traffic Load Distribution (STLD)

     Distribution of signaling traffic across
     multiple transport paths, i.e., MGC to PSTN and between IP
     telephony elements

Sidebottom                                                      [Page 3]

Internet Draft                  IPS7                       June 18, 1998

In addition to SCTP, there need to be a set of adaptation 
protocols that support mapping of SS7 signaling to the common
transport mechanism over IP:

- SS7 Link Adaptation Protocol

Adaptation protocol to enable use of IP transport between
SGs that emulates an SS7 link between SS7 entities.

- Signaling Gateway Associated Signaling

Adaptation protocol supporting the transport of F-link based SS7
signaling received at an Media Gateway (MG) to an MGC for
further processing

Signaling Gateway Direct Signaling

Adaptation protocol supporting transport of SS7 A/B-link based
SS7 signaling from an SS7 Signal Transfer Point through the SG 
terminating on the MGC for call processing.


3.2 PINT Activities

PINT protocol work (and the new PIN activity) has resulted in
definition of protocol that would support an SCGF function 
attaching PSTN and IP networks.  The PINT activity has resulted
in definition of the PINT Profile for SIP and SDP. 


3.3 Independent Activities

The following protocols are not being addressed by IETF
Working Groups:

- Signaling Secure Association Protocol 

IP network application protocol enabling registration,
authentication and accounting for entities involved in
signaling transport.

- Overload Control (OVLC)

Protocol between an MGC or other IP telephony element and an
SG supporting the SG control of the offered call or transaction
load to a node in the IP domain from the PSTN



Sidebottom                                                      [Page 4]

Internet Draft                  IPS7                       June 18, 1998

4. SG Internal Functions

The protocols above need to be supported within the SG by a
set of internal functions that would not be standardized.  The
following list of functions is provided as a means of 
structuring further discussion or investigation of IPS7
protocol requirements.

- IP Quality of Service Function (IPQF)

SG functionality enabling utilization of IP QoS mechanisms
in signaling

- IP Secure Association Function (IPSF)

IP network level and/or transaction level function enabling
secure communication between trusted entities involved

- Signaling Gateway Screening Function (SGSF)

SG support of an SS7 gateway screening function

- Signaling Gateway Mediation Function (SGMF)

SG support of an 'application firewall' function operating at
the ISUP/TCAP level

- Signaling Protocol Conversion Function 

A stateless function at the application layer that maps or
translates signaling messages across the SG to converge the
number and variations of the protocols supported at IP entities

6 Acknowledgements


7 Bibliography

   [1] <draft-ietf-sigtran-framework-arch-03.txt>, work in progress.

   [2] <draft-ietf-sigtran-mdtp-06.txt>, work in progress.

   [3] <draft-ietf-pint-profile-04.txt>, work in progress







Sidebottom                                                      [Page 5]

Internet Draft                  IPS7                       June 18, 1998


8 Author's Contact Information

Greg Sidebottom
Nortel Networks
3685 Richmond Rd,
Nepean, Ontario 
Canada  K2H5B7
gregside@nortelnetworks.com




This document expires January 2000.




































Sidebottom                                                   [Page 6]

