
Network Working Group                                W A Simpson, Editor
Internet Draft                                                Daydreamer
expires in six months                                      November 1995


                     Domain Name System Delegation
                  draft-simpson-dns-delegation-00.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is an independent submission.  Comments should be
   submitted to the namedroppers@internic.net mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material, or to cite them other than as a ``working draft''
   or ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the internet-drafts Shadow
   Directories on:

      ftp.is.co.za (Africa)
      nic.nordu.net (Europe)
      ds.internic.net (US East Coast)
      ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast)
      munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim)



Abstract

   This document provides information on the organizational structure of
   the Domain Name System (DNS), specifically the top-level domain
   names.

   This document is a rewrite and update of RFC-1591.




Simpson                  expires in six months                  [Page i]
DRAFT                       ICMP Delegation                November 1995


1.  Introduction

   The Internet Activities Board (IAB), also known as the Internet
   Architecture Board, is responsible for the coordination of Internet
   Activities [RFC-1601].  The IAB is responsible for editorial
   management and publication of the Request for Comments (RFC) document
   series, and for administration of the various Internet assigned
   numbers.

   The IAB has designated an Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
   to coordinate the registration of Internet protocol numbers, the top
   level Domain Names, and many other parameters used in the Internet.
   IANA discretion in the execution of these duties is explicitly
   limited to technical and engineering considerations.

   The IAB has designated a separate Internet Secretariate to coordinate
   meetings, publish minutes and drafts, and administer funds related to
   the coordination of the Internet.



2.  The Top Level Structure of the Domain Names

   In the Domain Name System (DNS) naming of computers, there is a
   hierarchy of names.  The root of the system is unnamed, and is
   usually represented by a trailing dot ".", as at the end of a
   sentence.

   The small set of names which are registered at the root are called
   "primary-level domain names" (1LDN).  Under each 1LDN may be created
   a hierarchy of names, sometimes called "secondary-level domain names"
   (2LDN), "tertiary-level domain names" (3LDN), and so forth.



2.1.  Root

   The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) has principle
   responsibility for maintaining the root of the Domain Name System
   (DNS).  IANA is responsible for oversight of both operation and
   security of the DNS root.  IANA has sole authority to create or
   remove a 1LDN delegation, or transfer delegation to another party
   which meets the established criterion.

   To this end, the number of primary-level domain names registered at
   the root is deliberately kept within humanly managable limits.  Only
   a few hundred root entries are anticipated.




Simpson                  expires in six months                  [Page 1]
DRAFT                       ICMP Delegation                November 1995


   Day-to-day database storage and transaction activity may be
   distributed to other organizations.  However, it is not anticipated
   that the root will be updated by external registration authorities.



2.1.1.  Servers

   The DNS root is maintained and distributed to servers from IANA.
   These servers must be continuously available world-wide, and enjoy
   multiply-connected network topological distribution.

   Technical considerations restrict the number of root servers.  The
   DNS UDP datagrams can support about 16 such servers.  The servers are
   currently in the domain root-servers.net.

   Another technical consideration is the load placed on the servers.
   To promote cached operation, primary root servers should refuse DNS
   requests from systems not named as Name Servers (NS) in their
   delegation.

   Operation of primary root servers is a voluntary service to the
   Internet community.  When there are more than enough volunteers, IANA
   will select sites that are well distributed topologically.
   Consideration will also be given to technical considerations such as
   proximity to Internet exchanges, and demonstrated capability to
   operate such servers.



2.1.2.  Establishment

   A new 1LDN is usually created and its management delegated to a
   "designated manager" all at once.

   Root domain delegations must demonstrate a significant world-wide
   constituency, and must serve a broad spectrum of the community.  Each
   1LDN should have at least 6 servers distributed over multiple
   continents.

   Delegations must provide a Charter with clear membership guidelines.
   Each 1LDN must be open to all qualifying applicants on a non-
   discriminatory basis.

   Requests for new or changed 1LDN delegation records should be
   submitted to root-delegation@iana.net.  The proposed charter will be
   posted as an internet-draft, and a 28 day Last Call will be issued by
   the Internet Secretariate.  IANA will make its decision based on the



Simpson                  expires in six months                  [Page 2]
DRAFT                       ICMP Delegation                November 1995


   results of the Last Call.  Successful applications will be published
   by the RFC-Editor.



2.1.3.  Termination

   Requests for termination of 1LDN delegation records should be
   submitted to root-delegation@iana.net.  A 28 day Last Call will be
   issued by the Internet Secretariate.  IANA will make its decision
   based on the results of the Last Call.



2.2.  One Letter 1LDN

   Currently, there are no single alphabetic, numeric, or symbolic
   letter domains.

   Operation of single letter alphabetic domains will be distributed by
   lottery.  Each year 9 alphabetic domains will be randomly paired with
   volunteer registries (the third year only 8 will be distributed).  No
   registry may operate more than one such domain.

   Details are described in a separate charter.



2.2.1.  Servers

   These domain servers are operated on a voluntary basis.  Usually, the
   primary server for a one letter domain is co-located with one of the
   root-servers.



2.3.  Two Letter 1LDN

   Most of the first level domains are two-letter country codes taken
   from the ISO standard 3166.  Additional two letter codes are
   maintained on an historical basis.

   The country code domains (for example, FR, NL, KR, US) are each
   organized by an administrator for that country.  At their discretion,
   these administrators may further delegate the management of portions
   of their naming tree.  There is a wide variation in the name
   structure.  In some countries the structure is very flat.  In others
   there is substantial structural organization.



Simpson                  expires in six months                  [Page 3]
DRAFT                       ICMP Delegation                November 1995


   In some country domains the second levels are generic categories
   (such as AC, CO, GO, and RE), in others they are based on political
   geography, and in still others organization names are listed directly
   under the country code.

   The organization for the US country domain is described in [RFC-
   1480].



2.3.1.  Servers

   These domain servers are operated on a voluntary basis by the country
   administrators, performing a public service on behalf of the Internet
   community.



2.4.  Three Letter and Longer 1LDNs

   Longer 1LDNs are available for domains that cross geopolitical
   boundaries, that have not been recognized by its native country, or
   that choose for some other reason to be independent.

   Each of these 1LDNs was created for a general category of
   organizations.  Some are network related (Net and Int), some are
   historic (ARPA, Gov, Mil), some are commercial (Com, Corp, Inc, Ltd),
   and others are organizational (Edu, Org)

   Generally, under the generic 1LDNs the structure is very flat.  That
   is, many organizations are registered directly under the 1LDN, and
   any further structure is up to the individual organizations.

   Unfortunately, this has engendered significant administrative and
   engineering problems.  In particular, administrative, competitive,
   language and naming difficulties.

   There have been serious scaling problems.  Certain popular 1LDNs have
   required tens of thousands of updates per month at a single registry,
   rather than having the updates distributed throughout the DNS across
   many registries.

   These problems are ameliorated by separating the server and registry
   functions.  With the advent of DNS Security and Dynamic Update
   capability, it is recently possible to allow multiple registries to
   update the same 1LDN servers.





Simpson                  expires in six months                  [Page 4]
DRAFT                       ICMP Delegation                November 1995


2.4.1.  Servers

   These domain servers are operated on a voluntary basis.  When there
   are more than enough volunteers, IANA will select sites that are well
   distributed topologically.  Consideration will also be given to
   technical considerations such as proximity to Internet exchanges, and
   demonstrated capability to operate such servers.  Usually, these
   servers are co-located with some of the root-servers.



Security Considerations

   Separating delegation of domain servers from sub-domain registration
   requires a robust DNS Security service.  This is beyond the scope of
   this specification.



Author's Address

   Questions about this memo can also be directed to:

      William Allen Simpson
      Daydreamer
      Computer Systems Consulting Services
      1384 Fontaine
      Madison Heights, Michigan  48071

      Bill.Simpson@um.cc.umich.edu
          bsimpson@MorningStar.com (prefered)




















Simpson                  expires in six months                  [Page 5]
DRAFT                       ICMP Delegation                November 1995


                           Table of Contents


     1.     Introduction ..........................................    1

     2.     The Top Level Structure of the Domain Names ...........    1
        2.1       Root ............................................    1
           2.1.1  Servers .........................................    2
           2.1.2  Establishment ...................................    2
           2.1.3  Termination .....................................    3
        2.2       One Letter 1LDN .................................    3
           2.2.1  Servers .........................................    3
        2.3       Two Letter 1LDN .................................    3
           2.3.1  Servers .........................................    4
        2.4       Three Letter and Longer 1LDNs ...................    4
           2.4.1  Servers .........................................    5

     SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS ......................................    5

     AUTHOR'S ADDRESS .............................................    5
































