
     Internet Draft                                                   M. Barnes 
     Document: draft-barnes-midcom-mib-00.txt                  Nortel Networks 
                                                                 D. Harrington 
                                                            Enterasys Networks 
                                                                M. Stiemerling 
     Category: Standards Track                                 NEC Europe Ltd. 
     Expires: September 2003                                       March 2003 
      
                 Managed Objects for Middlebox Communications (MIDCOM)  
          
     Status of this Memo  
         
        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
        provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
             
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
        Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups 
        may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
             
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
        and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
        time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
        or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
             
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
             http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
             
     Abstract  
         
        This document describes and defines the managed objects for 
        configuration of middleboxes. The scope of the middleboxes to which 
        these managed objects apply is limited to NATs and Firewalls.  However, 
        the MIB module as defined by this document is intended to provide a 
        baseline for the configuration of other types of middleboxes. The 
        applicability of existing Management Information Base (MIB) modules to 
        the MIDCOM requirements, framework and semantics is described. 
        Additional managed objects are defined to satisfy the entirety of the 
        MIDCOM requirements, framework and semantics, providing a complete 
        MIDCOM MIB for NATs and Firewalls.  
       
       
     Table of Contents 
         
        1. SNMP Management Framework......................................2 
        2. MIDCOM Overview and SNMP Applicability.........................2 
        3. SNMP and the MIDCOM data model.................................3 
           3.1 Secure Communications......................................5 
           3.2 Device Configuration.......................................5 
           3.3 Service Configuration......................................6 
           3.4 Policy Coordination........................................7 
           3.5 Policy Specification.......................................8 
        4. Applicability of existing MIBs.................................8 
        5. Additional MIDCOM specific managed objects.....................9 
        6. Security Considerations........................................9 
        Normative References..............................................9 
        Informative References...........................................10 
        Full Copyright Statement.........................................11 
            
      
      
     Barnes,et.al.           Expires û August 2003                [Page 1] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
     Overview 
      
        This intent of this document is to define a Management Information base 
        (MIB) for configuration of middleboxes. The scope of the middleboxes to 
        which this MIB is specifically applied is limited to NATs and Firewalls.  
        However, this MIB is intended to be extensible and provide a baseline 
        for the development of managed objects for configuring other types of 
        middleboxes.  
         
        Section 1 provides an overview of the SNMP Management Framework. Section 
        2 provides further background on SNMP and its applicability to the 
        MIDCOM Protocol Framework, Requirements and semantics.   
         
        Section 3 provides a high level overview of some existing mibs 
        potentially relevant and reusable, which satisfy the MIDCOM requirements 
        and semantics, and relate to the MIDCOM architecture and framework.   
         
        Section 4 provides a detailed discussion of existing MIBs, defining the 
        level of applicability to the MIDCOM protocol requirements, framework 
        and semantics and re-usability for the MIDCOM MIB.   
         
        Section 5 defines the additional MIDCOM specific managed objects 
        required to satisfy some of the requirements and to provide a linkage 
        between the existing MIBs applicable to MIDCOM. 
      
      
     Conventions used in this document  
             
        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
        "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
        document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. 
          
      
     1. SNMP Management Framework 
           
        For a detailed overview of the documents that describe the current 
        Internet-Standard (SNMP) Management Framework, please refer to section 7 
        of RFC 3410 [RFC3410]. 
         
        Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the 
        Management Information Base or MIB.  MIB objects are generally accessed 
        through the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). Objects in the 
        MIB are defined using the mechanisms defined in the Structure of 
        Management Information (SMI).  This memo specifies a MIB module that is 
        compliant to the SMIv2, which is described in STD 58, RFC 2578 
        [RFC2578], STD 58, RFC 2579 [RFC2579] and STD 58, RFC 2580[RFC2580]. 
         
     2. MIDCOM Overview and SNMP Applicability 
         
       The MIDCOM architecture and framework [RFC3303] defines a model in which 
       trusted third parties can be delegated to assist middleboxes in 
       performing their operations, without requiring application intelligence 
       be embedded in the middleboxes. This trusted third party is referred to 
       as the MIDCOM Agent.  The MIDCOM protocol is defined between the MIDCOM 
       agent and middlebox.   
      
      
       The SNMP management framework provides functions equivalent to those 
       defined by the MIDCOM framework, although there are a few architectural 
       differences. 
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 2] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
        
        For SNMP, application intelligence is captured in MIB modules, rather 
        than in the messaging protocol. MIB modules define a data model of the 
        information that can be collected and configured for managed 
        functionality. The SNMP messaging protocol transports the data in a 
        standardized format without needing to understand the semantics of the 
        data being transferred. The endpoints of the communication understand 
        the semantics of the data.  
         
        Traditionally, the SNMP endpoints have been called Manager and Agent. An 
        SNMP manager is an entity capable of generating requests and receiving 
        notifications, and a SNMP agent is an entity capable of responding to 
        requests and generating notifications. As applied to the MIDCOM 
        framework, the SNMP Manager corresponds to the MIDCOM agent and the SNMP 
        Agent corresponds to the Middlebox.  
      
        The MIDCOM protocol is divided into three phases, per section 4 of 
        [RFC3303]: 
          o Session Setup 
          o Run-time (involving real-time configuration of the middlebox) 
          o Session Termination  
        A MIDCOM session is defined to be a lasting association between a MIDCOM 
        agent and a middlebox. The MIDCOM agent should initiate the session 
        prior to the start of the application. Although the SNMP management 
        framework does not have the concept of a session, session-like 
        associations can be established through the use of managed objects. 
        Requests from the MIDCOM agent to the Middlebox would be performed using 
        write access to managed objects defined in MIB modules. The middlebox 
        (SNMP agent) would respond to requests by sending an SNMP response 
        message indicating success or failure at modifying the managed objects. 
        The MIDCOM agent (SNMP manager) can verify this information by reading 
        or polling the corresponding managed objects, if desired. 
         
        The MIDCOM Protocol semantics [MDCSEM] defines two basic transaction 
        types: request transactions and notify transactions. SNMPv3 uses the 
        architecture detailed in [RFC3411], where all SNMP entities are capable 
        of performing certain functions, such as the generation of requests, 
        response to requests, the generation of asynchronous notifications, the 
        receipt of notifications, and the proxy-forwarding of SNMP messages. 
        SNMP is used to read and manipulate a virtual database (the MIB) which 
        is composed of objects representing commands, controls, status, and 
        statistics, which are defined in managed-application-specific MIB 
        modules. 
         
        Application-specific mib modules can be defined at varying levels of 
        abstraction. At the lowest level, vendor-specific, device-specific 
        parameters may be defined, for instance, to configure a specific model 
        of firewall. At a higher level, a mib module may define an abstracted 
        view of firewall functionality that can be used to specify a firewall 
        policy, which an implementation can translate into the necessary 
        parameters to configure the specific model of firewall on which the 
        abstract mib is implemented. At a higher level yet, a mib module may 
        define service policies or business policies that end up being 
        translated into more detailed instructions, possibly into the more 
        detailed mib module data schemas. It is common practice to have one mib 
        module point to other mib modules that contain less/more concrete 
        conceptual representations. 
      
     3. SNMP and the MIDCOM data model 
         
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 3] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
        This section provides a high level description of the categories of data 
        required to satisfy the MIDCOM requirements and semantics as it relates 
        to existing SNMP mib models. Wherever possible, mib designers should 
        attempt to reuse functionality provided by existing mibs.  
         
        SNMP for MIDCOM can leverage the data schemas of many existing mib 
        models designed to permit secure communications, configuration of 
        devices, configuration of services, policy coordination abstractions, 
        and the specification of policies. As well as specifying policies, 
        MIDCOM must verify that policies are being enforced, and many existing 
        mibs provide monitoring capabilities that can be applied to MIDCOM 
        functionality.  
         
        The following diagram (Figure 1) summarizes the potential relevance and 
        reusability of the data schema of existing mib models to the MIDCOM 
        architecture to satisfy the MIDCOM protocol framework, requirements and 
        semantics: 
         
           
                   +----------------------+ 
                   |   Application        | 
                   |                      |                       
                   | +---------------+    | 
                   | | MIDCOM agent  |    |   
                   | |               |    | 
                   | |               |    | 
                   | +---------------+    |        +------------+             
                   +------------^---------+        |            | 
                                .                  | Policy     | 
                                .                  |            | 
                                .                  | +--------+ |  
                    Application .                  | | MIDCOM | | 
                       Requests .                 /+-|  PDP   | | 
                     (via SNMP) .                / | +--------+ | 
                                .               /  +------------+ 
                                .              /     
                                .             /   
                                .            /  
                                .            |   
                                v            v  
                +-------------------------------------------+ 
                |   Middlebox   *            *              | 
                |               * a.         * b.           | 
                |               v            v              | 
                |     +-------------------------------+     | 
                |     |  Middlebox Communication      |     | 
                |     |  Protocol (MIDCOM) Interface  |     | 
                |     +-------------------------------+     | 
                |                     *                     |  
                |                     * c.                  |  
                |                     v                     |                         
                |     +-------------------------------+     | 
                |     | Device/Service Configuration  |     | 
                |     |                               |     | 
                |     +-------------------------------+     | 
                |                                           | 
                +-------------------------------------------+ 
         
         
              Legend: .... Middlebox Communication Protocol (MIDCOM) 
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 4] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
                      //// MIDCOM PDP Interface (outside scope of this document) 
                      **** Managed objects relevant to the MIDCOM Interface  
                           (with the associated letters referencing the  
                            mibs potentially applicable summarized below:  
                 
                         a. gaps between existing mibs (b and c) and MIDCOM    
                         requirements 
                         b. POLICY-BASED-MANAGEMENT-MIB, DIFFSERV-CONFIG-MIB,  
                         c. IPSEC-POLICY-MIB  
                         NAT-MIB, DIFFSERV-MIB, IPSEC-POLICY-MIB 
         
         
             Figure 1: Data relationships relevant to the MIDCOM Interface      
         
         
         
     3.1 Secure Communications 
         
        SNMPv3 is designed to provide secure communications between two end-
        points, and it provides a proxy capability that can be used to define 
        trust relationships between multiple domains. 
         
        MIDCOM requirements include mutual authentication, message integrity 
        checking, timeliness checking to prevent replay, message encryption, and 
        authorization controls to ensure only certain agents can modify certain 
        subsets of middlebox configurations. MIDCOM requires secure request-
        response capabilities and secure notifications. 
         
        SNMPv3 defines mib modules to allow the monitoring and configuration of 
        all these security features. They are defined in RFC3411-RFC3418, and 
        RFC3410 provides an overview of these capabilities. 
        
     3.2 Device Configuration 
         
        SNMP is the most commonly used standardized protocol for remotely 
        monitoring and manipulating the configuration of devices. There are a 
        large number of IETF standard and vendor-specific mib modules available. 
         
        CLI is used more than SNMP for large-scale configuration, but it is not 
        standardized, which makes the development of vendor-neutral device 
        configuration policies more difficult.  
         
        Most IETF standard mib modules do not provide much configuration support 
        because SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c were non-secure, and it is difficult to 
        standardize abstractions that provide enough information to configure 
        device implementations that require vendor-specific parameters. There 
        are many vendor-specific mib modules that permit configuration of the 
        vendorÆs devices. 
         
        SNMP mib modules are definitions of virtual databases with scalars and 
        tables of data. SNMP supports multiple mechanisms to define 
        relationships between entries in different tables. For example, entries 
        in multiple tables are often related by common indices. SNMP uses a 
        standardized hierarchical namespace, so the value of a field in one 
        table can serve as the index into another table. 
         
        The ability to define relationships between mib tables (including tables 
        in different mib modules) allows an abstracted configuration policy to 
        point to a vendor-specific configuration mib for more detailed 
        instructions.  
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 5] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
         
        There are multiple ways to send policies to middleboxes, including SNMP 
        and COPS/PR and RADIUS/Diameter, and most policies are auto-magically 
        converted into low-level configuration commands that set the correct 
        operational parameters to enforce desired behavior. 
         
        Some middlebox functionalities are related to physical and logical 
        topologies that are created by manipulating device configurations. Some 
        mibs that can be used for topology configuration would include the 
        802.1X MIB [81XMIB] and the Interfaces MIB [RFC2863] to enable or 
        disable a physical port or logical interface, the Bridge MIB [BREMIB]to 
        assign interfaces into virtual LANs and to enable port mirroring 
        functionality for IDS usage, the Layer Two Tunneling MIB or IPSec MIB to 
        create topology tunnels for VPNs, and so on. 
         
        There are many IETF standard mibs that monitor traffic, which can be 
        used to verify that a policy is being enforced. Most ôtransmissionö mib 
        modules, those that fall under the { mib-2 transmission } subtree 
        relative to Interfaces MIB entries, provide statistics about traffic 
        going in or out of ports on a device. The Bridge MIB can be used to 
        monitor the amount of traffic being forwarded into or out of virtual 
        LANs, and so on. 
         
         
     3.3 Service Configuration 
         
        A middlebox may be able to support multiple types of services, and a 
        MIDCOM agent must determine which services are available and running, 
        and which have stopped running. Middlebox functionalities are 
        applications that run on a middlebox, and there are multiple mib modules 
        designed to monitor applications and their operational characteristics. 
        Most of the mibs described here are for monitoring only, but could be 
        extended with application-specific mibs for configuration and additional 
        monitoring.  
         
        The Host Resources MIB [RFC2790]provides monitoring of hardware 
        resources, such as memory and CPU load, and monitors installed 
        applications, running applications, and application performance. These 
        can be used to do capability discovery for a middlebox, and these 
        factors can be important to consider before configuring additional 
        functionality or sessions on a middlebox. 
         
        The Network Services Monitoring MIB [RFC2788] module provides objects 
        for monitoring high-level concepts related to network services, such as 
        their current run status and their associations. This mib works with 
        supplemental service-specific mib modules, including configuration 
        objects. 
         
        The Systems Application MIB [RFC2287] monitors installed applications, 
        running applications, and running processes. The installed application 
        information can be important for determining the actual capabilities of 
        the model and version of firewall installed.  
         
        The Application MIB [RFC2564] permits identification of one or more 
        instances of named services on a system, and the association of running 
        application elements to these services. The mib permits monitoring 
        transaction streams and the relation to I/O channels. In the MIDCOM 
        environment, it could permit discovering a firewall and the associated 
        installed signature packages. 
         
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 6] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
        The WWW Services MIB [RFC2594] is an example of a service-specific mib 
        that works with the generic Systems Application and Applications mib 
        modules. 
         
        But MIDCOM is primarily about configuring middlebox functionality, so we 
        should look at mib modules that can do configuration of firewalls and 
        NATS.  
         
        The Diffserv MIB [RFC3289] describes the configuration and management of 
        a Differentiated Services interface in terms of one or more Traffic 
        Conditioning Blocks (TCB), each containing, arranged in the specified 
        order, by definition, zero or more classifiers, meters, actions, 
        algorithmic droppers, queues and schedulers. The ôlinked-listö approach 
        is very flexible, and could be used to configure some firewall tasks. 
         
        The use of RowPointers as connectors in the Diffserv MIB allows for the 
        simple extension of the MIB. The RowPointers, whether "next" or 
        "specific", may point to Entries defined in other MIB modules. This 
        mechanism can point to other, possibly vendor-specific, configuration 
        mibs. 
         
        The IPSec Policy MIB [IPCMIB] defines objects that could be reused for 
        purposes of filtering service-related traffic and subsequent policy 
        actions.  
         
         
     3.4 Policy Coordination 
         
        To properly coordinate policy application, it is necessary to determine 
        if a device has the capabilities needed to effectively enforce a policy, 
        and to coordinate the application of policies according to time 
        constraints, priorities, rule groupings, policy sessions, and so on. 
         
        The SNMPCONF working has developed a number of mib modules designed for 
        the purpose of policy coordination.  
         
        Many policies are dependent on factors that are not so much traffic-
        related as business related. The role that a person plays in the 
        organization, or that a device serves in the network, or the geographic 
        location of a device may impact a policy. The SNMPCONF Policy MIB 
        [PBMMIB] allows an administrator to define roles, and associate them 
        with policies. A notification facility is included so a PDP can be 
        informed when a new role is defined for a system. 
         
        The SNMPCONF mibs include a policy download table, a policy registration 
        table, and a scheduling function for defining when a policy should be 
        made active and when it should be made dormant. Time schedules can be 
        grouped for easier manipulation, and wildcards are supported. To ease 
        integration with other policy efforts, the schedule table is modeled 
        after the Policy Core Information Model scheduler. 
         
        SNMPCONF provides a capabilities table to advertise the functionality 
        available for policy enforcement, including configuration parameters to 
        enable a MIDCOM agent to be notified when new capabilities are installed 
        on a system. Capabilities may be available on some components of a 
        system and not others, such as a board in a chassis, but also may be 
        accessible only in certain logical partitions, such as the community 
        profile (more accurately, the SNMPv3 context) of the super-user. 
         
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 7] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
        SNMPCONF defines tracking tables, so an administrator can determine 
        which elements are being controlled by which policies. The mib also 
        includes debugging tables for logging policy enforcement run-time 
        exceptions. An administrator can disable policies in place, if they 
        desire. 
         
         
     3.5 Policy Specification 
         
        SNMPCONF Policies have configurable priorities, may be assigned to 
        groups that have their own priorities, support actions-on-error 
        planning, and parameters to specify how frequently an element should be 
        checked to verify that the configuration matches the policy. Statistics 
        about the application of policies and errors conditions encountered are 
        included. 
         
        SNMPCONF is designed to work with other mibs that provide more concrete 
        specifications of policy. The Diffserv Configuration MIB [DPCMIB], for 
        example, defines a template that SNMPCONF applies to the Diffserv MIB 
        mentioned above. 
      
     4. Applicability of existing MIBs 
         
        This section summarizes the details of the applicability of existing 
        mibs to the MIDCOM data model.  As highlighted in Figure 1, the MIDCOM 
        protocol itself is only defined to be the interface from the MIDCOM 
        agent (SNMP manager) to the middlebox or MIDCOM Interface.  However, 
        Requests from the MIDCOM agent to the MIDCOM Interface must be evaluated 
        against the installed policies and must contain all the data required 
        for the specific device/service configuration. In addition, the session 
        setup reply includes capabilities of the middlebox, several of which 
        relate to policies.  Thus, although the Policy interface itself is out 
        of scope of the MIDCOM protocol, the correlation of the policy related 
        data to the data associated with the MIDCOM Interface is imperative. In 
        effect, an instance of the "MIDCOM mib" comprises the data from the 
        semantics evaluated against the policy and applied to configure the 
        device/service.  
      
        The following MIBs were analyzed and found to have a high level of 
        applicability and re-usability for MIDCOM: 
          o Network Address Translators (NAT) MIB [NATMIB] 
          o <to be completed once detailed analysis is done > 
      
        4.1 Network Address Translators (NAT) MIB 
         
        There is currently a NAT MIB module [NATMIB] under development for 
        configuring NATs. The NAT MIB module appears to meet all of the MIDCOM 
        requirements concerning NAT control.  Additional MIBs, such as those 
        defined by SNMP Policy Based Management MIB, allowing the definition of 
        policy rulesets and grouping of policy rules would also be required.  
      
        4.2  
         
         
        4.4 Summary of applicability of existing MIBs 
         
        < To Be Completed >  
         
        <Diagram showing these MIBs as applied to the basic data model> 
         
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 8] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
         
         
     5. Additional MIDCOM specific managed objects 
      
        <MIDCOM specific managed objects may be required to satisfy some of the 
        requirements and to provide a linkage between the existing MIBs 
        applicable to MIDCOM.>  
      
        < To Be Completed >  
         
     6. Security Considerations 
      
        The MIDCOM requirements [RFC3304] defines the general security 
        requirements for the MIDCOM protocol.  The SNMPv3 User-based Security 
        Model (USM, [RFC2574]) satisfies those requirements. USM defines three 
        standardized methods for providing authentication, confidentiality, and 
        integrity. The method to use can be optionally chosen.  The methods 
        operate securely across untrusted domains. Additionally, USM has 
        specific built-in mechanisms for preventing replay attacks including 
        unique protocol engine IDs, timers and counters per engine and time 
        windows for the validity of messages. 
         
      
     Normative References  
        
        [RFC3304] R. Swale, P. Mart, P. Sijben, S. Brim, M. Shore, "Middlebox 
        Communications (MIDCOM) Protocol Requirements", RFC 3304, August, 2002. 
         
        [RFC3303] P. Srisuresh, J. Kuthan, J. Rosenberg, A. Molitor, A. Rayhan, 
        "Middlebox Communications Architecture and Framework", RFC 3303, August, 
        2002.  
         
        [MDCSEM] Stiemerling, M., Quittek, J., Taylor, T., "MIDCOM Protocol 
        Semantics", draft-ietf-midcom-semantics-01.txt, February, 2003.  
         
        [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
        Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 
         
        [RFC2578] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., 
        Rose, M., and S. Waldbusser, "Structure of Management Information 
        Version 2 (SMIv2)", STD 58, RFC 2578, April 1999. 
         
        [RFC2579] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., 
        Rose, M., and S. Waldbusser, "Textual Conventions for SMIv2", STD 58, 
        RFC 2579, April 1999. 
         
        [RFC2580] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., Schoenwaelder, J., Case, J., 
        Rose, M., and S. Waldbusser, "Conformance Statements for SMIv2", STD 58, 
        RFC 2580, April 1999. 
      
        [RFC3411] Harrington, D., Presuhn, R., and B. Wijnen, "An Architecture 
        for Describing SNMP Management Frameworks", STD 62, RFC 3411, November 
        2002. 
      
        [RFC3412] Case, J., Harrington D., Presuhn R., and B. Wijnen, "Message 
        Processing and Dispatching for the Simple Network Management Protocol 
        (SNMP)", STD 62, RFC 3412, November 2002. 
      
        [RFC3413] Levi, D., Meyer, P., and B. Stewart, "SNMPv3 Applications", 
        STD 62, RFC 3413, November 2002. 
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003                [Page 9] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
         
        [RFC3414] Blumenthal, U., and B. Wijnen, "User-based Security Model(USM) 
        for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3)", STD 
        62, RFC 3414, November 2002. 
         
        [RFC3415] Wijnen, B., Presuhn, R., and K. McCloghrie, "View-based Access 
        Control Model (VACM) for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)", 
        STD 62, RFC 3415, November 2002. 
      
        [NATMIB] Raghunarayan, R., Pai, N., Rohit, R., Wang, C., Srisuresh, P., 
        "Definitions of Managed Objects for Network Address Translators (NAT)", 
        draft-ietf-nat-natmib-05.txt, November, 2002.  
      
        [PBMMIB]  Waldbusser, S., Saperia, J., Hongal, T., "Policy Based 
        Management MIB", draft-ietf-snmpconf-pm-13.txt, March, 2003.  
      
        [IPCMIB] Baer, M., Charlet, R., Hardaker, W., Story, R., Wang, C., 
        "IPsec Policy Configuration MIB module", draft-ietf-ipsp-ipsec-conf-mib-
        06.txt, November, 2002.  
      
         
     Informative References  
      
        [RFC3410] Case, J., Mundy, R., Partain, D., and B. Stewart, 
        "Introduction to Version 3 of the Internet-standard Network Management 
        Framework", 3410, November 2002. 
         
        [MDCPEV] Barnes, M., "Middlebox Communications (MIDCOM) Protocol 
        Evaluation", draft-ietf-midcom-protocol-eval-06.txt, November, 2002. 
         
        [RFC2287] Krupczak, C. and J. Saperia, "Definitions of System-Level 
        Managed Objects for Applications", RFC 2287, February 1998. 
         
        [RFC2564] C. Kalbfleisch, C. Krupczak, R.Presuhn, J. Saperia, 
        "Application Management MIB", May 1999. 
         
        [RFC2594] H. Hazewinkel, C. Kalbfleisch, J. Schoenwaelder, "Definitions 
        of Managed Objects for WWW Services", May 1999. 
         
        [RFC2788] N. Freed, S. Kille, "Network Services Monitoring MIB", RFC 
        2788, March 2000. 
         
        [RFC2790] S. Waldbusser, P. Grillo, "Host Resources MIB", March 2000. 
      
        [RFC2863] McCloghrie, K. and F. Kastenholz, "The Interfaces Group MIB 
        using SMIv2", RFC 2863, June 2000. 
         
        [RFC3289] Baker, F., Chan, K., Smith, A., "Management Information Base 
        for the Differentiated Services Architecture", RFC 3289, May 2002. 
         
        [DPCMIB] Hazewinkel, H, Partain, D., "The Differentiated Services 
        Configuration MIB", draft-ietf-snmpconf-diffpolicy-05.txt, June 2002. 
         
        [BRGMIB] Norseth, K.C. and Bell, E., "Definitions of Managed Objects for 
        Bridges", draft-ietf-bridge-bridgemib-smiv2-04.txt, October 2002. 
         
        [BREMIB] Ngai, V., "Definitions of Managed Objects for Bridges with 
        Traffic Classes, Multicast Filtering and Virtual LAN Extensions", draft-
        ietf-bridge-ext-v2-01.txt, September 2002. 
      
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003               [Page 10] 
                                   MIDCOM MIB                    March 2003 
      
      
        [81xMIB] Norseth, K.C. "Definitions for Port Access Control (IEEE 
        802.1X) MIB", draft-ietf-bridge-8021x-01.txt, February, 2003. 
                    
      
     Acknowledgements 
      
         
      
     Author's Address 
             
        Mary Barnes  
        Nortel Networks 
        2380 Performance Drive         Phone:  1-972-684-5432  
        Richardson, TX USA             Email:  mbarnes@nortelnetworks.com  
         
        David Harrington               Co-chair SNMPv3 WG 
        Enterasys Networks 
        35 Industrial Way              Phone: +1 603-337-2614 
        Rochester, NH 03867-5005       EMail: dbh@enterasys.com 
      
        Martin Stiemerling 
        NEC Europe Ltd. 
        Network Laboratories 
        Adenauerplatz 6 
        69115 Heidelberg               Phone: +49 6221 90511-13 
        Germany                        Email: stiemerling@ccrle.nec.de 
         
         
          
         
     Full Copyright Statement 
         
        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
            
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
        others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
        or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
        and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
        kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
        are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
        document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
        the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
        Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
        developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
        copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
        followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
        English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
        will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
        assigns.  This document and the information contained 
        herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
        THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, 
        EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
        THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
        ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
      
         
      
      
      
     Barnes, et. al.         Expires - August 2003               [Page 11] 