


Benchmarking Working Group                             Gabor Feher, BUTE
INTERNET-DRAFT                                    Krisztian Nemeth, BUTE
Expiration Date: August 2006                           Andras Korn, BUTE
                                            Istvan Cselenyi, TeliaSonera

                                                           February 2006

   Benchmarking Terminology for Resource Reservation Capable Routers
                 <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Table of contents

   Abstract...........................................................2
   1. Introduction....................................................2
   2. Existing definitions............................................3
   3. Definition of Terms.............................................3
      3.1 Traffic Flow Types..........................................3
         3.1.1 Data Flow..............................................3
         3.1.2 Distinguished Data Flow................................4
         3.1.3 Best-Effort Data Flow..................................4
      3.2 Resource Reservation Protocol Basics........................4
         3.2.1 QoS Session............................................5
         3.2.2 Resource Reservation Protocol..........................6
         3.2.3 Resource Reservation Capable Router....................6
         3.2.4 Reservation State......................................6
         3.2.5 Resource Reservation Protocol Orientation..............7
      3.3 Router Load Factors.........................................8
         3.3.1 Best-Effort Traffic Load Factor........................9
         3.3.2 Distinguished Traffic Load Factor......................9

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

         3.3.3 Session Load Factor...................................10
         3.3.4 Signaling Intensity Load Factor.......................10
         3.3.5 Signaling Burst Load Factor...........................11
      3.4 Performance Metrics........................................12
         3.4.1 Signaling Message Handling Time.......................12
         3.4.2 Distinguished Traffic Delay...........................13
         3.4.3 Best-effort Traffic Delay.............................13
         3.4.4 Signaling Message Deficit.............................14
         3.4.5 Session Maintenance Capacity..........................15
      3.5 Router Load Conditions and Scalability Limit...............15
         3.5.1 Loss-Free Condition...................................15
         3.5.2 Lossy Condition.......................................16
         3.5.3 Scalability Limit.....................................17
   4. Security Considerations........................................17
   5. IANA Considerations............................................17
   6. Acknowledgements...............................................18
   7. References.....................................................18
      7.1 Normative References.......................................18
      7.2 Informative References.....................................18
   Authors' Addresses................................................19
   Disclaimer of Validity............................................19
   Copyright Notice..................................................20
   Disclaimer........................................................20

Abstract

   The primary purpose of this document is to define terminology
   specific to the benchmarking of resource reservation signaling of
   Integrated Services IP routers. These terms can be used in
   additional documents that define benchmarking methodologies for
   routers that support resource reservation or reporting formats for
   the benchmarking measurements.

1. Introduction

   Signaling based resource reservation (e.g. via RSVP [3]) is an
   important part of the different QoS provisioning approaches.
   Therefore network operators who are planning to deploy signaling
   based resource reservation may want to examine the scalability
   limitations of reservation capable routers and the impact of
   signaling on their data forwarding performance.

   An objective way of quantifying the scalability constraints of QoS
   signaling is to perform measurements on routers that are capable of
   resource reservation. This document defines terminology for a
   specific set of tests that vendors or network operators can carry
   out to measure and report the signaling performance characteristics
   of router devices that support resource reservation protocols. The
   results of these tests provide comparable data for different
   products, and thus support the decision-making process before
   purchase. Moreover, these measurements provide input characteristics
   for the dimensioning of a network in which resources are provisioned
   dynamically by signaling. Finally, the tests are applicable for

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

   characterizing the impact of the resource reservation signaling on
   the forwarding performance of the routers.

   This benchmarking terminology document is based on the knowledge
   gained by examination of (and experimentation with) different
   resource reservation protocols: the IETF standard RSVP [3] and
   several experimental ones, such as YESSIR [5], ST2+ [6], SDP [7],
   Boomerang [8] and Ticket [9]. Some of these protocols are also
   analyzed in an IETF NSIS working group draft [10]. Although at the
   moment the authors are only aware of resource reservation capable
   router products that interpret RSVP, this document defines terms
   that are valid in general and not restricted to any of the above
   listed protocols.

   In order to avoid any confusion we would like to emphasize that this
   terminology considers only signaling protocols that provide IntServ
   resource reservation; for example, techniques in the DiffServ
   toolbox are predominantly beyond our scope.

2. Existing definitions

   RFC 1242 "Benchmarking Terminology for Network Interconnect
   Devices" [1] and RFC 2285 "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN
   Switching Devices" [2] contain discussions and definitions for a
   number of terms relevant to the benchmarking of signaling
   performance of reservation capable routers and should be consulted
   before attempting to make use of this document.

   Additionally, this document defines terminology in a way that is
   consistent with the terms used by Next Steps in Signaling working
   group laid out in [4].

   For the sake of clarity and continuity this document adopts the
   template for definitions set out in Section 2 of RFC 1242.
   Definitions are indexed and grouped together into different sections
   for ease of reference.

3. Definition of Terms

3.1 Traffic Flow Types

   This group of definitions describes traffic flow types forwarded by
   resource reservation capable routers.

3.1.1 Data Flow

   Definition:
     A data flow is a stream of data packets from one sender to one or
     more receivers, where each packet has a flow identifier unique to
     the flow.




Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

   Discussion:
     The flow identifier can be an arbitrary subset of the packet
     header fields that uniquely distinguishes the flow from others.
     For example, the 5-tuple "source address; source port; destination
     address; destination port; protocol number" is commonly used for
     this purpose (where port numbers are applicable). It is also
     possible to take advantage of the Flow Label field of IPv6
     packets. For more comment on flow identification refer to [4].

3.1.2 Distinguished Data Flow

   Definition:
     Distinguished data flows are flows that resource reservation
     capable routers intentionally treat better or worse than best-
     effort data flows, according to a QoS agreement defined for the
     distinguished flow.

   Discussion:
     Routers classify the packets of distinguished data flows and
     identify the data flow they belong to.

     The most common usage of the distinguished data flow is to get
     higher priority treatment than that of best-effort data flows (see
     the next definition). In these cases, a distinguished data flow is
     sometimes referred to as a "premium data flow". Nevertheless
     theoretically it is possible to require worse treatment than that
     of best-effort flows.

3.1.3 Best-Effort Data Flow

   Definition:
     Best-effort data flows are flows that are not treated in any
     special manner by resource reservation capable routers; thus,
     their packets are served (forwarded) in some default way.

   Discussion:
     "Best-effort" means that the router makes its best effort to
     forward the data packet quickly and safely, but does not guarantee
     anything (e.g. delay or loss probability). This type of traffic is
     the most common in today's Internet.

     Packets that belong to best-effort data flows need not be
     classified by the routers; that is, the routers don't need to find
     a related reservation session in order to find out what treatment
     the packet is entitled to.

3.2 Resource Reservation Protocol Basics

   This group of definitions applies to signaling based resource
   reservation protocols implemented by IP router devices.




Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

3.2.1 QoS Session

   Definition:
     A QoS session is an application layer concept, shared between a
     set of network nodes, that pertains to a specific set of data
     flows. The information associated with the session includes the
     data required to identify the set of data flows in addition to a
     specification of the QoS treatment they require.

   Discussion:
     A QoS session is an end-to-end relationship. Whenever end-nodes
     decide to obtain special QoS treatment for their data
     communication, they set up a QoS session; as part of the process,
     they or their proxies make a QoS agreement with the network,
     specifying their data flows and the QoS treatment that the flows
     require.

     It is possible for the same QoS session to span multiple network
     domains that have different resource provisioning architectures.
     In this document, however, we only deal with the case where the
     QoS session is realized over an IntServ architecture. It is
     assumed that sessions will be established using signaling messages
     of a resource reservation protocol.

     QoS sessions must have unique identifiers; it must be possible to
     determine which QoS session a given signaling message pertains to.
     Therefore, each signaling message should include the identifier of
     its corresponding session. As an example, in the case of RSVP, the
     "session specification" identifies the QoS session plus refers to
     the data flow; the "flowspec" specifies the desired QoS treatment
     and the "filter spec" defines the subset of data packets in the
     data flow that receive the QoS defined by the flowspec.

     QoS sessions can be unicast or multicast depending on the number
     of participants. In a multicast group there can be several data
     traffic sources and destinations. Here the QoS agreement does not
     have to be the same for each branch of the multicast tree
     forwarding the data flow of the group. Instead, a dedicated
     network resource in a router can be shared among many traffic
     sources from the same multicast group (c.f. multicast reservation
     styles in the case of RSVP).

   Issues:
     Even though QoS sessions are considered to be unique, resource
     reservation capable routers might aggregate them and allocate
     network resources to these aggregated sessions at once. The
     aggregation can be based on similar data flow attributes (e.g.
     similar destination addresses) or it can combine arbitrary
     sessions as well. While reservation aggregation significantly
     lightens the signaling processing task of a resource reservation
     capable router, it also requires the administration of the
     aggregated QoS sessions and might also lead to the violation of


Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

     the quality guaranties referring to individual data flows within
     an aggregation [11].

3.2.2 Resource Reservation Protocol

   Definition:
     Resource reservation protocols define signaling messages and
     message processing rules used to control resource allocation in
     IntServ architectures.

   Discussion:
     It is the signaling messages of a resource reservation protocol
     that carry the information related to QoS sessions. This
     information includes a session identifier, the actual QoS
     parameters, and possibly flow descriptors.

     The message processing rules of the signaling protocols ensure
     that signaling messages reach all network nodes concerned. Some
     resource reservation protocols (e.g. RSVP) are only concerned with
     this, i.e. carrying the QoS-related information to all the
     appropriate network nodes, without being aware of its content.
     This latter approach allows changing the way the QoS parameters
     are described, and different kinds of provisioning can be realized
     without the need to change the protocol itself.

3.2.3 Resource Reservation Capable Router

   Definition:
     A router is resource reservation capable (it supports resource
     reservation) if it is able to interpret signaling messages of a
     resource reservation protocol, and based on these messages is able
     to adjust the management of its flow classifiers and network
     resources so as to conform to the content of the signaling
     messages.

   Discussion:
     Routers capture signaling messages and manipulate reservation
     states and/or reserved network resources according to the content
     of the messages. This ensures that the flows are treated as their
     specified QoS requirements indicate.

3.2.4 Reservation State

   Definition:
     A reservation state is the set of entries in the router's memory
     that contain all relevant information about a given QoS session
     registered with the router.

   Discussion:
     States are needed because IntServ related resource reservation
     protocols require the routers to keep track of QoS session and
     data-flow-related metadata. The reservation state includes the
     parameters of the QoS treatment; the description of how and where

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

     to forward the incoming signaling messages; refresh timing
     information; etc.

     Based on how reservation states are stored in a reservation
     capable router, the routers can be categorized into two classes:

     Hard-state resource reservation protocols (e.g. ST2 [6]) require
     routers to store the reservation states permanently, established
     by a set-up signaling primitive, until the router is explicitly
     informed that the QoS session is canceled.

     There are also soft-state resource reservation capable routers,
     where there are no permanent reservation states, and each state
     has to be regularly refreshed by appropriate refresh signaling
     messages. If no refresh signaling message arrives during a certain
     period then the router stops the maintenance of the QoS session
     assuming that the end-points do not intend to keep the session up
     any longer or the communication lines are broken somewhere along
     the data path. This feature makes soft-state resource reservation
     capable routers more robust than hard-state routers, since no
     failures can cause resources to stay permanently stuck in the
     routers. (Note that it is still possible to have an explicit
     teardown message in soft-state protocols for quicker resource
     release.)

   Issues:
     Based on the initiating point of the refresh messages, soft-state
     resource reservation protocols can be divided into two groups.
     First, there are protocols where it is the responsibility of the
     end-points or their proxies to initiate refresh messages. These
     messages are forwarded along the path of the data flow refreshing
     the corresponding reservation states in each router affected by
     the flow. Secondly, there are other protocols, where routers and
     end-points have their own schedule for the reservation state
     refreshes and they signal these refreshes to the neighboring
     routers.

3.2.5 Resource Reservation Protocol Orientation

   Definition:
     The orientation of a resource reservation protocol tells which end
     of the protocol communication initiates the allocation of the
     network resources. Thus, the protocol can be sender or receiver
     initiated, depending on the location of the data flow source
     (sender) and destination (receiver) compared to the reservation
     initiator.

   Discussion:
     In the case of sender-initiated protocols the resource reservation
     propagates the same directions as of the data flow. Consequently,
     in the case of receiver-initiated protocols the signaling messages
     reserving resources are forwarded backward on the path of the data
     flow. Due to the asymmetric routing nature of the Internet, in

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

     this latter case, the path of the desired data flow should be
     known before the reservation initiator would be able to send the
     resource allocation messages. For example in the case of RSVP, the
     RSVP PATH message, traveling from the data flow sources towards
     the destinations, first marks the path of the data flow on which
     the resource allocation messages will travel backward.

     This definition considers only protocols that reserve resources
     for just one data flow between the end-nodes. The reservation
     orientation of protocols that reserve more than one data flow is
     not defined here.

   Issues:
     The location of the reservation initiator affects the basics of
     the resource reservation protocols and therefore is an important
     aspect of characterization. Most importantly, in the case of
     multicast QoS sessions, the sender-oriented protocols require the
     traffic sources to maintain a list of receivers and send their
     allocation messages considering the different requirements of the
     receivers. Using multicast QoS sessions, the receiver-oriented
     protocols enable the receivers to manage their own resource
     allocation requests and thus ease the task of the sources.

3.3 Router Load Factors

   When a router is under "load", it means that there are tasks its
   CPU(s) must attend to; and/or that its memory contains data it must
   keep track of; and/or that its interface buffers are utilized to
   some extent; etc. Unfortunately, we cannot assume that the full
   internal state of a router can be monitored during a benchmark;
   rather, we must consider the router to be a black box.

   We need to look at router "load" in a way that makes this "load"
   measurable and controllable. Instead of focusing on the internal
   processes of a router, we will consider the external, and therefore
   observable, measurable and controllable processes that result in
   "load".

   In this chapter we introduce several ways of creating "load" on a
   router; we will refer to these as "load factors" henceforth. These
   load factors are defined so that they each impact the performance of
   the router in a different way (or by different means), by utilizing
   different components of a resource reservation capable router as
   separately as possible.

   During a benchmark, the performance of the device under test will
   have to be measured under different controlled load conditions, that
   is, with different values of these load factors.






Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

3.3.1 Best-Effort Traffic Load Factor

   Definition:
     The best-effort traffic load factor is defined as the number and
     length of equal-sized best-effort data packets that traverses the
     router in a second.

   Discussion:
     Forwarding the best-effort data packets, which requires obtaining
     the routing information and transferring the data packet between
     network interfaces, requires processing power. This load factor
     creates load on the CPU(s) and buffers of the router.

     For the purpose of benchmarking we define a traffic flow as a
     stream of equal-sized packets with even interpacket delay. It is
     possible to specify traffic with varying packet sizes as a
     superposition of multiple best-effort traffic flows as they are
     defined here.

   Issues:
     The same amount of data segmented into differently sized packets
     causes different amounts of load on the router, which has to be
     considered during benchmarking measurements. The measurement unit
     of this load factor reflects this as well.

   Measurement unit:
     This load factor has a composite unit of [packets per second
     (pps); bytes]. For example, [5 pps; 100 bytes] means five pieces
     of one-hundred-byte packets per second.

3.3.2 Distinguished Traffic Load Factor

   Definition:
     The distinguished traffic load factor is defined as the number and
     length of the distinguished data packets that traverses the router
     in a second.

   Discussion:
     Similarly to the best-effort data, forwarding the distinguished
     data packets requires obtaining the routing information and
     transferring the data packet between network interfaces. However,
     in this case packets have to be classified as well, which requires
     additional processing capacity.

     For the purpose of benchmarking we define a traffic flow as a
     stream of equal-sized packets with even interpacket delay. It is
     possible to specify traffic with varying packet sizes as a
     superposition of multiple distinguished traffic flows as they are
     defined here.

   Issues:
     Just as in the best-effort case, the same amount of data segmented
     into differently sized packets causes different amounts of load on

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006              [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

     the router, which has to be considered during the benchmarking
     measurements. The measurement unit of this load factor reflects
     this as well.

   Measurement unit:
     This load factor has a composite unit of [packets per second
     (pps); bytes]. For example, [5 pps; 100 bytes] means five pieces
     of one-hundred-byte packets per second.

3.3.3 Session Load Factor

   Definition:
     The session load factor is the number of QoS sessions the router
     is keeping track of.

   Discussion:
     Resource reservation capable routers maintain reservation states
     to keep track of QoS sessions. Obviously, the more reservation
     states are registered with the router, the more complex the
     traffic classification becomes, and the more time it takes to look
     up the corresponding resource reservation state. Moreover, not
     only the traffic flows, but also the signaling messages that
     control the reservation states have to be identified first, before
     taking any other action, and this kind of classification also
     means extra work for the router.

     In the case of soft-state resource reservation protocols, the
     session load also affects reservation state maintenance. For
     example, the supervision of timers that watchdog the reservation
     state refreshes may cause further load on the router.

     This load factor utilizes the CPU(s), the main memory and the
     session management logic (e.g. content addressable memory), if
     any, of the resource reservation capable router.

   Measurement unit:
     This load component is measured by the number of QoS sessions that
     impact the router.

3.3.4 Signaling Intensity Load Factor

   Definition:
     The signaling intensity load factor is the number of signaling
     messages that are presented at the input interfaces of the router
     during one second.

   Discussion:
     The processing of signaling messages requires processor power that
     raises the load on the control plane of the router.

     In routers where the control plane and the data plane are not
     totally independent (e.g. certain parts of the tasks are served by
     the same processor; or the architecture has common memory buffers,

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

     transfer buses or any other resources) the signaling load can have
     an impact on the router's packet forwarding performance as well.

     Naturally, just as everywhere else in this document, the term
     "signaling messages" refer only to the resource reservation
     protocol related primitives.

   Issues:
     Most resource reservation protocols have several protocol
     primitives realized by different signaling message types. Each of
     these message types may require a different amount of processing
     power from the router. This fact has to be considered during the
     benchmarking measurements.

   Measurement unit:
     The unit of this factor is signaling messages/second.

3.3.5 Signaling Burst Load Factor

   Definition:
     The signaling burst load factor is defined as the number of
     signaling messages that arrive to one input port of the router
     back-to-back ([1]), causing persistent load on the signaling
     message handler.

   Discussion:
     The definition focuses on one input port only and does not
     consider the traffic arriving at the other input ports.
     As a consequence, a set of messages arriving at different ports,
     but with such a timing that would be a burst if the messages
     arrived at the same port, is not considered to be a burst. The
     reason for this is that it is not guaranteed in a black-box test
     that this would have the same effect on the router as a burst
     (incoming at the same interface) has.

     This definition conforms to the burst definition given in [2].

   Issues:
     Most of the resource reservation protocols have several protocol
     primitives realized by different signaling message types. Bursts
     built up of different messages may have a different effect on the
     router. Consequently, during measurements the content of the burst
     has to be considered as well.

     Likewise, the first one of multiple idempotent signaling messages
     that each accomplish exactly the same end will probably not take
     the same amount of time to be processed as subsequent ones.
     Benchmarking methodology will have to consider the intended effect
     of the signaling messages, as well as the state of the router at
     the time of their arrival.




Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

   Measurement unit:
     This load factor is characterized by the number of messages in the
     burst.

3.4 Performance Metrics

   This group of definitions is a collection of measurable quantities
   that describe the performance impact the different load components
   have on the router.

   During a benchmark, the values of these metrics will have to be
   measured under different load conditions.

3.4.1 Signaling Message Handling Time

   Definition:
     The signaling message handling time (or, in short, signal handling
     time) is the latency ([1], for store-and-forward devices) of a
     signaling message passing through the router.

   Discussion:
     The router interprets the signaling messages, acts based on their
     content and usually forwards them in an unmodified or modified
     form. Thus the message handling time is usually longer than the
     forwarding time of data packets of the same size.

     There might be signaling message primitives, however, that are
     drained or generated by the router, like certain refresh messages.
     In this case the signal handling time is not necessarily
     measureable, therefore it is not defined for such messages.

     In the case of signaling messages that carry information
     pertaining to multicast flows, the router might issue multiple
     signaling messages after processing them. In this case, by
     definition, the signal handling time is the latency between the
     incoming signaling message and the last outgoing signaling message
     related to the received one.

     The signal handling time is an important characteristic as it
     directly affects the setup time of a QoS session.

   Issues:
     The signal handling time may be dependent on the type of the
     signaling message. For example, it usually takes a shorter time
     for the router to remove a reservation state than to set it up.
     This fact has to be considered during the benchmarking process.

     As noted above, the first one of multiple idempotent signaling
     messages that each accomplish exactly the same end will probably
     not take the same amount of time to be processed as subsequent
     ones. Benchmarking methodology will have to consider the intended
     effect of the signaling messages, as well as the state of the
     router at the time of their arrival.

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006


   Measurement unit:
     The unit of the signaling message handling time is the second.

3.4.2 Distinguished Traffic Delay

   Definition:
     Distinguished traffic delay is the latency ([1], for store-and-
     forward devices) of a distinguished data packet passing through
     the tested router device.

   Discussion:
     Distinguished traffic packets must be classified first in order to
     assign the network resources dedicated to the flow. The time of
     the classification is added to the usual forwarding time
     (including the queuing) that a router would spend on the packet
     without any resource reservation capability. This classification
     procedure might be quite time consuming in routers with vast
     amounts of reservation states.

     There are routers where the processing power is shared between the
     control plane and the data plane. This means that the processing
     of signaling messages may have an impact on the data forwarding
     performance of the router. In this case the distinguished traffic
     delay metric also indicates the influence the two planes have on
     each other.

   Issues:
     Queuing of the incoming data packets in routers can bias this
     metric, so the measurement procedures have to consider this
     effect.

   Measurement unit:
     The unit of the distinguished traffic delay is the second.

3.4.3 Best-effort Traffic Delay

   Definition:
     Best-effort traffic delay is the latency of a best-effort data
     packet traversing the tested router device.

   Discussion:
     If the processing power of the router is shared between the
     control and data plane, then the processing of signaling messages
     may have an impact on the data forwarding performance of the
     router. In this case the best-effort traffic delay metric is an
     indicator of the influence the two planes have on each other.

   Issues:
     Queuing of the incoming data packets in routers can bias this
     metric as well, so measurement procedures have to consider this
     effect.


Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006


   Measurement unit:
     The unit of the best-effort traffic delay is the second.

3.4.4 Signaling Message Deficit

   Definition:
     Signaling message deficit is one minus the ratio of the actual and
     the expected number of signaling messages leaving a resource
     reservation capable router.

   Discussion:
     This definition gives the same value as the ratio of the lost
     (that is, not forwarded or not generated) and the expected
     messages. The above calculation must be used because the number of
     lost messages cannot be measured directly.

     There are certain types of signaling messages that reservation
     capable routers are required to forward as soon as their
     processing is finished. However, due to lack of resources or other
     reasons, the forwarding or even the processing of these signaling
     messages might not take place.

     Certain other kinds of signaling messages must be generated by the
     router in the absence of any corresponding incoming message. It is
     possible that an overloaded router does not have the resources
     necessary to generate such a message.

     To characterize these situations we introduce the signaling
     message deficit metric that expresses the ratio of the signaling
     messages that have actually left the router and those ones that
     were expected to leave the router. We subtract this ratio from one
     in order to obtain a loss-type metric instead of a "message
     survival metric".

     Since the most frequent reason for signaling message deficit is
     high router load, this metric is suitable for sounding out the
     scalability limits of resource reservation capable routers.

     During the measurements one must be able to determine whether a
     signaling message is still in the queues of the router or if it
     has already been dropped. For this reason we define a signaling
     message as lost if no forwarded signaling message is emitted
     within a reasonably long time period. This period is defined along
     with the benchmarking methodology.

   Measurement unit:
     This measure has no unit; it is expressed as a real number, which
     is between zero and one, including the limits.





Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006


3.4.5 Session Maintenance Capacity

   Definition:
     The session maintenance capacity metric is used in the case of
     soft-state resource reservation protocols only. It is defined as
     the ratio of the number of QoS sessions actually being maintained
     and the number of QoS sessions that should have been maintained
     during one refresh period.

   Discussion:
     For soft-state protocols maintaining a QoS session means
     refreshing the reservation states associated with it.

     When a soft-state resource reservation capable router is
     overloaded, it may happen that the router is not able to refresh
     all the registered reservation states, because it does not have
     the time to run the state refresh task. In this case sooner or
     later some QoS sessions will be lost even if the endpoints still
     require their maintenance.

     The session maintenance capacity sounds out the maximal number of
     QoS sessions that the router is capable of maintaining.

   Issues:
     The actual process of session maintenance is protocol and
     implementation dependent, thus so is the method to examine whether
     a session is maintained or not.

     In the case of soft-state resource reservation protocols a router
     that fails to maintain a QoS session may not emit refresh
     signaling messages either. This has direct consequences on the
     signaling message deficit metric.

   Measurement unit:
     This measure has no unit; it is expressed as a real number, which
     is between zero and one (including the limits).

3.5 Router Load Conditions and Scalability Limit

   Depending mainly, but not exclusively, on the overall load of a
   router, it can be in exactly of the following two conditions at a
   time: loss-free or lossy. These conditions are defined below, along
   with the scalability limit, which is the 'boundary' between them.

3.5.1 Loss-Free Condition

   Definition:
     A router is in loss-free condition, or loss-free state, if the
     extent to which its internal resources are utilized interferes
     with neither the correctness nor the timeliness of its operation.



Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

   Discussion:
     All existing routers have finite buffer memory and finite
     processing power. If a router is in loss-free state, the buffers
     of the router still contain enough free space to accommodate the
     next incoming packet when it arrives. Also, the router has enough
     processing power to cope with all its tasks, thus all required
     operations are carried out within the time the protocol
     specification allows; or, if this time is not specified by the
     protocol, then in "reasonable time" (which is then defined in the
     benchmarks). Similar considerations can be applied to other
     resources a router may have, if any; in loss-free states, the
     utilization of these resources still allows the router to carry
     out its tasks in accordance with applicable protocol
     specifications and in "reasonable time".

     Note that loss-free states as defined above are not related to the
     reservation states of resource reservation protocols. The word
     "state" is used to mean "condition".

     Also note that it is irrelevant what internal reason causes a
     router to fail to perform in accordance with protocol
     specifications or in "reasonable time"; if it is not high load but
     -- for example -- an implementation error that causes the device
     to perform inadequately, it still cannot be said to be in a loss-
     free state. The same applies to the random early dropping of
     packets in order to prevent congestion. In a black-box measurement
     it is impossible to determine whether a packet was dropped as part
     of a congestion control mechanism or because the router was unable
     to forward it; therefore, if packet loss is observed, the router
     is by definition in lossy state (lossy condition).

   Related definitions:
     Lossy Condition
     Scalability Limit

3.5.2 Lossy Condition

   Definition:
     A router is in lossy condition, or lossy state, if it cannot
     perform its duties adequately for some reason; that is, if it
     doesn't meet protocol specifications, or -- if time-related
     specifications are missing -- doesn't complete some operations in
     "reasonable time" (which is then defined in the benchmarks).
   Discussion:
     A router may be in a lossy state for several reasons, including
     but not necessarily limited to the following:

     a) Buffer memory has run out, so either an incoming or a buffered
         packet has to be dropped.
     b) The router doesn't have enough processing power to cope with
         all its duties. Some required operations are skipped, aborted
         or suffer unacceptable delays.
     c) Some other finite internal resource is exhausted.

Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

     d) The router runs a defective (non-conforming) protocol
         implementation.
     e) Hardware malfunction.


   Related definitions:
     Loss-Free Condition (especially the discussion of congestion
        control mechanisms that cause packet loss)
     Scalability Limit

3.5.3 Scalability Limit

   Definition:
     The scalability limits of a router are the boundary load
     conditions where the router is still in a loss-free state but the
     smallest amount of additional load would drive it to a lossy
     state.

   Discussion:
     An unloaded router that operates correctly is in loss-free state.
     As load increases, the resources of the router are becoming more
     and more utilized. There is a certain point where the router
     leaves the loss-free state and enters the lossy state. Note that
     such a point may be impossible to reach in some cases (for
     example, the bandwidth of the physical medium prevents increasing
     the traffic load any further).

     A particular load condition can be identified by the corresponding
     values of the load factors (as defined in 3.3 Router Load Factors)
     impacting the router. These values can be represented as a 7-tuple
     of numbers (5 is the number of load factors, but two of them have
     composite units and thus require two numbers each to express). We
     can think of these tuples as vectors that correspond either to
     loss-free state or to lossy state. The scalability limit of the
     router is, then, the boundary between the sets of vectors
     corresponding to loss-free and lossy states. Finding these
     boundary points if one of the objectives of benchmarking.

   Related definitions:
     Loss-Free Condition
     Lossy Condition

4. Security Considerations

   As this document only provides terminology and describes neither a
   protocol nor an implementation or a procedure, there are no security
   considerations associated with it.

5. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.



Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

6. Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank the following individuals for their help in
   the research and development work which contributed to the creation
   of this document: Joakim Bergkvist and Norbert Vegh from Telia
   Research AB, Sweden; Balazs Szabo, Gabor Kovacs and Peter Vary from
   the High Speed Networks Laboratory, Department of Telecommunication
   and Mediainformatics, Budapest University of Technology and
   Economics, Hungary.

7. References

7.1 Normative References

   [1]  S. Bradner, "Benchmarking Terminology for Network
        Interconnection Devices", RFC 1242, July 1991

   [2]  R. Mandeville, "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching
        Devices", RFC 2285, February 1998

7.2 Informative References

   [3]  B. Braden, Ed., et. al., "Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP)
        - Version 1 Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September
        1997.

   [4]  R. Hancock, et al., "Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS):
        Framework", RFC4080, June 2005

   [5]  P. Pan, H. Schulzrinne, "YESSIR: A Simple Reservation Mechanism
        for the Internet", Computer Communication Review, on-line
        version, volume 29, number 2, April 1999

   [6]  L. Delgrossi, L. Berger, "Internet Stream Protocol Version 2
        (ST2) Protocol Specification - Version ST2+", RFC 1819, August
        1995

   [7]  P. White, J. Crowcroft, "A Case for Dynamic Sender-Initiated
        Reservation in the Internet", Journal on High Speed Networks,
        Special Issue on QoS Routing and Signaling, Vol. 7 No. 2, 1998

   [8]  J. Bergkvist, D. Ahlard, T. Engborg, K. Nemeth, G. Feher, I.
        Cselenyi, M. Maliosz, "Boomerang : A Simple Protocol for
        Resource Reservation in IP Networks", Vancouver, IEEE Real-Time
        Technology and Applications Symposium, June 1999

   [9]  A. Eriksson, C. Gehrmann, "Robust and Secure Light-weight
        Resource Reservation for Unicast IP Traffic", International WS
        on QoS'98, IWQoS'98, May 18-20, 1998

   [10] J. Manner, X. Fu, "Analysis of Existing Quality of Service
        Signaling Protocols", RFC4094, May 2005


Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

   [11] F. Baker, C. Iturralde, F. Le Faucheur, B. Davie, "Aggregation
        of RSVP for IPv4 and IPv6 Reservations", RFC 3175, September
        2001

Authors' Addresses

   Gabor Feher
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics
   Department of Telecommunications and Mediainformatics
   Magyar Tudosok krt. 2, H-1117, Budapest, Hungary
   Phone: +36 1 463-1538
   Email: Gabor.Feher@tmit.bme.hu

   Krisztian Nemeth
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics
   Department of Telecommunications and Mediainformatics
   Magyar Tudosok krt. 2, H-1117, Budapest, Hungary
   Phone: +36 1 463-1565
   Email: Krisztian.Nemeth@tmit.bme.hu

   Andras Korn
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics
   Department of Telecommunication and Mediainformatics
   Magyar Tudosok krt. 2, H-1117, Budapest, Hungary
   Phone: +36 1 463-2664
   Email: andras.korn@tmit.bme.hu

   Istvan Cselenyi
   TeliaSonera International Carrier
   Vaci ut 22-24, H-1132 Budapest, Hungary
   Phone: +36 1 412-2705
   Email: Istvan.Cselenyi@teliasonera.com

Disclaimer of Validity

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to
   rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.




Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT   <draft-ietf-bmwg-benchres-term-07.txt>    February 2006

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

Disclaimer

   This document and the information contained herein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE.






























Feher, Nemeth, Korn, Cselenyi  Expires August 2006             [Page 20]
