

Individual Submission                                          G. Huston
Internet-Draft                                                   Telstra
Expires: August 15, 2003                                         A. Lord
                                                                   APNIC
                                                                P. Smith
                                                                   Cisco
                                                       February 14, 2003


                       IPv6 Documentation Address
             draft-huston-ipv6-documentation-prefix-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   To reduce the likelihood of conflict and confusion when relating
   documented examples to deployed systems, an IPv6 unicast prefix is
   reserved for use in examples in RFCs, books, documentation, and the
   like. Since site-local and link- local unicast addresses have special
   meaning in IPv6, these addresses cannot be used in many example
   situations. The document describes the use of the IPv6 address prefix
   2001:0DB8::/32 as a reserved prefix for use in documentation. This
   prefix has been assigned by the Asia Pacific Network Information
   Centre (APNIC) for this purpose, on behalf of the Regional Internet



Huston, et al.          Expires August 15, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 Documentation Address          February 2003


   Registries.

1. Introduction

   The address architecture for IPv6 [1] does not specifically allocate
   an IPv6 address prefix for use for documentation purposes.
   Documentation material is currently using address prefixes drawn from
   address blocks already allocated or assigned to existing
   organizations or to well known ISPs, or drawn from the currently
   unallocated address pool. Such use conflicts with existing or future
   allocations or assignments of IPv6 address space.

   The problems such conflicts may cause have already been encountered
   with IPv4 where literal use of documented examples in a production
   environment causes address and routing conflicts with existing
   services. In making an explicit allocation of a documentation address
   prefix, it is intended that such operational problems may be avoided
   for IPv6.

   Similar, but different, discussion also applies to top level domain
   names and some have been reserved for similar purposes [2].

2. Documentation IPv6 Address Prefix

   To allow documentation to accurately describe deployment examples the
   use of site local or link local addresses is inappropriate, and a
   unicast address block is required. All IPv6 unicast address space is
   marked reserved or allocated [1], and no unicast address space has
   been specifically nominated for the purposes of use in documented
   examples.

   Following  acceptance within the addressing community of a proposal
   for a block of IPv6 address space to be created for documentation
   purposes, the Regional Internet Registries allocated a unicast
   address prefix for documentation purposes. The address block is
   within the range of a conventional allocation size, so that
   documentation can accurately match deployment scenarios.

   Multicast addresses can also be reserved for documentation using this
   document reserved address space together with the Unicast
   prefix-based proposal [3]for multicast addresses.

   The prefix allocated for documentation purposes is 2001:0DB8::/32

3. Operational Implications

   This assignment implies that IPv6 network operators should add this
   address block to the list of non-routeable IPv6 address space, and if



Huston, et al.          Expires August 15, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 Documentation Address          February 2003


   packet filters are deployed, then this address should be added to
   packet filters.

   This not a private-use address block, and the filters may be used in
   both private and public contexts. Private use should use a site-local
   address block [1].

4. IANA Considerations

   IANA is to reserve 2001:0DB8::/32 address space out of the global
   unicast address space as a documentation-only prefix, and note this
   reservation in the IPv6 address registry. No end party is to be
   assigned this address.

5. Security Considerations

   IPv6 addressing documents do not have any direct impact on Internet
   infrastructure security.  Authentication of IPv6 packets is defined
   in [4].

6. Acknowledgements

   The authors acknowledge the work of Marc Blanchet, assisted by Alain
   Durand, Robert Elz, Bob Fink and Dave Thaler, in authoring a previous
   proposal for a V6 documentation prefix.

References

   [1]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
        Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998.

   [2]  Eastlake, D. and A. Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS Names", BCP
        32, RFC 2606, June 1999.

   [3]  Haberman, B. and D. Thaler, "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 Multicast
        Addresses", RFC 3306, August 2002.

   [4]  Kent, S. and R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header", RFC 2402,
        November 1998.


Authors' Addresses

   Geoff Huston
   Telstra






Huston, et al.          Expires August 15, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 Documentation Address          February 2003


   Anne Lord
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre


   Philip Smith
   Cisco Systems













































Huston, et al.          Expires August 15, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 Documentation Address          February 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Huston, et al.          Expires August 15, 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 Documentation Address          February 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Huston, et al.          Expires August 15, 2003                 [Page 6]



