


Network Working Group                                   O. Kolkman (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Intended status: Informational                              May 25, 2009
Expires: November 26, 2009


                      RFC Editor Model (Version 1)
                     draft-iab-rfc-editor-model-06

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 26, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The RFC Editor performs a number of functions that may be carried out
   by various persons or entities.  The RFC Editor model presented in
   this document divides the responsibilities for the RFC Series into



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   four functions: The RFC Series Editor, the Independent Submission
   Editor, RFC Production Center, and the RFC Publisher.  It also
   introduces the RFC Series Advisory group and an (optional)
   Independent Stream Editorial Board.  The model outlined here is
   intended to increase flexibility and operational support options,
   provide for the orderly succession of the RFC Editor, and ensure the
   continuity of the RFC series, while maintaining RFC quality,
   maintaining timely processing, ensuring document accessibility,
   reducing costs, and increasing cost transparency.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  IAOC Implementation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Expenses for the RFC Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  RFC Editor Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  RFC Series Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Independent Submission Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  RFC Production Center  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  RFC Publisher  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.1.  Charter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.2.  membership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.3.  Disagreements Among RFC Editor Entities  . . . . . . . 12
     4.2.  Independent Stream Editorial Board . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Acknowledgements Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  2009 Selection Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.1.  Ad-hoc advisory committee(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.2.  The IAB Selection Process of an RFC Series Editor
           and/or an Independent Stream Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.2.1.  Nominations and Eligibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.2.2.  Committees in 2009 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.2.3.  Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.2.4.  Care of Personal Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       A.2.5.  Term of Office and Selection Time Frame  . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix B.  Internet Draft editing details  . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     B.1.  Section 00->01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     B.2.  Section 01->02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     B.3.  Section 02->03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     B.4.  section 03->04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     B.5.  section 04->05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     B.6.  section 05->06 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


1.  Introduction

   The IAB, on behalf of the Internet technical community, is concerned
   with ensuring the continuity of the RFC Series, orderly RFC Editor
   succession, maintaining RFC quality, and RFC document accessibility.
   The IAB is also sensitive to the concerns of the IAOC about providing
   the necessary services in a cost effective and efficient manner.

   The definition of the RFC series is described in RFC 4844 [1].
   Section 3.1 defines "RFC Editor":


 | 3.1. RFC Editor
 |
 |  Originally, there was a single person acting as editor of the RFC
 |  Series (the RFC Editor).  The task has grown, and the work now
 |  requires the organized activity of several experts, so there are RFC
 |  Editors, or an RFC Editor organization.  In time, there may be
 |  multiple organizations working together to undertake the work
 |  required by the RFC Series.  For simplicity's sake, and without
 |  attempting to predict how the role might be subdivided among them,
 |  this document refers to this collection of experts and organizations
 |  as the "RFC Editor".
 |
 |  The RFC Editor is an expert technical editor and series editor,
 |  acting to support the mission of the RFC Series.  As such, the RFC
 |  Editor is the implementer handling the editorial management of the
 |  RFC Series, in accordance with the defined processes.  In addition,
 |  the RFC Editor is expected to be the expert and prime mover in
 |  discussions about policies for editing, publishing, and archiving
 |  RFCs.

   RFC 4844 makes no attempt to explore the internal organization of the
   RFC Editor.  However, RFC 4844 envisions changes in the RFC Editor
   organizational structure.  In discussion with the Internet community,
   the IAB considered changes that increase flexibility and operational
   support options, provides for the orderly succession of the RFC
   Editor, and ensures the continuity of the RFC series, while
   maintaining RFC quality, maintaining timely processing, ensuring
   document accessibility, reducing costs, and increasing cost
   transparency.  The model set forth below is the result of those
   discussions, and examines the internal organization of the RFC
   Editor, while remaining consistent with RFC 4844.

   Note that RFC 4844 uses the term "RFC Editor function" or "RFC
   Editor" as the collective set of responsibilities for which this memo
   provides a model for internal organization.  This memo introduces the
   term "RFC Series Editor" or "Series Editor" for one of the



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   organizational components.

   The IAB approved the the initial version of this RFC Editor model on
   October 1, 2008, the model has received clarifications since.  It
   should be noted that the publication of the document as an RFC does
   not cast the model in stone, as the primary purpose of this document,
   throughout the publication procession, is to encourage normal
   community review in order to ascertain consensus to work to this
   model as a first step.  The document, and the resulting structures,
   will be modified as needed through normal procedures.  The IAB will
   continue to monitor discussions within the community about potential
   adjustments to the RFC Editor model and recognizes that the process
   described in this document, may need to be adjusted to align with any
   changes that result from such discussions, hence the version number
   in the title.

   In particular, the document will be reviewed after the various
   transition periods and mechanisms specified in this version are
   completed.

2.  IAOC Implementation

   The model is constructed in such a way that it allows for all these
   functions to be implemented jointly or under separate contractual
   arrangements.  In fact, a bidder could put together a proposal that
   includes one or more subcontractors.  The reporting structure will
   depend on the manner that the contracts are awarded, and they are
   subject to change over time.  As a result, the model describes only
   responsibilities, procedures, and process.  The exact implementation
   is a responsibility of the IAOC.

2.1.  Expenses for the RFC Editor

   The expenses discussed in this document are not new expenses.  They
   are part of the IASA budget.  Today, these expenses are part of the
   RFC Editor contract with ISI.

3.  RFC Editor Model

   The RFC Editor model divides the responsibilities for the RFC Series
   into the following components:

   o  RFC Series Editor ("RSE")

   o  Independent Submission Editor ("ISE")

   o  RFC Production Center




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   o  RFC Publisher

   The RFC Series Production and Process under this structure is
   schematically represented by the figure below (the picture does not
   depict oversight and escalation relations).


              ------     -----     ------     ---------
   Stream    |      |   |     |   |      |   |Community|
   Pro-      | IETF |   | IAB |   | IRTF |   |   at    |
   ducers    |      |   |     |   |      |   |  Large  |
              --^---     --^--     ---^--     ----^----
                |          |          |           |
                |          |          |           |             -------
                |          |          |           |            | Indep.|
              --v---    ---v---    ---v--     ----v------      | Stream|
   Stream    |      |   |     |   |      |   |Independent|     | Edi-  |
   Appro-    | IESG |   | IAB |   | IRSG |   |  Stream   |.....| torial|
   vers      |      |   |     |   |      |   |  Editor   |     | Board |
              ----^-    ---^---   ----^---    ----^------       -------
                  |        |          |           |
                  |        |          |           |             -------
                  |        |          |           |            | RFC   |
    ------      --v--------v----------v-----------v-----       | Series|
   |      |    |                                        |      | Adv.  |
   | IANA | <->|        RFC Production Center           <---.  | Group |
   |      |    |                                        |   |   -------
    ------      -----------------^----------------------    |     |
                                 |                          |     |
                                 |                    ------v-------
                           ------v---------          |              |
                          |                |         |  RFC Series  |
                          |    Publisher   |<------->|    Editor    |
                          |                |         |              |
                           ----------------           --------------

              Ordinary RFC Series production and process.

                                 Figure 1

   In this model documents are produced and approved through multiple
   document streams.  The four that now exist are described in
   [RFC4844].  Documents from these streams are edited and processed by
   the Production Center and published by the Publisher.The RFC Series
   Editor will exercise executive-level management over many of the
   activities of the RFC Publisher and the RFC Production Center (which
   can be seen as back office functions) and will be the entity that:




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   o  faces the community;

   o  works with the IAOC for contractual responsibilities;

   o  and in collaboration with the RFC Series Advisory Group,
      identifies and leads community discussion of important issues and
      opportunities facing the RFC Series;

   while the IAB and IAOC maintain their chartered responsibility.  More
   details about the collaboration with the RSAG and the IAB
   responsibilities can be found in Section 4.1.

   The RSE does not have the authority to hire or fire RFC Editor
   contractors or personnel (See Section 4.1.3).

3.1.  RFC Series Editor

   The RFC Series Editor, is an individual who may have assistants and
   who will regularly be provided support from an advisory group (see
   Section 4.1).  The RSE is responsible for:

   1.  Identifying appropriate steps for RFC Series continuity

   2.  Exercising executive-level management over the implementation of
       policies, processes and procedures established to ensure the
       quality and consistency for the RFC Series.  The RFC Series
       Editor will work with the RSAG, and, where appropriate, the IAB
       and IAOC to develop, new policy and see that contractual
       agreements are met.

   3.  Taking proposed changes to the community, and working with the
       IAB so that the IAB can ensure that there is sufficient community
       review before significant policies or policy changes are adopted.

   4.  Coordinating with IAB and/or IAOC, and together with the IAB
       and/or IAOC participating in reviews of the RFC Publisher, RFC
       Publication Center, and Independent Stream Editor functions to
       ensure the above mentioned continuity

   5.  Developing, maintaining, and publishing the RFC Style Manual
       publication for use by authors, editors, and the RFC publisher

   6.  Managing the RFC errata process

   7.  Liaising with the IAB

   8.  Overseeing consistency of RFCs with the RFC Series and RFC Style
       Manual



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   There are many potential issues with respect to RFC Series
   continuity.  To name a few: Look and feel of the series, indexing
   methodologies, accessibility of the publications, IPR and copyright
   issues, and formatting issues.  After identifying the appropriate
   steps to address such issues, the implementation of those steps
   resides mostly with the RFC production and publishing functions.
   Since the IAOC maintains oversight of the implementation, the RFC
   Series Editor is expected to be invited and participate in reviews of
   that implementation.

   The RFC Series Editor is a senior technology professional with the
   following qualifications:

   1.  Strong understanding of the IETF process

   2.  Executive management experience suitable to managing the
       requirements outlined elsewhere in this document and the many
       aspects of this role and to coordinating the overall RFC Editor
       process.

   3.  Good understanding of the English language and technical
       terminology related to the Internet

   4.  Good communication skills

   5.  Experience with editorial processes

   6.  Independent worker

   7.  Experience as an RFC author desired

   There are alternative selection methods for selecting the individual
   to serve as the RFC Series Editor:

   The first alternative involves a Request for Proposal (RFP) process
   run by the IAOC.  The IAOC would seek a person with the listed
   qualifications in a broadly distributed RFP.  The winner would be
   selected by the IAOC in consultation with the IAB, and then, the IAOC
   would contract for the services.  Contract terms, including length of
   contract, extensions and renewals, shall be as provided in the RFP.
   The opportunity to bid shall be broadly available.  Fees and expenses
   to support the administrative operation of the RFC Series Editor
   would be part of the awarded contract and be part of the IASA budget.

   The second alternative involves a nomination and confirmation
   process.  Candidates are nominated, and then an individual with the
   listed qualifications is selected by the Internet community and
   confirmed by the IAB.  An approach similar to the one used by the IAB



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   to select an IAOC member every other year as described in Appendix A
   will be used.  Once the selection is made, a contract will be
   negotiated between the person selected and the IAOC, following the
   general model above.  Financial compensation and expenses to support
   the administrative operation of the RFC Series Editor selected in
   this manner would be part of the IASA budget.

   Based on an Request for Information (RFI) issued by the IAOC in
   December 2008 the IAOC recommended that the second alternative is
   chosen for the 2009 selection cycle to be completed in 2009.

3.2.  Independent Submission Editor

   The Independent Submission Editor is an individual who may have
   assistants and who is responsible for:

   1.  Maintaining technical quality of the Independent stream

   2.  Independent Submissions approval and processing

   3.  Forwarding RFCs in the Independent Stream to the RFC Production
       Center

   4.  Independent Submissions RFC errata review and approval

   The Independent Submission Editor is a senior position for which the
   following qualifications are desired:

   1.  Technical competence, i.e. broad technical experience and
       perspective across the whole range of Internet technologies and
       applications, and specifically, the ability to work effectively
       with portions of that spectrum in which no personal expertise
       exists.

   2.  Thorough familiarity with the RFC series

   3.  An ability to define and constitute advisory and document review
       arrangements.  If those arrangements include an Editorial Board
       similar to the current one or some equivalent arrangement and
       assess the technical competence of potential Editorial Board
       members.

   4.  Good standing in the technical community, in and beyond the IETF.

   5.  Demonstrated Editorial skills, good command of the English
       language, and demonstrated history of being able to work
       effectively with technical documents and materials created by
       others.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   6.  The ability to work effectively in a multi-actor environment with
       divided authority and responsibility similar to that described in
       this document.

   The Independent Submission Editor may seek support from an advisory
   board (see Section 4.2) and may form a team to perform the activities
   needed to fulfill their responsibilities.

   The individual with the listed qualifications will be selected by the
   IAB after input is collected from the community.  An approach similar
   to the one used by the IAB to select an IAOC member every other year
   as described in Appendix A should be used.  While the ISE itself is
   considered a volunteer function, the IAB considers maintaining the
   Independent stream within the RFC Series part of the IAB's supported
   activities, and will include the expenses made for the support of the
   ISE in its IASA-supported budget.

3.3.  RFC Production Center

   RFC Production is performed by a paid contractor, and the contractor
   responsibilities include:

   1.   Editing inputs from all RFC streams to comply with the RFC Style
        Manual

   2.   Creating records of edits performed on documents

   3.   Identifying where editorial changes might have technical impact
        and seek necessary clarification.

   4.   Engaging in dialogue with authors, document shepherds, IANA,
        and/or stream dependent contacts when clarification is needed.

   5.   Creating records of dialogue with documents authors

   6.   Requesting advice from the RFC Series Editor as needed

   7.   Providing suggestions to the RFC Series Editor as needed

   8.   Coordinating with IANA to perform protocol parameter registry
        actions

   9.   Assigning of RFC number

   10.  Establishing publication readiness of each document through
        communication with the authors, document shepherds, IANA and/or
        stream dependent contacts, and if needed with the RFC Series
        Editor.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   11.  Forwarding ready-to-publish documents to the RFC Publisher

   12.  Forwarding records of edits and author dialogue to RFC Publisher
        so these can be preserved

   13.  Liaising with IESG and IAB

   The RFC Production Center contractor is to be selected by the IAOC
   through an RFP process.  The IAOC would seek a bidder who, among
   other things, is able to provide a professional, quality, timely, and
   cost effective service against the established style and production
   guidelines.  Contract terms, including length of contract, extensions
   and renewals, shall be as defined in an RFP.  The opportunity to bid
   shall be broadly available.

   As described in Section 3.1 this model allows the IAOC to recommend
   the RSE position to be selected through an RFP process, in that case
   the model also allows combining the RFC Production Center bid with
   the RSE bid.  For 2009 the recommendation was made that the RSE is
   selected throug a IAB led selection process.

3.4.  RFC Publisher

   The RFC Publisher responsibilities include:

   1.  Announce and provide on-line access to RFCs

   2.  Provide on-line system to submit RFC Errata

   3.  Provide on-line access to approved RFC Errata

   4.  Provide backups

   5.  Provide storage and preservation of records

   6.  Authenticate RFCs for legal proceedings

   All these activities will be done under general supervision of the
   RSE and need some level of coordination with various submission
   streams and the RSE.

   Implementation of the RFC Publisher function can be pursued in two
   different ways.  The choice between these alternatives will be based
   on an RFI issued by the IAOC in December 2009.

   The first alternative is to modify the IETF Secretariat contract to
   include these services.  Expenses to support these services would be
   part of the revised contract.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   The second alternative is a separate vendor selected by the IAOC
   through an RFP process, possibly as part of the same contract as the
   RFC Series Editor.  Expenses to support service would be part of the
   awarded contract.

4.  Committees

4.1.  RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG)

4.1.1.  Charter

   The purpose of the RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG) is to provide
   expert, informed guidance (chiefly, to the RSE) in matters affecting
   the RFC Series operation and development.  Such matters include, but
   are not limited to, issues in operation of the RFC model components,
   and consideration of additional RFC streams, to give a sense of the
   range of topics covered.

   The RSAG is chartered by the IAB.  As such, it operates independently
   of the IAB to fulfill that charter, and provides periodic reports to
   the IAB via the RSE.

   The group provides guidance to the RSE, who in turn addresses
   immediate operational issues or opportunities with the ISE,
   Production Center, or Publisher.  In cases where these issues have
   contractual side-effects the RSE provides guidance to the IAD.  The
   RSAG also serves to provide advice to the RSE on longer-term, larger-
   scale developments for the RFC Series.  This informs the proposals
   the RSE takes to the community for discussion, and the IAD/IAOC as
   proposals for implementation.

   The RSAG will assist the RSE in identifying and leading community
   discussion of important issues and opportunities facing the RFC
   Series.  The IAB retains its oversight role and is responsible for
   ensuring that adequate community discussion has been held on any such
   significant topics.

4.1.2.  membership

   The RSAG full members are all at large members, selected for their
   experience and interest in the RFC Series, to provide consistency and
   constancy of the RFC Series interpretation over time; the members do
   not represent a particular RFC stream or any organizations.  The RSAG
   members are proposed by the Series Editor in consultation with the
   sitting RSAG members, and then confirmed and formally appointed by
   the IAB.  In addition to these full members, each RFC stream will
   appoint a liaison to the RSAG to provide context specific to their
   stream.  Initially there will be no IAOC or IAB liaison for their



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   oversight role, however as experience is gained the IAOC, IAB, or
   RSAG may request for such.  There is no requirement or expectation
   that RSAG members will be IAB members.

   The RSAG does not select or appoint the RSE, or any other component
   of the RFC Editor model, although it acts as an important resource
   for informing any selection process.

   It is envisioned that the RSAG will be composed of appointed full
   members serving staggered 3 year terms, plus the RSE.  The full
   members will serve at the pleasure of the IAB -- appointed by the
   IAB, and if necessary, removed by the IAB.

   In order to provide continuity and to assist with a smooth transition
   of the RFC Editor function, the members of the existing RFC Editor
   Editorial Board who are willing to do so are asked to serve as an
   interim RSAG, effective as of the time of approval of this document.
   Within one year from the time the RFC Editor function transitions to
   the new model and after consideration of the operation of the new
   model in practice, the interim RSAG and RSE will formulate
   recommendations to the IAB about this model, in particular the
   regular composition, size, and selection process for the permanent
   RSAG in particular.

4.1.3.  Disagreements Among RFC Editor Entities

   If during the execution of their activities, a disagreement arises
   over an implementation decision made by one of the entities in the
   model, any relevant party should first request a review and
   reconsideration of the decision.  If that party still disagrees after
   the reconsideration, the RSE may be asked to decide or, especially if
   the RSE is involved, the IAB Chair (for a technical or procedural
   matter) or IAD (for an administrative or contractual one) may be
   asked to mediate or appoint a mediator to aid in the discussions,
   although neither is obligated to do so.  All parties should work
   informally and in good faith to reach a mutually agreeable
   conclusion.

   If such a conclusion is not possible through those informal
   processes, then the matter must be registered with the RFC Series
   Advisory Group.  The RSAG may choose to offer advice to the RSE or
   more general advice to the parties involved and may ask the RSE to
   defer a decision until it formulates its advice.  However, if a
   timely decision cannot be reached through discussion, mediation, and
   mutual agreement, the Series Editor is expected to make whatever
   decisions are needed to ensure the smooth functioning of the RFC
   Editor function; those decisions are final.




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   RSE decisions of this type are limited to the functioning of the
   process and evaluation of whether current policies are appropriately
   implemented in the decision or need adjustment.  In particular, it
   should be noted that final decisions about the technical content of
   individual documents are the exclusive responsibility of the stream
   approvers for those documents, as shown in the illustration in
   Figure 1.

   If a disagreement or decision has immediate or future contractual
   consequences, the Series Editor must identify the issue to the IAOC
   and, if the RSAG has provided advice, forward that advice as well.
   After the IAOC has notified the IAB, the IAD as guided by the IAOC,
   with advice provided by the Series Editor, has the responsibility to
   resolve these contractual issues.

   If informal agreements cannot be reached and formal RSAG review
   and/or RSE or stream approver decisions are required, the RSE must
   identify the issues involved to the community and report them to the
   IAB in its oversight capacity.  The RSE and IAB shall mutually
   develop a satisfactory mechanism for this type of reporting when and
   if it is necessary.

   IAB and community discussion of any patterns of disputes are expected
   to inform future changes to Series policies including possible
   updates to this document.

4.2.  Independent Stream Editorial Board

   Today the RFC Editor is supported by an Editorial Board for the
   review of Independent stream documents.  This board is expected to
   evolve in what we will call the Independent Stream Editorial Board.
   This Editorial Board will exist at the pleasure of the ISE, and the
   members serve at the pleasure of the ISE.  The existence of this
   board is simply noted within this model, and additional discussion of
   such considered out of scope of this document.

5.  IANA considerations

   This document defines several functions within the overall RFC Editor
   structure, and it places the responsibility for coordination of
   registry value assignments with the RFC Production Center.  The IAOC
   will facilitate the establishment of the relationship between the RFC
   Production Center and IANA.

   This document does not create a new registry nor does it register any
   values in existing registries, and no IANA action is required.





Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


6.  Security considerations

   The same security considerations as those in RFC 4844 apply: The
   processes for the publication of documents must prevent the
   introduction of unapproved changes.  Since the RFC Editor maintains
   the index of publications, sufficient security must be in place to
   prevent these published documents from being changed by external
   parties.  The archive of RFC documents, any source documents needed
   to recreate the RFC documents, and any associated original documents
   (such as lists of errata, tools, and, for some early items, non-
   machine readable originals) need to be secured against failure of the
   storage medium and other similar disasters.

   The IAOC should take these security considerations into account
   during the implementation of this RFC Editor model.

7.  Acknowledgements Section

   The RFC Editor model was conceived and discussed in hallways and on
   mail lists.  The first iteration of the text on which this document
   is based was first drafted by Leslie Daigle, Russ Housley, and Ray
   Pelletier.  In addition to the members of the IAOC and IAB in
   conjuction with those roles, major and minor contributions were made
   by (in alphabetical order): Bob Braden, Brian Carpenter, Sandy
   Ginoza, Alice Hagens, Joel M. Halpern, Paul Hoffman, John Klensin,
   Subramanian Moonesamy, and Jim Schaad.

   The IAOC members at the time the RFC Editor model was approved were
   (in alphabetical order): Fred Baker, Bob Hinden, Russ Housley, Ole
   Jacobsen, Ed Juskevicius, Olaf Kolkman, Ray Pelletier (non-voting),
   Lynn St.Amour, and Jonne Soininen.  In addition, Marshall Eubanks was
   serving as the IAOC Scribe.

   The IAB members at the time the initial RFC Editor model was approved
   were (in alphabetical order): Loa Andersson, Gonzalo Camarillo,
   Stuart Cheshire, Russ Housley, Olaf Kolkman, Gregory Lebovitz, Barry
   Leiba, Kurtis Lindqvist, Andrew Malis, Danny McPherson, David Oran,
   Dave Thaler, and Lixia Zhang.  In addition, the IAB included two ex-
   officio members: Dow Street, who was serving as the IAB Executive
   Director, and Aaron Falk, who was serving as the IRTF Chair.

   The IAB members at the time the this RFC was approved were (in
   alphabetical order): Marcelo Bagnulo, Gonzalo Camarillo, Stuart
   Cheshire, Vijay Gill, Russ Housley, John Klensin, Olaf Kolkman,
   Gregory Lebovitz, Andrew Malis, Danny McPherson, David Oran, Jon
   Peterson, and Dave Thaler.

8.  References



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC Series and
        RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.

8.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Huston, G. and B. Wijnen, "The IETF Administrative Oversight
        Committee (IAOC) Member Selection Guidelines and Process",
        BCP 113, RFC 4333, December 2005.

Appendix A.  2009 Selection Process

   In 2009 the IAB is repsonsible for the selection of the RFC Series
   Editor and for the selection of the Independent Submission Editor.
   The IAOC selects the RFC Production Center and RFC Publisher from
   vendors that choose to submit a proposal.  The IAOC procurement
   process is not described in this document.

   The selection process for the ISE and RSE is taken from [2] but
   modified to allow for subject matter experts to advise the IAB, to
   take into account that the community with interest in the RFC series
   extends beyond the IETF community.

A.1.  Ad-hoc advisory committee(s)

   It is expected that the IAB and IAOC will, during the various stages
   of the bidding process, establish one or more ad-hoc advisory
   committees to assist them in the selection of the various functions.
   The names of the members of the committees, who do not need to be IAB
   members or IETF participants, will be made public through the IAB and
   IAOC minutes or otherwise.

   Members of these committees are expected to have an understanding of
   the RFC series and related processes, and of procedures and interests
   of the various streams.

   Members of the subcommittees will be privy to confidential material
   and are expected to honour confidentiality.  Because they are subject
   to confidential material they are recused from bidding on any of the
   functions for which financial compensation is offered.

   The IAB and IAOC bear the responsibility for the selections of the
   candidates for defined functions, the committees provide advice and
   recommendations but are not expected to act as nomination or
   selection committees.





Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


A.2.  The IAB Selection Process of an RFC Series Editor and/or an
      Independent Stream Editor

A.2.1.  Nominations and Eligibility

   The IAB will be making a broad public call for nominations.  The
   public call will specify the manner by which nominations will be
   accepted and the means by which the list of nominees will be
   published.  Self-nominations are permitted.  Along with the name and
   contact information for each candidate, details about the candidate's
   background and qualifications for the position should be attached to
   the nomination.

   People that served on the ad-hoc advisory committee(s) mentioned
   above are not eligible.  There are no further limmitations.
   Specifically, nominees do not have to be actively contributing to the
   IETF and active participation as being a working group chair, an IETF
   Nominating Committee member, or an IAB or IESG member is not a
   limitation.

   IAB members who accept a nomination for an IAB-selected position will
   recuse themselves from IAB selection discussions.

A.2.2.  Committees in 2009

   During the 2009 selection process a committee assisted the IAOC/IAB
   in creating the job descriptions and statements of work.  This
   committee may also assist in assessing the bids made to the IAOC for
   the Production Center and the RFC Publisher.  Another committee, the
   Ad-hoc Committee for selection of Editorial Functions, assists the
   IAB in the assesment of the RFC Series Editor and the Independent
   Submission Editor candidates.

A.2.3.  Selection

   The IAB will publish the list of nominated persons prior to making a
   decision, allowing time for the community to pass any relevant
   comments to the IAB.  When established, the advisory committee will
   be asked to provide a motivated shortlist.  The IAB will review the
   nomination material, any submitted comments, the shortlist from the
   advisory committee, and make its selection.

   It is noted that the community mentioned above is the community with
   an interest in RFCs and the RFC Editor's functioning, the IETF
   community is only a part of that community.

   The main intent is to select the superior candidate taking
   considerations of continuity of the series into account.



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


A.2.4.  Care of Personal Information

   The following procedures will be used by the IAB in managing
   candidates' personal information:

   o  The candidate's name will be published, with all other candidate
      names, at the close of the nominations period.

   o  Except as noted above, all information provided to the IAB during
      this process will be kept as confidential to the IAB and, when
      established, the advisory committee.

A.2.5.  Term of Office and Selection Time Frame

   Subject to further negotiations and in the interest of providing
   stability, terms of office are expected to be five years with no
   restrictions on renewals and with provision for shorter actual
   contracts and intermediate reviews.  In addition an effort should be
   made so that terms of office for the RSE, ISE, and RFC Production
   Center do not terminate concurrently.

   The selection timeframe for 2009 is roughly:

      May - IAB calls for nominations for ISE and RSE positions

      Mid July - [Stockholm] A Committee conducts interviews

      Mid August - Committee recommends individuals to IAB for ISE and
      RSE positions

      Second half of September - IAB Appoints ISE, and RSE subject to
      successful negotiations of agreement with IAOC

      Mid October - MOUs Executed with IAD, ISE for expenses RSE for
      stipend and expenses

      Mid October - Transition begins

      January 2010 - Contract begins

   The timeline for future selections is subject to recommendation from
   the RSAG and review by the IAB.

Appendix B.  Internet Draft editing details

   [This appendix is to be removed at publication]

   $Id: draft-iab-rfc-editor-model.xml 48 2009-05-25 07:57:19Z olaf $



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


B.1.  Section 00->01

   Added Sandy and Alice to the acknowledgement section, they were
   accidentally omitted

   Added Appendix A so that the selection mechanism is explicitly
   documented.  The selection mechanism documents the use of an advisory
   committee and is explicit about the fact that the community expands
   beyond the IETF community.

   Modified the RFC Editor Function name to "RFC Series Editor" in order
   to minimize confusion between the collective of functions (RFC
   Editor) and the function (Series Editor).

   Added wording for specifying the technical competence needed by the
   indep.subm.editor as suggested by JCK

   Clarified the responsibilities of the production function in
   Section 3.3

   Enumerated qualifications of the RFC Editor

B.2.  Section 01->02

   Various nits corrected

   Inconsistency in the use of RFC Production house and RFC Production
   fixed: RFC Production Center used as term

   Oversight over RFC consistency with the style manual has been made
   explicit.

   Clarified that the Independent Stream Editors budget is independent
   from the IETF/IASA.

   Improved the language that clarified that the RFC Series editors and
   Independent Stream editor do not necessarily need to work without
   assistants, while they bear the responsibility.

B.3.  Section 02->03

   Added Joel to the acknowledgements

   Added the Advisory committee charter as a FYI

   Added editorial skill and command of English as a requirement for the
   ISE




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   In the responsibilities for the RFC series: Change "Participate in"
   to "Provide input in" for IAOC Review.  This makes the text more
   implementation neutral.

   Typo: Model is consistent with RFC4844 instead of 4884

   Added "Maintaining technical quality of the Independent stream" as an
   explicit responsibility for the ISE.

B.4.  section 03->04

   [omitted by accident]

B.5.  section 04->05

   Introduced the concept of the RFC Series Advisory Group and reworked
   the text to take this into account.  This also caused the renaming of
   the advisory group to an explicit "Independent Stream Editorial
   Board".

   Rewrote the appeal process to take the RSAG into account

   In Appendix A.2.5: Extended the appointment period to 3 years

B.6.  section 05->06

   This version documents decisions made by the IAB during prior to
   approval during its April 27-28 retreat

   Addressed some nits

   Rewritten details of dispute resolution.  Also stopped using the
   words appeal or dispute resolution as they have a specific meaning in
   the standards process

   The ISE's expenses are covered from the IASA budget.

   The envisioned size of the RSAG is changed from 6 to un-specified,
   the RSAG is allowed to advice on the size later

   Rewrote/clarified requirements for RSE and ISE function

Authors' Addresses

   Olaf M. Kolkman

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        RFC Editor Model (Version 1)              May 2009


   Internet Architecture Board

   EMail: iab@iab.org
















































Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB     Expires November 26, 2009              [Page 20]

