 
 
 
   Network Working Group Name                             Michael Welzl 
   Internet Draft                                 Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   Document: draft-irtf-iccrg-wetzl-                            Editors 
   congestion-control-open-research-00.txt 
                                                         Michael Scharf 
                                                                        
   Expires: December 2007                                     July 2007 
 
 
            Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control 
                                      
      draft-irtf-iccrg-welzl-congestion-control-open-research-00.txt 
 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
       
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts.    
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2007. 
    
Copyright Notice  
        
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
 
 
Abstract 
    
   This document describes many of the open problems in Internet 
   congestion control that are known today. This includes several new 
   challenges that are becoming important as the network grows, as well 
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 1] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   as some issues that have been known for many years. These challenges 
   are generally considered to be open research topics that may require 
   more study or application of innovative techniques before Internet-
   scale solutions can be confidently engineered and deployed. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Global Challenges - Overview...................................4 
   3. Detailed Challenges............................................4 
      3.1 Challenge 1: Router Support................................4 
      3.2 Challenge 2: Dynamic Range of Requirements.................7 
      3.3 Challenge 3: Corruption Loss...............................8 
      3.4 Challenge 4: Small Packets................................10 
      3.5 Challenge 5: Pseudo-Wires.................................10 
      3.6 Challenge 6: Multi-domain Congestion Control..............12 
      3.7 Challenge 7: Precedence for Elastic Traffic...............13 
      3.8 Challenge 8: Misbehaving Senders and Receivers............14 
      3.9 Other challenges..........................................14 
   4. Security Considerations.......................................14 
   5. Contributors..................................................14 
   6. References....................................................14 
   7.1 Normative References.........................................14 
      Acknowledgments...............................................17 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   This document describes many of the open research topics in the 
   domain of Internet congestion control that are known today. We begin 
   by reviewing some proposed definitions of congestion and congestion 
   control based on current understandings. 
 
   Congestion is defined as the reduction in utility due to overload in 
   networks that support both spatial and temporal multiplexing, but no 
   reservation [Keshav]. Congestion control is a distributed algorithm 
   to share network resources among competing traffic sources. Two 
   components of congestion control have been defined: the primal and 
   the dual [Kelly98]. Primal congestion control is based on the traffic 
   sources algorithm controlling their sending rates or window sizes 

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 2] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   depending on the congestion indication feedback signals they get from 
   routers (dynamic feedback-based adjustment). TCP algorithms carry out 
   the primal iteration. Dual congestion control is implemented by the 
   routers through gathering information from the traffic flows that are 
   using them. Routers congestion control algorithm updates, implicitly 
   or explicitly, a congestion measure and sends it back, implicitly or 
   explicitly, to the traffic sources that use that link. Queue 
   management algorithms such as Random Early Detection (RED) [Floyd93] 
   or Random Exponential Marking (REM) [Ath01] carry out the dual 
   iteration.  
    
   Congestion control provides for a fundamental set of mechanisms for 
   maintaining the stability and efficiency of the Internet operations. 
   Congestion control has been associated with TCP since Van Jacobson's 
   work in 1988, but also outside of TCP (e.g. for real-time multimedia 
   applications, multicast, and router-based mechanisms). The Van 
   Jacobson end-to-end congestion control algorithms [Jacobson88] 
   [RFC2581] are used by the Internet transport protocols TCP [RFC793]. 
   They have been proven to be highly successful over many years but 
   have begun to reach their limits. Indeed, heterogeneity of both data 
   link/physical layer and applications are pulling TCP congestion 
   control (that performs poorly as bandwidth or delay increases) 
   outside of its natural operating regime. A side effect of these 
   deficits is that there is an increasing share of hosts that use non-
   standardized congestion control enhancements (for instance, many 
   Linux distributions are shipped with "CUBIC" as default TCP 
   congestion control.)  
    
   From the original Jacobson algorithm requiring no congestion-related 
   state in routers, more recent modifications have backed off from this 
   purity. Active Queue Management (AQM) in routers, e.g., RED and all 
   its variants, xCHOKE [Pan00], RED with In/Out (RIO) [Clark98], etc. 
   improves performance by keeping queues small (implicit feedback), 
   while Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) [Floyd94] [RFC3168] 
   passes one bit of congestion information back to senders. These 
   measures do improve performance, but there is a limit to how much can 
   be accomplished without more information from routers. The 
   requirement of extreme scalability together with robustness has been 
   a difficult hurdle to accelerating information flow. Primal-Dual 
   TCP/AQM distributed algorithm stability and equilibrium properties 
   have been extensively studied in [Low02] [Low03].   
    
   In addition, congestion control includes many new challenges that are 
   becoming important as the network grows, in addition to the issues 
   that have been known for many years. These are generally considered 
   to be open research topics that may require more study or application 
   of innovative techniques before Internet-scale solutions can be 
   confidently engineered and deployed. 
    
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 3] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
2. Global Challenges - Overview 
    
3. Detailed Challenges 
    
3.1 Challenge 1: Router Support  
    
   Routers can be involved in congestion control in two ways: First, 
   they can implicitly optimize their functions, such as queue 
   management and scheduling strategies, in order to support the 
   operation of an end-to-end congestion control.  
    
   Various approaches have been proposed and also deployed, such as 
   different AQM techniques. Even though these implicit techniques are 
   known to improve network performance during congestion phases, they 
   are still only partly deployed in the Internet. This may be due to 
   the fact that finding optimal and robust parameterizations for these 
   mechanisms is a non-trivial problem. Indeed, the problem with various 
   AQM schemes is the difficulty to identify correct values of the 
   parameter set that affects the performance of the queuing scheme (due 
   to variation in the number of sources, the capacity and the feedback 
   delay) [Fioriu00] [Hollot01] [Zhang03]. None of the AQM schemes (RED, 
   REM, BLUE, PI-Controller but also Adaptive Virtual Queue (AVQ) define 
   a systematic rule for setting its parameters. 
    
   Second, routers can participate in congestion control by explicit 
   notification mechanisms. By such feedback from the network, 
   connection endpoints can obtain more accurate information about the 
   current network characteristics on the path. This allows endpoints to 
   make more precise decisions that can better prevent packet loss and 
   that can also improve fairness among different flows. Examples for 
   explicit router feedback include Explicit Congestion Notification 
   (ECN) [RFC3168], Quick-Start [RFC4782], and eXplicit Control Protocol 
   (XCP) [Katabi02] [Falk07]. 
    
   With increasing the per-flow bandwidth-delay product increases, TCP 
   becomes inefficient and prone to instability, regardless of the 
   queuing scheme. XCP, which generalizes ECN, has been developed to 
   address these issues, using per-packet feedback. By decoupling 
   resource utilization/congestion control from fairness control, XCP 
   outperforms TCP in conventional and high bandwidth-delay 
   environments, and remains efficient, fair, scalable, and stable 
   regardless of the link capacity, the round trip delay, and the number 
   of sources. XCP aims at achieving fair bandwidth allocation, high 
   utilization, small standing queue size, and near-zero packet drops, 
   with both steady and highly varying traffic. Importantly, XCP does 
   not maintain any per-flow state in routers and requires few CPU 
   cycles per packet, hence portable to high-speed routers. However, XCP 
   is still subject to research efforts: [Andrew05] has recently pointed 
   out cases where in which XCP is stable locally but unstable globally 
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 4] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   (when the maximum RTT of a flow is much larger than the mean RTT). 
   This instability can be removed by setting the estimation interval to 
   be the maximum observed RTT, rather than the mean RTT. Nevertheless, 
   this makes the system vulnerable to erroneous RTT advertisements. 
   [PAP02] shows that when flows with different RTTs are applied, XCP 
   sometimes discriminates among heterogeneous traffic flows, even if 
   XCP is generally fair to different flows even if they belong to 
   significantly heterogeneous flows. [Low05] provides for a complete 
   characterization of the XCP equilibrium properties. 
    
   In general, such router support raises many issues that have not been 
   completely solved yet: 
    
3.1.1 Performance and robustness 
    
   Congestion control requires some tradeoffs: On the one hand, it must 
   allow high link utilizations and fair resource sharing. But on the 
   other hand the algorithms must also be robust and conservative in 
   particular during congestion phases. 
      
   Router support can help to improve performance and fairness, but it 
   can also result in additional complexity and more control loops. This 
   requires a careful design of the algorithms in order to ensure 
   stability and avoid e.g. oscillations. A further challenge is the 
   fact that information may be imprecise. For instance, severe 
   congestion can delay feedback signals. Also, the measurement of 
   parameters such as round-trip times (RTT) or data rates may contain 
   estimation errors. Even though there has been significant progress in 
   providing fundamental theoretical models for such effects, research 
   has not completely explored the whole problem space yet. 
       
   Open questions are:  
    
   - How much can routers theoretically improve performance in the  
     complete range of communication scenarios that exists in the  
     Internet?  
    
   - Is it possible to design robust mechanisms that offer significant  
     benefits without additional risks? 
    
3.1.2 Granularity of router functions 
    
   There are several degrees of freedom concerning router involvement, 
   ranging from some few additional functions in network management 
   procedures one the one end, and additional per packet processing on 
   the other end of the solution space. Furthermore, different amounts 
   of state can be kept in routers (no per-flow state, partial per-flow 
   state, soft state per flows, hard state per flow). The additional 

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 5] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   router processing a challenge for Internet scalability and could also 
   increase the end-to-end latencies. 
    
   There are many solutions that do not require per-flow state and thus 
   do not cause a large processing overhead. However, scalability issues 
   could also be caused, for instance, by synchronization mechanisms for 
   state information among parallel processing entities, which are e. g. 
   used in high-speed router hardware designs. 
    
   Open questions are:  
    
   - What granularity of router processing can be realized without    
     affecting the Internet scalability?  
    
   - How can additional processing efforts be kept at a minimum? 
 
3.1.3 Information acquisition 
    
   In order to support congestion control, routers have to obtain at 
   least a subset of the following information. Obtaining that 
   information may result in complex tasks. 
    
   1. Capacity of (outgoing) links 
    
   Link characteristics depend on the realization of lower protocol 
   layers. Routers do not necessarily know the link layer network 
   topology and link capacities, and these are not necessarily constant 
   (e. g., on shared wireless links). Difficulties also arise when using 
   IP-in-IP tunnels [RFC 2003] or MPLS [RFC3031] [RFC3032]. In these 
   cases, link information could be determined by cross-layer 
   information exchange, but this requires link layer technology 
   specific interfaces. An alternative could be online measurements, but 
   this can cause significant additional network overhead. 
    
   2. Traffic carried over (outgoing) links 
    
   Accurate online measurement of data rates is challenging when traffic 
   is bursty. For instance, it is impossible to define and measure a 
   current link load. This is a challenge for proposals that require 
   knowledge e.g. about the current link utilization. 
    
   3. Internal buffer statistics  
    
   Some proposals use buffer statistics such as a virtual queue length 
   to trigger feedback.  However, routers can include multiple 
   distributed buffer stages that make it difficult to obtain such 
   metrics. 
    

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 6] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   Open questions are: Can this information be made available, e.g., by 
   additional interfaces or protocols? 
 
3.1.4 Feedback signaling 
    
   Explicit notification mechanisms can be realized either by in-band 
   signaling or by out-of-band signaling. The latter case requires 
   additional protocols and can be further subdivided into path-coupled 
   and path-decoupled approaches.  
    
   In-band signaling can be considered to be an appropriate choice: 
   Since notifications are piggy-packet along with data traffic, there 
   is less overhead and implementation complexity remains limited. Path-
   coupled out-of-band signaling could however be possible, too. 
    
   Open questions concerning feedback signaling include:  
    
   - At which protocol layer should the feedback occur (IP/network layer  
     assisted, transport layer assisted, hybrid solutions, shim  layer  
     /intermediate sub-layer, etc.)?  
    
   - What is the optimal frequency of feedback (only in case of  
     congestion events, per RTT, per packet, etc.)? 
    
3.2 Challenge 2: Dynamic Range of Requirements 
    
   The Internet encompasses a large variety of heterogeneous IP networks 
   that are realized by a multitude of technologies, which result in a 
   tremendous variety of link and path characteristics: capacity can be 
   either scarce in very slow speed radio links (several kbps), or there 
   may be an abundant supply in high-speed optical links (several 
   gigabit per second). Concerning latency, scenarios range from local 
   interconnects (much less than a millisecond) to certain wireless and 
   satellite links with very large latencies (up to a second). Even 
   higher latencies can occur in interstellar communication.  As a 
   consequence, both the available bandwidth and the end-to-end delay in 
   the Internet may vary over many orders of magnitude, and it is likely 
   that the range of parameters will further increase in future. 
    
   Additionally, neither available bandwidth nor end-to-end delays are 
   constant. At the IP layer, competing cross-traffic, traffic 
   management in routers, and dynamic routing can result in sudden 
   changes of the characteristics of the path followed from the source 
   to the destination. Additional dynamics can be caused by link layer 
   mechanisms, such as shared media access (e.g., in wireless networks), 
   changes of links (horizontal/vertical handovers), topology 
   modifications (e. g., in ad-hoc networks), link layer error 
   correction, dynamic bandwidth provisioning schemes, etc. From this 

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 7] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   follows that path characteristics can be subject to substantial 
   changes within short time frames. 
    
   The congestion control algorithms have to deal with this variety in 
   an efficient way. The congestion control principles introduced by V. 
   Jacobson assume a rather static scenario and implicitly target at 
   configurations where the bandwidth-delay product is of the order of 
   some dozens of packets at most. While these principles have proved to 
   work well in the Internet for almost two decades, much larger 
   bandwidth-delay products and increased dynamics challenge them more 
   and more. There are many situations where today's congestion control 
   algorithms react in a suboptimal way, resulting in low resource 
   utilization, non-optimal congestion avoidance, or unfairness. 
    
   This gave rise to a multitude of new proposals for congestion control 
   algorithms. For instance, since the additive-increase multiplicative 
   decrease (AIMD) principle of TCP does not scale well to large 
   congestion window sizes, several high-speed congestion control 
   extensions have been developed recently, such as High-Speed TCP, 
   Scalable TCP, Fast TCP and BIC/CUBIC. However, these new algorithms 
   raise fairness issues, and they may be less robust in certain 
   situations for which they have not been designed.  
    
   However, there is still no common agreement in the IETF on which 
   algorithm and protocol to choose. For instance, XCP could solve some 
   problems caused by high bandwidth-delay products, at the cost of some 
   additional complexity in routers. Also note that XCP may have some 
   problems with dynamic changes of link layer characteristics as they 
   are discussed in this section (shared media etc.). Similarly, 
   proprietary congestion control mechanisms have been proposed for 
   other specific environments, e.g., to cope with highly variable data 
   rates.  
    
   It is always possible to tune congestion control parameters based on 
   some knowledge about the environment and the application scenario. 
   However, the fundamental question is whether it is possible to define 
   one congestion control mechanism that operates reasonable well in the 
   whole range of scenarios that exist in the Internet. Hence, it is an 
   open research question how such a "unified" congestion control would 
   have to be designed, and which maximum degree of dynamics it could 
   efficiently handle. 
    
3.3 Challenge 3: Corruption Loss 
    
   It is common for congestion control mechanisms to interpret packet 
   loss as a sign of congestion. This is appropriate when packets are 
   dropped in routers because of a queue that overflows, but there are 
   other possible reasons for packet drops. In particular, in wireless 

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 8] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   networks, packets can be dropped because of corruption, rendering the 
   typical reaction of a congestion control mechanism inappropriate.  
    
   TCP over wireless and satellite is a topic that has been investigated 
   for a long time [Krishnan04]. There are some proposals where the 
   congestion control mechanism would react as if a packet had not been 
   dropped in the presence of corruption (cf. TCP HACK [MW1]), but 
   discussions in the IETF have shown that there is no agreement that 
   this type of reaction is appropriate. It has been said that 
   congestion can manifest itself as corruption on shared wireless 
   links, and in any case it is questionable whether a source that sends 
   packets that are continuously impaired by link noise should keep 
   sending at a high rate. 
    
   Generally, two questions must be addressed when designing congestion 
   control mechanism that would take corruption into account: 
    
   1. How is corruption detected? 
    
   2. What should be the reaction? 
    
   In addition to question 1 above, it may be useful to consider 
   detecting the reason for corruption, but this has not yet been done 
   to the best of our knowledge. 
    
   Corruption detection can be done using an in-band or out-of-band 
   signaling mechanism, much in the same way as described for Challenge 
   1. Additionally, implicit detection can be considered: link layers 
   sometimes retransmit erroneous frames, which can cause the end-to-end 
   delay to increase - but, from the perspective of a sender at the 
   transport layer, there are many other possible reasons for such an 
   effect.  
    
   Header checksums provide another implicit detection possibility: if a 
   checksum covers all necessary headers only and this checksum does not 
   show an error, it is possible for errors to be found in the payload 
   using a second checksum. Such error detection is possible with UDP-
   Lite and DCCP, and it was found to work well over a GPRS network in a 
   study [MW2] and poorly over a WiFi network in another study [MW3]. 
   Note that, while UDP-Lite and DCCP enable the detection of 
   corruption, the specifications of these protocols do not foresee any 
   specific reaction to it for the time being. 
    
   The idea of having a transport endpoint detect and accordingly react 
   to corruption poses a number of interesting questions regarding 
   cross-layer interactions. As IP is designed to operate over arbitrary 
   link layers, it is therefore difficult to design a congestion control 
   mechanism on top of it, which appropriately reacts to corruption - 
   especially as the specific data link layers that are in use along an 
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007               [Page 9] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   end-to-end path are typically unknown to entities at the transport 
   layer.  
    
   The IETF has not yet specified how a congestion control mechanism 
   should react to corruption. 
    
3.4 Challenge 4: Small Packets 
    
   With multimedia streaming flows becoming common, an increasingly 
   large fraction of the bytes transmitted belong to control traffic. 
   Compounding the congestion control, small packets may excessively 
   contribute to lower network efficiency in terms of full-size packet 
   transfer performance. 
    
   For small packets, the Nagle algorithm allows to avoid congestion 
   collapse and pathological congestion [RFC896]. The Nagle algorithm 
   can dramatically reduce the number of small packets. However, 
   aggregation implies delay for packets. Applications that are jitter-
   sensitive typically disable the Nagle algorithm. For applications 
   that exchange small packets, variants for the small packet to the 
   TCP-friendly rate control (TFRC) [RFC3448] in the Datagram Congestion 
   Control Protocol (DCCP) [RFC4340] have been designed. DCCP enables 
   unreliable but congestion-controlled data transmission. TFRC is a 
   congestion control mechanism for unicast flows operating in a best-
   effort Internet environment, and is designed for DCCP that controls 
   the sending rate based on a stochastic Markov model for TCP Reno. 
   Consistent with the use of end-to-end congestion control, versions of 
   the Congestion Control Identifier (CCID) have dealt with DCCP flows 
   that would like to receive as much bandwidth as possible over the 
   long term (CCID 2) [RFC4241], or flows that minimize the abrupt rate 
   changes in the sending rate (CCID 3) [RFC4242]. 
    
   In its version number 4 [draft-floyd-ccid4-00.txt], CCID is being 
   designed either to applications programs that use a small fixed 
   segment size, or to application programs that change their sending 
   rate by varying the segment size.  
    
   In some stable and unstable conditions, it appears that the 
   congestion control mechanisms for small packets must be further 
   enhanced, tightly coordinated, and controlled over wide-area 
   networks. 
    
3.5 Challenge 5: Pseudo-Wires 
    
   Pseudowires (PW) may carry non-TCP data flows e.g. TDM traffic.  
   Structure Agnostic TDM over Packet (SATOP) [RFC4553], Circuit 
   Emulation over Packet Switched Networks (CESoPSN), TDM over IP, are 
   not responsive to congestion control in a TCP-friendly manner as 

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 10] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   prescribed by [RFC2914]. Moreover, it is not possible to simply 
   reduce the flow rate of a TDM PW when facing packet loss.  
    
   Carrying TDM PW over an IP network poses a real problem. Indeed, 
   providers can rate control corresponding incoming traffic but it may 
   not be able to detect that a PW carries TDM traffic. This can be 
   illustrated with the following example. 
    
   Sources S1, S2, S3 and S4 are originating TDM over IP traffic. P1 
   provider edges E1, E2, E3, and E4 are respectively rate limiting such 
   traffic. Provider P1 SLA with transit provider P2 is such that the 
   latter assumes a BE traffic pattern and that the distribution shows 
   the typical properties of common BE traffic (elastic, non-real time, 
   non-interactive). 
    
   The problem rises for transit provider P2 that is not able to detect 
   that IP packets are carrying constant-bit rate service traffic that 
   is by definition unresponsive to any congestion control mechanisms.  
     
    
              ...........       ............ 
             .           .     . 
      S1 --- E1 ---      .     . 
             .     |     .     . 
             .      === E5 === E7 --- 
             .     |     .     .     | 
      S2 --- E2 ---      .     .     |       
             .           .     .     |      | 
              ...........      .     |      v 
                               .      ----- R --->       
              ...........      .     |      ^   
             .           .     .     |      | 
      S3 --- E3 ---      .     .     |      
             .     |     .     .     | 
             .      === E6 === E8 --- 
             .     |     .     . 
      S4 --- E4 ---      .     . 
             .           .     . 
              ...........       ............ 
    
             \---- P1 ---/     \---------- P2 ----- 
 
 
   Assuming P1 providers are rate limiting BE traffic, a transit P2 
   provider router R may be subject to serious congestion as all TDM PWs 
   cross the same router. TCP-friendly traffic would follow existing 
   TCP's Additive-Increase Multiplicative-Decrease (AIMD) algorithm of 
   reducing the sending rate in half in response to each packet drop. 
   Nevertheless, the TDM PWs will take all available capacity leaving no 
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 11] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   room for any other type of traffic. Note that the situation may 
   simply occur because S4 suddenly turns up a TDM PW. 
    
   As it is not possible to assume that edge routers will soon have the 
   ability to detect the type of the carried traffic, it is important 
   for transit routers (P2 provider) to be able to apply a fair, robust, 
   responsive and efficient congestion control technique such as to 
   prevent impacting normal-behaving Internet traffic. However, it is 
   still an open question how the corresponding mechanisms in data and 
   control plane have to be designed. 
 
 
3.6 Challenge 6: Multi-domain Congestion Control 
    
   Transport protocols such as TCP operate over the Internet that is 
   divided into autonomous systems. These systems are characterized by 
   their heterogeneity as IP networks are realized by a multitude of 
   technologies. Variety of conditions (see also Challenge 2) and their 
   variations leads to correlation effects between policers that 
   regulate traffic against certain conformance criteria.  
    
   With the advent of techniques allowing for early detection of 
   congestion, packet loss is no longer the solely metric of congestion. 
   ECN (Explicit Congestion Notification) marks packets - set by active 
   queue management techniques - to convey congestion information trying 
   to prevent packet losses (packet loss and the number of packets 
   marked gives you an indication of the level of congestion). Using TCP 
   ACKs to feed back that information allows the hosts to realign their 
   transmission rate and thus encourage them to efficiently use of the 
   network. In IP, ECN uses the two unused bits of the TOS field 
   [RFC2474]. Further, ECN in TCP uses two bits in the TCP header that 
   were previously defined as reserved [RFC793]. 
    
   ECN [RFC3168] is an example of a congestion feedback mechanism from 
   the network toward hosts, while the policer must sit at every 
   potential point of congestion. The congestion-based feedback scheme 
   has, however limitations when applied inter-domain. Indeed, the same 
   congestion feedback mechanism is required on the entire path for 
   optimal control at end-systems.  
    
   Another solution in multi-domain environment may be the TCP rate 
   controller (TRC), as traffic conditioner, that regulates the TCP flow 
   at the ingress node in each domain by controlling packet drops and 
   RTT of the packets in a flow. The outgoing traffic from a TRC 
   controlled domain is shaped in a way that no packets are dropped at 
   the policer. However, the TRC depends on the TCP end-to-end model, 
   and thus the diversity of TCP implementations is a general problem. 
    

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 12] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   Another challenge in multi-domain operation is security. At some 
   domain boundaries, an increasing number of application layer gateways 
   (e. g., proxies) is deployed, which split up end-to-end connections 
   and prevent end-to-end congestion control. Furthermore,  
   authentication and authorization issues can arise at domain 
   boundaries, whenever information is exchanged, and so far the 
   Internet does not have a single general security architecture that 
   could be used in all cases. Many autonomous systems also only 
   exchange some limited amount of information about their internal 
   state (topology hiding principle), even though having more precise 
   information could be highly beneficial for congestion control. The 
   future evolution of the Internet inter-domain operation has to show 
   whether more multi-domain information exchange can be realized.   
 
3.7 Challenge 7: Precedence for Elastic Traffic 
    
   Elastic traffic initiated by so-called elastic data applications 
   adapt to available bandwidth via a feedback control loop such as the 
   TCP congestion control. There are two types of "as-soon-as-possible" 
   traffic types: short-lived flows and flows with an expected average 
   throughput. For all those flows the application dynamically adjusts 
   the data generation rate. Examples of short-lived elastic traffic 
   include HTTP and instant messaging traffic. Examples of average 
   throughput requiring elastic traffic are FTP and emailing. In brief, 
   elastic data applications can show extremely different requirements 
   and traffic characteristics. 
    
   The idea to distinguish several classes of best-effort traffic dates 
   is rather old, since it would be beneficial to address the relative 
   delay sensitivities of different elastic applications. The notion of 
   traffic precedence was introduced in [RFC791], and it was broadly 
   defined as "An independent measure of the importance of this 
   datagram." 
    
   For instance, low precedence traffic will experience lower average 
   throughput than higher precedence traffic. Several questions arise, 
   however. What is the meaning of "relative"? What is the role of the 
   Transport Layer in providing the respective considerations for 
   precedence wrt to serviced applicative traffic? 
    
   The preferential treatment of higher precedence traffic with 
   appropriate congestion control mechanisms is still an open issue that 
   may, depending on the proposed solution, impact both the host and the 
   network precedence awareness, and thereby the congestion control.  
    
   DiffServ [RFC2474] [RFC2475] related aspects will be addressed in a 
   future release of this document. 
    

 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 13] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
3.8 Challenge 8: Misbehaving Senders and Receivers 
    
   TBD.  
    
3.9 Other challenges 
    
   TBD. 
    
4. Security Considerations  
    
5. Contributors 
    
   This document is the result of a collective effort to which the 
   following people have contributed: 
    
   Dimitri Papadimitriou <Dimitri.Papadimitriou@alcatel-lucent.be> 
   Michael Welzl <michael.welzl@uibk.ac.at> 
   Wesley Eddy <weddy@grc.nasa.gov> 
   Bela Berde <bela.berde@gmx.de> 
   Paulo Loureiro <loureiro.pjg@gmail.com> 
   Chris Christou <christou_chris@bah.com> 
   Michael Scharf <michael.scharf@ikr.uni-stuttgart.de> 
 
6. References 
 
7.1 Normative References 
 
 
   [RFC791]   Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, 
               September 1981. 
    
   [RFC793]   Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7, 
              RFC793, September 1981. 
    
   [RFC896]   Nagle, J., "Congestion Control in IP/TCP", RFC 896, 
              January 1984. 
    
   [RFC2309]  Braden, B., et al., "Recommendations on queue management 
              and congestion avoidance in the Internet", RFC 2309, 
              April 1998. 
      
   [RFC2003]  Perkins, C., "IP Encapsulation within IP", RFC 1633, 
              October 1996. 
    
   [RFC2474]  Nichols, K., Blake, S. Baker, F. and D. Black, 
              "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS 
              Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474, December 
              1998. 
    
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 14] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   [RFC2475]  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z. 
              and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated 
              Services", RFC 2475, December 1998. 
                  
   [RFC2581]  Allman, M., Paxson, V., and W. Stevens, "TCP Congestion 
              Control", RFC 2581, April 1999. 
    
   [RFC2914]  Floyd, S., "Congestion Control Principles", BCP 41, 
              RFC 2914, September 2000. 
 
   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition 
              of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", 
              RFC 3168, September 2001. 
    
   [RFC3448]  Handley, M., Floyd, S., Padhye, J., and J. Widmer, "TCP 
              Friendly Rate Control (TFRC): Protocol Specification", 
              RFC 3448, January 2003. 
    
   [RFC3985]  Bryant, S. and P. Pate, "Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to- 
              Edge (PWE3) Architecture", RFC 3985, March 2005. 
    
   [RFC4340]  Kohler, E., Handley, M., and S. Floyd, "Datagram 
              Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP)", RFC 4340, March 
              2006. 
    
   [RFC4341]  Floyd, S. and E. Kohler, "Profile for Datagram Congestion 
              Control Protocol (DCCP) Congestion Control ID 2: TCP-like 
              Congestion Control", RFC 4341, March 2006. 
    
   [RFC4342]  Floyd, S., Kohler, E., and J. Padhye, "Profile for     
              Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) Congestion 
              Control ID 3: TCP-Friendly Rate Control (TFRC)", RFC 
              4342, March 2006. 
 
   [RFC4553]  Vainshtein, A. and Y. Stein, "Structure-Agnostic Time 
              Division Multiplexing (TDM) over Packet (SAToP)", 
              RFC 4553, June 2006. 
    
   [RFC4782]  Floyd, S., Allman, M., Jain, A., and P. Sarolahti, 
              "Quick-Start for TCP and IP", RFC 4782, Jan. 2007. 
 
7.2 Informative References 
    
   [Andrew00] L. Andrew, B. Wydrowski and S. Low, "An Example of 
              Instability in XCP", Manuscript available at < 
              http://netlab.caltech.edu/maxnet/XCP_instability.pdf> 
    


 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 15] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   [Ath01]    S. Athuraliya, S. Low, V. Li, and Q. Yin, "REM: Active 
              queue management," IEEE Network Magazine, vol.15, no.3, 
              pp. 48-53, May 2001.  
    
   [Bonald00] T. Bonald, M. May, and J.-C. Bolot, "Analytic Evaluation 
              of RED Performance," In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, Tel 
              Aviv, Israel, March 2000. 
    
   [Clark98]  D. Clark and W. Fang, "Explicit Allocation of Best-Effort 
              Packet Delivery Service," IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
              Networking, vol.6, no.4, pp.362-373, August 1998 
    
   [Floyd93]  S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, “Random early detection 
              gateways for congestion avoidance,” IEEE/ACM Trans. on 
              Networking, vol.1, no.4, pp. 397-413, Aug. 1993. 
    
   [Falk07]   A. Falk et al "Specification for the Explicit Control 
              Protocol (XCP)", Work in Progress, draft-falk-xcp-spec-
              03.txt, July 2007. 
    
   [Firoiu00] V. Firoiu and M. Borden, "A Study of Active Queue 
              Management for Congestion Control," In Proceedings of 
              IEEE INFOCOM, Tel Aviv, Israel, March 2000. 
    
   [Floyd94]  S. Floyd, "TCP and Explicit Congestion Notification", 
              ACM Computer Communication Review, vol.24, no.5, October 
              1994, pp. 10-23. 
    
   [Hollot01] C. Hollot, V. Misra, D. Towsley, and W.-B. Gong, "A 
              Control Theoretic Analysis of RED," In Proceedings of 
              IEEE INFOCOM, Anchorage, Alaska, April 2001. 
    
   [Jacobson88] V. Jacobson, "Congestion Avoidance and Control", Proc. 
                of the ACM SIGCOMM '88 Symposium, pp. 314-329, August 
              1988. 
    
   [Katabi02] D. Katabi, M. Handley, and C. Rohr, "Internet Congestion 
              Control for Future High Bandwidth-Delay Product 
              Environments", Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM '02 
              Symposium, pp. 89-102, August 2002. 
    
   [Kelly98]  F. Kelly, A. Maulloo, and D. Tan, "Rate control in 
              communication networks: shadow prices, proportional 
              fairness, and stability," Journal of the Operational 
              Research Society, vol.49, pp. 237–252, 1998. 
    
   [Keshav]   S. Keshav, "What is congestion and what is congestion 
              control", Presentation at IRTF ICCRG Workshop, Pfldnet 
              2007, (Los Angeles), California, February 2007. 
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 16] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
 
   [Krishnan04] R. Krishnan, J. Sterbenz, W. Eddy, C. Partridge, and M. 
              Allman, "Explicit Transport Error Notification (ETEN) for 
              Error-Prone Wireless and Satellite Networks", Computer 
              Networks, vol.46, no.3, October 2004. 
    
   [Low05]    S. Low, L. Andrew and B. Wydrowski. "Understanding XCP: 
              equilibrium and fairness", Proceedings of IEEE Infocom, 
              Miami, USA, March 2005. 
    
   [Low03.2]  S. Low, F. Paganini, J. Wang, and J. Doyle, "Linear 
              stability of TCP/RED and a scalable control", Computer 
              Networks Journal, vol.43, no.5, pp.633-647, December 
              2003. 
 
   [Low03.1]  S. Low, "A duality model of TCP and queue management 
              algorithms", IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, vol.11, no.4, 
              pp.525–536, August 2003.   
    
   [Low02]    S. Low, F. Paganini, J. Wang, S. Adlakha, and J. C. 
              Doyle, "Dynamics of TCP/RED and a Scalable Control", 
              Proceedings of IEEE Infocom, New York, USA, June 2002. 
 
   [Pan00]    R. Pan, B. Prabhakar, and K. Psounis, "CHOKe: a stateless 
              AQM scheme for approximating fair bandwidth allocation", 
              In Proceedings of IEEE Infocom, Tel Aviv, Israel, March 
              2000. 
    
   [Zhang03]  H. Zhang, C. Hollot, D. Towsley, and V. Misra. "A Self-
              Tuning Structure for Adaptation in TCP/AQM Networks", 
              SIGMETRICS’03, June 10–14, 2003, San Diego, California, 
              USA. 
 
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Jan Vandenabeele for its comments on 
   the document. 
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Michael Welzl 
   University of Innsbruck 
   Technikerstr 21a 
   A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria 
   Phone: +43 (512) 507-6110 
   Email: michael.welzl@uibk.ac.at 
    
   Dimitri Papadimitriou  
   Alcatel-Lucent 
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 17] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
   Copernicuslaan, 50 
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium 
   Phone : +32 3 240 8491 
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel-lucent.be 
    
   Michael Scharf 
   University of Stuttgart 
   Pfaffenwaldring 47 
   D-70569 Stuttgart 
   Germany 
   Phone: +49 711 685 69006 
   Email: michael.scharf@ikr.uni-stuttgart.de 
    




































 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 18] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
    
    
 
     
 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 19] 

Open Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control          July 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
 
 














































 
 
Welzl & Papadimitriou  Expires - December 2007              [Page 20] 
