





Internet Draft                                                Mark Bakke
<draft-bakke-iscsi-wwui-urn-00>                                    Cisco
Expires August 2001
                                                                Joe Czap
                                                                     IBM

                                                              Jim Hafner
                                                                     IBM

                                                             Howard Hall
                                                                   Pirus

                                                            Jack Harwood
                                                                     EMC

                                                            John Hufferd
                                                                     IBM

                                                             Yaron Klein
                                                                  Sanrad

                                                         Lawrence Lamers
                                                      San Valley Systems

                                                             Todd Sperry
                                                                 Adaptec

                                                            Joshua Tseng
                                                                  Nishan

                                                      Kaladhar Voruganti
                                                                     IBM

                                                           February 2001


        A URN Namespace for iSCSI World-Wide Unique Identifiers


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.



Bakke                                                           ^L[Page 1]





Internet Draft                iSCSI and SLP                February 2001


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The iSCSI protocol provides a way for hosts to access SCSI devices
   over an IP network.  This document describes a Uniform Resource Name
   (URN) namespace for naming iSCSI initiators and targets.


1.  Acknowledgements

   This draft was produced as a companion document for the iSCSI Naming
   and Discovery team, including Joe Czap, Jim Hafner, John Hufferd, and
   Kaladhar Voruganti (IBM), Howard Hall (Pirus), Jack Hardwood (EMC),
   Yaron Klein (Sanrad), Lawrence Lamers (San Valley), Todd Sperry
   (Adaptec), and Joshua Tseng (Nishan).


2.  Introduction

   SCSI [SAM-2] defines two entities that exchange commands.  The
   initiator creates and sends commands, and is usually implemented as a
   host driver.  The target receives and executes commands, and is
   usually implemented in a device, such as a disk drive, tape drive, or
   storage controller.

   iSCSI [ISCSI] is protocol for connecting SCSI initiators and targets
   over an IP network.  It is currently defined only over TCP.

   Each initiator and target may be addressable via more than one IP
   address and TCP port.  Additionally, multiple initiators, targets, or
   both may make use of the same IP address and TCP port.  To aid in
   discovery of targets, determination of multiple paths to a target,
   and demultiplexing of targets at the same address, each initiator and
   target has a World-Wide Unique Identifier (WWUI).



Bakke                                                           ^L[Page 2]





Internet Draft                iSCSI and SLP                February 2001


   The WWUI is a UTF-8 character string, designed to fulfill as much as
   possible the functional requirements for URNs [RFC1737].  The format
   of the WWUI is further defined in "iSCSI Naming and Discovery
   Requirements" [NDT].


3.  Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

       "iscsi" requested.

       The intent of this document is to register the namespace ID
       "iscsi", and to actually use the sub-namespace "iscsi:wwui",
       to allow further identifiers related to iSCSI should they
       become necessary.

   Registration Information:

       Registration Version Number: 1
       Registration Date: 2001-02-23

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

       Should this be an individual or a working group???
       IETF IPS Working Group

   Declaration of structure:

       A WWUI is a UTF-8 text string.  It includes a top-level string
       used to designate a naming authority type, followed by a
       naming authority, followed by whatever unique name is allocated
       by that naming authority.  Several naming authority types are
       defined, including the ability to use a reversed DNS domain
       name, a manufacturer's Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI),
       or an EUI-64 address.  The WWUI format is defined in [NDT].

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

       draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-04.txt
       draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-name&disc-00.txt

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

       The iSCSI WWUI defines a method to provide naming authorities
       with a unique top-level name space.  It is the responsibility
       of the naming authority assigning a WWUI to ensure that the
       WWUI string within the naming authority's space is unique.



Bakke                                                           ^L[Page 3]





Internet Draft                iSCSI and SLP                February 2001


   Identifier persistence considerations:

       The top-level naming authorities depend on names that are not
       generally re-assigned, including registered domain names and
       OUIs.  It is the responsibility of the naming authority to
       ensure that assigned WWUIs within its name space are persistent.

   Process of identifier assignment:

       Naming authority type designators are assigned by the IETF
       IP Storage Working Group (IPS), and are designed to make use
       of naming authority identifiers already assigned by other
       entities.  The identifier assignment process within a naming
       authority's name space is controlled by that naming authority.

   Process of identifier resolution:

       iSCSI WWUIs may be resolved by querying iSCSI targets, by
       discovery using the Service Location Protocol [RFC2608],
       or using an external name service.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

       The entire URN is case-insensitive.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

       There are no additional characters reserved.

   Validation mechanism:

       None additional to resolution specified.

   Scope:

       Global


4.  Examples

   The following examples are fictional.  Any resemblence to actual
   WWUIs, whether currently in use or historical, is purely
   coincidental.

       URN:iscsi:wwui:iscsi.com.acme.sn.1234567
       URN:iscsi:wwui:eui.020045BA490CDA3F
       URN:iscsi:wwui:oui.00023B.12345678




Bakke                                                           ^L[Page 4]





Internet Draft                iSCSI and SLP                February 2001


5.  Security Considerations

   Since the URNs in this namespace are opaque there are no additional
   security considerations other than those normally associated with the
   use and resolution of URNs in general.


6.  References


[RFC1737]   Sollins, K., Masinter, L.  "Functional Requirements for
            Uniform Resource Names", RFC1737, December 1994.

[RFC2141]   Moats, R.  "URN Syntax", RFC2141, May 1997.

[RFC2608]   E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, M. Day.  Service
            Location Protocol, version 2  RFC 2608, July, 1999.

[ISCSI]     J. Satran, et. al.  "iSCSI", draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-04.txt,
            February 2001.

[SAM2]      ANSI T10.  "SCSI Architectural Model 2", revision 13, March
            2000.

[NDT]       K. Voruganti, et. al.  "iSCSI Naming and Discovery
            Requirements", draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-disc-reqts-02.txt,
            February 2001.

Author's  Addresses:

       Mark Bakke
       Cisco Systems, Inc.
       6450 Wedgwood Road
       Maple Grove, MN
       USA 55311

       Voice:  +1 763-398-1000
       E-Mail: mbakke@cisco.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are



Bakke                                                           ^L[Page 5]





Internet Draft                iSCSI and SLP                February 2001


   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




























Bakke                                                           ^L[Page 6]


