

   Audio/Video Transport                                                
   Internet Draft                                            R. Kreuter 
   Document: draft-ietf-avt-rtp-clearmode-04.txt             Siemens AG 
   Expires: June 2004                                     December 2003 
    
    
            RTP payload format for a 64 kbit/s transparent call 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes how to carry 64 kbit/s data streams 
   transparently in RTP packets, using a pseudo-codec called 
   "Clearmode".  It also serves as registration for a related MIME type 
   called "audio/clearmode". 
    
   "Clearmode" is a basic feature of VoIP media gateways. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Conventions used in this document.............................3 
   3. 64 kbit/s data stream handling and RTP header parameters......3 

 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call       December 2003 
 
 
   4. IANA Considerations...........................................3 
   5. Mapping to Session Description Protocol (SDP) parameters......4 
   6. Security Considerations.......................................5 
   7. References....................................................6 
   8. Author's Address..............................................6 
   9. IPR Notice....................................................6 
   10. Full Copyright Statement.....................................7 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   [Note to the RFC Editor: This paragraph is to be deleted when this 
   draft is published as an RFC.  All references to RFC yyyy in section 
   4 should be replaced by the RFC number of this draft, when published.  
   All references to RFC XXXX in sections 4 and 5 should be replaced by 
   the RFC number of the revision of RFC 2327, when published.] 
    
   Voice over IP (VoIP) media gateways need to carry all data streams 
   generated by analog or integrated services digital network (ISDN) 
   terminals via an IP network. 
    
   ISDN wideband speech terminals do not rely on a voice data 
   processing, like echo cancellation or dual tone multifrequency (DTMF) 
   detection, within a VoIP media gateway.  Moreover, ISDN data 
   terminals e.g. will produce data streams that are not compatible with 
   a non-linear encoding as is used for voice. 
    
   For such applications, there exists a necessity for a transparent 
   relay of 64 kbit/s data streams in real-time transport protocol (RTP) 
   [6] packets.  This mode is often referred to as "clear-channel data" 
   or "64 kbit/s unrestricted".  No encoder/decoder is needed in that 
   case, but a unique RTP payload type is necessary and a related MIME 
   type is to be registered for signaling purposes. 
    
   Clearmode is not restricted to the examples described above.  It can 
   be used by any application, that does not need a special encoding / 
   decoding for transfer via a RTP connection. 
    
   This payload format document describes a pseudo-codec called 
   "Clearmode", for sample-oriented 64 kbit/s data streams with 8 bits 
   per sample.  It is in accordance with RFC 2736 [3], which provides a 
   guideline for the specification of new RTP payload formats. 
    
   Examples for the current use of Clearmode are the transfer of "ISDN 7 
   kHz voice" and "ISDN data" in VoIP media gateways. 
    
   This document also serves as the MIME type registration according to 
   RFC 2048 [5], which defines procedures for registration of new MIME 
   types within the IETF tree. 
 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call       December 2003 
 
 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2]. 
    
    
3. 64 kbit/s data stream handling and RTP header parameters 
    
   Clearmode does not use any encoding or decoding. It just provides 
   packetization. 
    
   Clearmode assumes that the data to be handled is sample oriented with 
   one octet (8bits) per sample.  There is no restriction on the number 
   of samples per packet other than the 64 kbyte limit imposed by the IP 
   protocol.  The number of samples SHOULD be less than the path maximum 
   transmission unit (MTU) minus combined packet header length. 
    
   The payload packetization/depacketization for Clearmode is similar to 
   the Pulse Code Modulation (PCMU or PCMA) handling described in RFC 
   3551 [7].  Each Clearmode octet SHALL be octet-aligned in a RTP 
   packet.  The sign bit of each octet SHALL correspond to the most 
   significant bit of the octet in the RTP packet. 
    
   A sample rate of 8000 Hz MUST be used. 
   This calculates to a 64 kbit/s transmission rate per channel. 
    
   The Timestamp SHALL be set as described in RFC 3550 [6]. 
    
   The marker bit is always zero.  Silence suppression is not applicable 
   for Clearmode data streams. 
    
   The payload type is dynamically assigned by means outside the scope 
   of this document. 
    
   RTP header fields not mentioned here SHALL be used as specified in 
   RFC 3550 [6] and any applicable profile. 
    
   This document specifies the use of RTP over unicast and multicast UDP 
   as well as TCP.  (This does not preclude the use of this definition 
   when RTP is carried by other lower-layer protocols.) 
    
    
4. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document registers the following MIME subtype: audio/clearmode. 
    
 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call       December 2003 
 
 
   To: ietf-types@iana.org 
    
   Subject: Registration of MIME media type audio/clearmode 
    
   MIME media type name: audio 
    
   MIME subtype name: clearmode 
    
   Required parameters: none 
    
   Optional parameters: ptime, maxptime 
    
          "ptime" gives the length of time in milliseconds represented 
          by the media in a packet, as described in RFC xxxx [9]. 
    
          "maxptime" represents the maximum amount of media, which can 
          be encapsulated in each packet, expressed as time in 
          milliseconds, as described in RFC xxxx [9]. 
    
   Encoding considerations: 
    
          This type is only defined for transfer via RTP [6]. 
    
   Security considerations: 
    
          See Section 6 of RFC yyyy 
    
   Interoperability considerations: none 
    
   Published specification: RFC yyyy 
    
   Applications, which use this media type: 
    
          Voice over IP Media Gateways, transferring "ISDN 64 kb/s 
          data", "ISDN 7 kHz voice", or other 64 kbit/s data streams via 
          a RTP connection 
    
   Additional information: none 
    
   Intended usage: COMMON 
    
   Author/Change controller: 
    
          IETF Audio/Video transport working group 
    
    
5. Mapping to Session Description Protocol (SDP) parameters 
    
   Parameters are mapped to SDP [9] in a standard way. 
 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call       December 2003 
 
 
    
       o  The MIME type (audio) goes in SDP "m=" as the media name. 
    
       o  The MIME subtype (clearmode) goes in SDP "a=rtpmap" as the 
          encoding name. 
    
       o  The optional parameters "ptime" and "maxptime" go in the SDP 
          "a=ptime" and "a=maxptime" attributes, respectively. 
    
    
   An example mapping is as follows: 
    
           audio/clearmode; ptime=10 
    
           m=audio 12345 RTP/AVP 97 
           a=rtpmap:97 CLEARMODE/8000 
           a=ptime:10 
    
   Note that the payload format (encoding) names defined in the RTP 
   Profile are commonly shown in upper case.  MIME subtypes are commonly 
   shown in lower case.  These names are case-insensitive in both 
   places. 
    
    
6. Security Considerations 
    
   Implementations using the payload format defined in this 
   specification are subject to the security considerations discussed in 
   the RFC 3550 [6].  The payload format described in this document does 
   not specify any different security services.  The primary function of 
   this payload format is to add a transparent transport for a 64 kbit/s 
   data stream. 
    
   Confidentiality of the media streams is achieved by encryption. 
    
   As with any IP-based protocol, in some circumstances a receiver may 
   be overloaded simply by the receipt of too many packets, either 
   desired or undesired.  Network-layer authentication MAY be used to 
   discard packets from undesired sources, but the processing cost of 
   the authentication itself may be too high.  Overload can also occur, 
   if the sender chooses to use a smaller packetization period, than the 
   receiver can process.  The ptime parameter can be used to negotiate 
   an appropriate packetization during session setup. 
    
   In general RTP is not an appropriate transfer protocol for reliable 
   octet streams.  TCP is better in those cases.  Besides that, packet 
   loss due to congestion is as much an issue for clearmode, as for 
   other payload formats.  Refer to RFC 3551 [7], section 2, for a 
   discussion of this issue. 
 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call       December 2003 
 
 
    
    
7. References 
    
   Normative References 
    
   [1]  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [3]  M. Handley and C. Perkins, "Guidelines for Writers of RTP 
        Payload Format Specifications", RFC 2736, December 1999 
    
   [4]  N. Freed, N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions 
        (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies ", RFC 2045, 
        November 1996. 
    
   [5]  N. Freed, J. Klensin and J. Postel, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
        Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", BCP 13, 
        RFC 2048, November 1996. 
    
   [6]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R. and V. Jacobson, 
        "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", RFC 
        3550, July 2003. 
    
   [7]  Schulzrinne, H. and S. Casner, "RTP Profile for Audio and Video 
        Conferences with Minimal Control", RFC 3551, July 2003. 
    
   [8]  Casner, S. and P. Hoschka, "MIME Type Registration of RTP 
        Payload Types", RFC 3555, July 2003. 
    
   [10] M. Handley, V. Jacobson and C. Perkins, draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-
        new-xx.txt "SDP: Session Description Protocol", revision of 
        2327, work in progress. 
    
    
8. Author's Address 
    
   Ruediger Kreuter 
   Siemens AG 
   81359 Munich, Germany 
   Email: ruediger.kreuter@siemens.com 
    
    
9. IPR Notice 
    

 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft      64kbit/s voice band data call       December 2003 
 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
    
10. Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    







 
 
Kreuter                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 7] 

