

   MobOpts Research Group                             Thomas C. Schmidt 
   Internet Draft                                           HAW Hamburg 
   Category: Informational                           Matthias Waehlisch 
   Expires: August 2008                                        link-lab 
                                                          February 2008 
    
    
      Multicast Mobility in MIPv6: Problem Statement and Brief Survey 
                  <draft-irtf-mobopts-mmcastv6-ps-03.txt> 
    
IPR Statement 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes      
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79 [1]. 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This document is a submission of the IRTF MobOpts RG. Comments should 
   be directed to the MobOpts RG mailing list, mobopts@irtf.org. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document discusses current mobility extensions to IP layer 
   multicast. Problems arising from mobile group communication in 
   general, in the case of multicast listener mobility and for mobile 
   Any Source Multicast as well as Source Specific Multicast senders are 
   documented. Characteristic aspects of multicast routing and 
   deployment issues for fixed IPv6 networks are summarized. Specific 
   properties and interplays with the underlying network access are 
   surveyed w.r.t. the relevant technologies in the wireless domain. It 
   outlines the principal approaches to multicast mobility. In addition 
   to providing a comprehensive exploration of the mobile multicast 

 
                         
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 1] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   problem and solution space, this document attempts to draft a 
   conceptual roadmap for initial steps in standardization for the use 
   of future mobile multicast protocol designers. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    

   1. Introduction and Motivation....................................3 
     1.1 Document Scope..............................................4 

   2. Problem Description............................................5 
     2.1 General Issues..............................................5 
     2.2 Multicast Listener Mobility.................................7 
         2.2.1 Node & Application Perspective........................7 
         2.2.2 Network Perspective...................................8 
     2.3 Multicast Source Mobility...................................9 
         2.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility.........................9 
         2.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility...................10 
     2.4 Deployment Issues..........................................11 

   3. Characteristics of Multicast Routing Trees under Mobility.....11 

   4. Link Layer Aspects............................................12 
     4.1 General Background.........................................12 
     4.2 Multicast for Specific Technologies........................13 
         4.2.1 802.11 WLAN..........................................13 
         4.2.2 802.16 WIMAX.........................................14 
         4.2.3 3GPP.................................................15 
         4.2.4 DVB-H / DVB-IPDC.....................................15 
     4.3 Vertical Multicast Handovers...............................16 

   5. Solutions.....................................................17 
     5.1 General Approaches.........................................17 
     5.2 Solutions for Multicast Listener Mobility..................18 
         5.2.1 Agent Assistance.....................................18 
         5.2.2 Multicast Encapsulation..............................18 
         5.2.3 Hybrid Architectures.................................18 
         5.2.4 MLD Extensions.......................................19 
     5.3 Solutions for Multicast Source Mobility....................20 
         5.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility Approaches.............20 
         5.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility Approaches........20 

   6. Security Considerations.......................................22 

   7. Summary and Future Steps......................................22 

   8. IANA Considerations...........................................23 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 2] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   Appendix A. Implicit Source Notification Options.................23 

   9. References....................................................23 

   Acknowledgments..................................................30 

   Author's Addresses...............................................30 

   Intellectual Property Statement..................................30 

   Copyright Notice.................................................31 

   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................31 

   Acknowledgement..................................................31 

    
    
1. Introduction and Motivation 
    
   Group communication forms an integral building block of a wide 
   variety of applications, ranging from content broadcasting and 
   streaming, voice and video conferencing, collaborative environments 
   and massive multiplayer gaming up to the self-organization of 
   distributed systems, services or autonomous networks. Network layer 
   multicast support will be needed, whenever globally distributed, 
   scalable, serverless or instantaneous communication is required. As 
   broadband media delivery emerges as a typical mass scenario, 
   scalability and bandwidth efficiency of multicast routing 
   continuously gain importance.  
    
   The early idea of Internet multicasting [2] soon lead to a wide 
   adoption of Deering's host group model [3]. Multicast network support 
   will be of particular importance to mobile environments, where users 
   commonly share frequency bands of limited capacity. The rapidly 
   increasing mobile reception of 'infotainment' streams may soon 
   require a wide deployment of mobile multicast services. Multicast 
   mobility consequently has been a concern for about ten years [4] and 
   has led to numerous proposals, but no generally accepted solution. 
    
   Mobility in IPv6 [5] is standardized in the Mobile IPv6 RFCs [6,7]. 
   MIPv6 [6] only roughly defines multicast mobility, using a remote 
   subscription approach or through bi-directional tunneling via the 
   Home Agent. Remote subscription suffers from slow handovers, as it 
   relies on multicast routing to adapt to handovers, bi-directional 
   tunneling introduces inefficient overheads and delays due to 
   triangular forwarding, i.e., instead of traveling on shortest paths, 
   packets are routed through the Home Agent. Therefore none of the 
   approaches have been optimized for a large scale deployment. A mobile 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 3] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   multicast service for a future Internet should provide 'close to 
   optimal' routing at predictable and limited cost, robustness combined 
   with a service quality compliant to real-time media distribution.  
    
   Intricate multicast routing procedures, though, are not easily 
   extensible to comply with mobility requirements. Any client 
   subscribed to a group while operating mobility handovers, requires 
   traffic to follow to its new location; any mobile source requests the 
   entire delivery tree to comply with or adapt to its changing 
   positions. Significant effort has already been invested in protocol 
   designs for mobile multicast receivers; only limited work has been 
   dedicated to multicast source mobility, which poses the more delicate 
   problem [59]. 
    
   In multimedia conference scenarios, games or collaborative 
   environments each member commonly operates as receiver and as sender 
   for multicast based group communication. In addition, real-time 
   communication such as conversational voice or video places severe 
   temporal requirement on mobility protocols: Seamless handover 
   scenarios are expected to limit disruptions or delay to less than 100 
   ms. Jitter disturbances should not exceed 50 ms. Note that 100 ms is 
   about the duration of a spoken syllable in real-time audio. 
    
   It is the aim of this document, to specify the problem scope for a 
   multicast mobility management, which may be elaborated in future 
   work. The document subdivides the various challenges according to 
   their originating aspects and presents existing proposals for 
   solution, as well as major bibliographic references. 
    
1.1 Document Scope 
    
   When considering multicast node mobility, two basic scenarios are of 
   interest: Single-hop mobility (as shown in figure 1.a) and multi-hop 
   mobile routing (figure 1.b). This document adopts single-hop mobility 
   as the focal scenario, which coincides with the perspective of MIPv6 
   [6]. All key issues of mobile multicast membership control, as well 
   as the interplay of mobile and multicast routing will become apparent 
   in this simpler scenario. 
    
   Multi-hop network mobility is a subsidiary setting. All major aspects 
   are inherited from the single-hop problem, while additional 
   complexity is incurred from traversing a mobile cloud. This may be 
   solved by encapsulation or flooding (cf. [8] for a general overview). 
   Specific issues arising from (nested) tunneling or flooding, 
   especially the preservation of address transparency, require a 
   treatment in analogy to MIPv6. 
    
    
                                           +------+           +------+ 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 4] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                           |  MN  |  =====>   |  MN  | 
                                           +------+           +------+ 
                                              |                  . 
                                              |                  . 
                                              |                  . 
                                           +-------+          +-------+ 
                                           | LAR 1 |          | LAR 2 | 
                                           +-------+          +-------+ 
                                                    \        / 
                                                ***  ***  ***  *** 
                                               *   **   **   **   * 
       +------+           +------+            *                    * 
       |  MN  |  =====>   |  MN  |             *  Mobile Network  * 
       +------+           +------+            *                    * 
          |                  .                 *   **   **   **   * 
          |                  .                  ***  ***  ***  *** 
          |                  .                  |                 . 
       +-------+          +-------+         +-------+          +-------+ 
       | AR 1  |          | AR 2  |         | AR 1  |  =====>  | AR 2  | 
       +-------+          +-------+         +-------+          +-------+ 
           |                |                   |                | 
           ***  ***  ***  ***                   ***  ***  ***  *** 
          *   **   **   **   *                 *   **   **   **   * 
         *                    *               *                    * 
          *  Fixed Internet  *                 *  Fixed Internet  * 
         *                    *               *                    * 
          *   **   **   **   *                 *   **   **   **   * 
           ***  ***  ***  ***                   ***  ***  ***  *** 
    
         a) Single-Hop Mobility                  b) Multi-Hop Mobility 
    
                      Figure 1: Mobility Scenarios 
    
    
2. Problem Description 
    
2.1 General Issues 
    
   Multicast mobility is a generic term, which subsumes a collection of 
   quite distinct functions. At first, multicast communication divides 
   into Any Source Multicast (ASM) [3] and Source Specific Multicast 
   (SSM) [9,10]. At second, the roles of senders and receivers are 
   distinct and asymmetric. Both may individually be mobile. Their 
   interaction is facilitated by a multicast routing protocol such as 
   DVMRP [11], PIM-SM/SSM [12,13], Bi-directional PIM [14], formerly CBT 
   [15], BGMP [16], or inter-domain multicast prefix advertisements via 
   MBGP [17], and a client interaction with the multicast listener 
   discovery protocol (MLD and MLDv2) [18,19]. 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 5] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   Any multicast mobility solution must take all of these functional 
   blocks into account. It should enable seamless continuity of 
   multicast sessions when moving from one IPv6 subnet to another. It 
   should preserve the multicast nature of packet distribution and 
   approximate optimal routing. It should support per flow handover for 
   multicast traffic, as properties and designations of flows can be of 
   distinct nature. Such distinctions may result from differing 
   QoS/real-time requirements, but may also be caused by network layer 
   conditions, which need not be identical for all groups. 
    
   The host group model extends the capability of the network layer 
   unicast service. In common with the architecture of fixed networks, 
   multicast mobility management should transparently utilize or 
   smoothly extend the unicast functions of MIPv6 [6], its security 
   extensions [7,20], its expediting schemes FMIPv6 [21] and HMIPv6 
   [22], its context transfer protocols [23], its multihoming 
   capabilities [24,25], emerging protocols like PMIPv6 [57] or future 
   developments. From the perspective of an integrated mobility 
   architecture it is desirable to avoid multicast-specific as well as 
   unicast-restricted solutions, whenever general approaches jointly 
   supporting unicast and multicast can be derived.  
    
   Multicast routing dynamically adapts to the topology of the sender(s) 
   and receiver(s) participating in a multicast session, which then may 
   change under mobility. However, depending on the topology and the 
   protocol in use, current multicast routing protocols may require a 
   time close to seconds, or even minutes to converge following a change 
   in receiver or sender location. This is far too slow to support 
   seamless handovers for interactive or real-time media sessions. The 
   actual temporal behavior strongly depends on the multicast routing 
   protocol in use and on the geometry of the current distribution tree. 
   A mobility scheme that re-adjusts routing, i.e., partially changes or 
   fully reconstructs a multicast tree, is forced to comply with the 
   time scale of protocol convergence. Specifically it needs to consider 
   a possible rapid movement of the mobile node, as this may occur at 
   much higher rates than common protocol state updates.  
    
   IP layer multicast packet distribution is an unreliable service that 
   is bound to connectionless transport protocols. Where applications 
   are sensitive to packet loss, loss recovery, concealment, etc, 
   counter measures must be performed by the multicast transport or 
   application. Mobile multicast handovers though should not introduce 
   significant additional packet drops. Due to statelessness, the bi-
   casting of multicast flows does not cause foreseeable degradations at 
   the transport layer.  
    
   Group addresses in general are location transparent, even though they 
   may be scoped and there are methods that embed unicast prefixes or 
   Rendezvous Point addresses [26]. Addresses of sources contributing to 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 6] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   a multicast session are interpreted by the routing infrastructure and 
   by receiver applications, which frequently are source address aware. 
   Multicast therefore inherits the mobility address duality problem for 
   source addresses, being a logical node identifier, i.e., the home 
   address (HoA) on the one hand, and a topological locator, the care-
   of-address (CoA) on the other. At the network layer, the elements 
   that comprise the delivery tree, i.e., multicast senders, forwarders 
   and receivers, need to carefully account for address duality issues, 
   e.g., by using binding caches, extended multicast states or 
   signaling. 
    
   Multicast sources in general operate decoupled from their receivers 
   in the following sense: A multicast source sends packets to a group 
   of unknown receivers and thus operates without a feedback channel. It 
   neither has means to inquire on properties of its delivery trees, nor 
   will it be able to learn about the state of its receivers. In the 
   event of an inter-tree handover, a mobile multicast source therefore 
   is vulnerable to loosing receivers without taking notice. (Appendix A 
   describes implicit source notification approaches). Applying a MIPv6 
   mobility binding update or return routability procedure will 
   similarly break the semantic of a receiver group remaining 
   unidentified by the source and thus cannot be applied in unicast 
   analogy. 
    
   Despite of the complexity of the requirements, multicast mobility 
   management should seek lightweight solutions with easy deployment. 
   Such realistic, sample deployment scenarios and architectures should 
   be provided in future solution documents. 
    
2.2 Multicast Listener Mobility 
    
2.2.1 Node & Application Perspective 
    
   A mobile multicast listener entering a new IP subnet requires 
   multicast reception subsequent to handover in real-time. It faces the 
   problem of transferring the multicast membership context from its old 
   to its new point of attachment. This can either be achieved by (re-
   )establishing a tunnel or by transferring the MLD Listening State 
   information of MN's moving interface(s) to the new upstream 
   router(s). In the latter case, it may encounter either one of the 
   following conditions: The new network may not be multicast-enabled or 
   the specific multicast service may be unavailable, e.g. unsupported 
   or prohibited. Alternatively, the requested multicast service may be 
   supported and enabled in the visited network, but the multicast 
   groups under subscription may not be forwarded to it. Then current 
   distribution trees for the desired groups may only be met at large 
   routing distance. The simplest scenario occurs when data of some, or 
   all, of the subscribed groups of the mobile node are already received 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 7] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   by one or several group members in the destination network, and thus 
   multicast streams natively flow on MN’s arrival. 
    
   The problem of achieving seamless multicast listener handovers is 
   thus threefold: 
     o Ensure multicast reception even in visited networks without  
       appropriate multicast support. 
     o Minimize multicast forwarding delay to provide seamless 
       and fast handovers. Dependant on layer 2 and 3 handover  
       performance, the time available for multicast mobility operations 
       is typically bound to a fraction of 100 ms. 
     o Minimize packet loss and reordering that result from multicast  
       handover management. 
    
   Moreover, in many wireless regimes it is also desirable to minimize 
   multicast related signaling to preserve the limited resources of 
   battery powered mobile devices and the constrained transmission 
   capacities of the networks. This may lead to a need to restrict MLD 
   queries towards the MN. Multihomed MNs may smooth handoffs by a 
   .make-before-break. approach. This requires a per interface 
   subscription, facilitated by a selective MLD JOIN. 
    
   Encapsulation on the path between the upstream router and the 
   receiver may cause MTU size conflicts, as commonly path-MTU discovery 
   is unavailable for multicast. In the absence of fragmentation at 
   tunnel entry points, this may disable a group distribution service 
   entirely.  
    
2.2.2 Network Perspective 
    
   Infrastructure providing corresponding multicast services is required 
   to keep traffic following the mobile without having network 
   functionality compromised. Mobility solutions thus have to face the 
   immediate problems:  
    
     o Realize native multicast forwarding whenever applicable to  
       preserve network resources, facilitate multipoint distribution  
       capabilities at the link layer and avoid data redundancy. 
     o Activate link layer multipoint services, even if the MN performs  
       only a layer 2 / vertical handover.  
     o Ensure routing convergence, even if the mobile node moves rapidly 
       and performs handovers at high frequency. 
     o Avoid avalanche problems and n-casting, which potentially result 
       from replicated tunnel initiation or redundant forwarding at  
       network nodes.  
    
   Additional implications for the infrastructure remain. In changing 
   its point of attachment, an exclusive mobile receiver may cause 
   initiation and termination of a group distribution service in the new 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 8] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   respectively previous network. Mobility management may issue traffic 
   directives that lead to suboptimal routing, i.e., by erroneous 
   subscriptions following predictive handover operations, or by slow 
   effective leaves caused by MLD querying, or by a rapid departure of 
   the mobile without leaving groups in the previous network at all.  
    
   Finally, packet duplication and re-ordering may follow a change of 
   topology.  
    
2.3 Multicast Source Mobility 
    
2.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility 
    
   A node submitting data to an ASM group either defines the root of a 
   source specific shortest path tree (SPT), distributing data towards a 
   rendezvous point or receivers, or it forwards data directly down a 
   shared tree, e.g., via encapsulated PIM register messages, or using 
   bi-directional PIM routing. Native forwarding along source specific 
   delivery trees will be bound to the source’s topological network 
   address due to reverse path forwarding (RPF) checks. A mobile 
   multicast source moving to a new subnetwork is only able to either 
   inject data into a previously established delivery tree, which may be 
   a rendezvous point based shared tree, or to (re-)initiate the 
   construction of a multicast distribution tree compliant to its new 
   location. In the latter case, the mobile sender will have to precede 
   without controlling the new tree development due to decoupling of 
   sender and receivers. 
    
   A mobile multicast source consequently must meet address transparency 
   at two layers: To comply with RPF checks, it has to use an address 
   within the IPv6 basic header's source field, which is in topological 
   concordance with the employed multicast distribution tree. For 
   application transparency the logical node identifier, commonly the 
   HoA, must be presented as the packet source address to the transport 
   layer at the receiver side.  
    
   Conforming to address transparency and temporal handover constraints 
   pose major problems for any route optimizing mobility solution. 
   Additional issues arise from possible packet loss and from multicast 
   scoping. A mobile source away from home must respect scoping 
   restrictions that arise from its home and its visited location [6]. 
    
   Within intra-domain multicast routing the use of shared trees may 
   reduce mobility-related complexity. Relying upon a static rendezvous 
   point, a mobile source may continuously submit data by encapsulating 
   packets with its previous topologically correct or home source 
   address. Intra-domain mobility is transparently provided by bi-
   directional shared domain-spanning trees, when using bi-directional 
   PIM, eliminating the need for tunneling to a rendezvous point. 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008                [Page 9] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
    
   Issues arise in inter-domain multicast, whenever notification of 
   source addresses is required between distributed instances of shared 
   trees. A new CoA acquired after a mobility handover will necessarily 
   be subject to inter-domain record exchange. In presence of embedded 
   rendezvous point addresses [26], e.g., for inter-domain PIM-SM, the 
   primary rendezvous point will be globally appointed and the signaling 
   requirements obsolete. 
    
2.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility 
    
   Source Specific Multicast has been designed for static addresses of 
   multicast senders. The source addresses in a client subscription to 
   an SSM group is directly used for route identification. Any SSM 
   subscriber is thus forced to know the topological address of the 
   contributor to the group it wishes to join. The SSM source 
   identification invalidates, when topological source addresses change 
   under mobility. Hence client implementations of SSM source filtering 
   MUST be MIPv6 aware in the sense that a logical source identifier 
   (HoA) is correctly mapped to its current topological correspondent 
   (CoA). 
    
   As a direct consequence, source mobility for SSM packet distribution 
   requires a dedicated conceptual treatment beyond the problem scope of 
   mobile ASM. As a listener is subscribed to an (S,G) channel 
   membership and as routers have established an (S,G)-state shortest 
   path tree rooted at source S, any change of source addresses under 
   mobility requests state updates at all routers on the upstream path 
   and at all receivers in the group. On source handover a new SPT needs 
   to be established, which partly will coincide with the previous SPT, 
   e.g., at the receiver side. As the principle multicast decoupling of 
   a sender from its receivers likewise holds for SSM, client updates 
   needed for switching trees turns into a severe problem. 
    
   An SSM listener may subscribe to or exclude any specific multicast 
   source, and thereby wants to rely on the topological correctness of 
   network operations. The SSM design permits trust in equivalence to 
   the correctness of unicast routing tables. Any SSM mobility solution 
   should preserve this degree of confidence. Binding updates for SSM 
   sources thus should have to prove address correctness in the unicast 
   routing sense, which is equivalent to binding update security with a 
   correspondent node in MIPv6 [6]. 
    
   All of the above severely add complexity to a robust SSM mobility 
   solution, which should converge to optimal routes and, for 
   efficiency, should avoid data encapsulation. Like ASM, handover 
   management is a time-critical operation. The routing distance between 
   subsequent points of attachment, the 'step size' of the mobile from 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 10] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   previous to next designated router, may serve as an appropriate 
   measure of complexity [27,28]. 
    
   Finally, Source Specific Multicast has been designed as a light-
   weight approach to group communication. In adding mobility 
   management, it is desirable to preserve the principle leanness of SSM 
   by minimizing additional signaling overheads. 
    
2.4 Deployment Issues 
    
   IP multicast deployment in general has been hesitant over the past 15 
   years, even though all major router vendors and operating systems 
   offer implementations that support multicast [29]. While many 
   (walled) domains or enterprise networks operate point-to-multipoint 
   services, IP multicast rollout is currently limited in public inter-
   domain scenarios [30]. A dispute arose on the appropriate layer, 
   where group communication service should reside, and the focus of the 
   research community turned towards application layer multicast. This 
   debate on "efficiency versus deployment complexity" now overlaps the 
   mobile multicast domain [31]. Garyfalos and Almeroth [32] derived 
   from fairly generic principles that when mobility is introduced the 
   performance gap between IP and application layer multicast widens in 
   different metrics up to a factor of four. 
    
   Facing deployment complexity, it is desirable that any solution for 
   mobile multicast should leave routing protocols unchanged. Mobility 
   management in such deployment-friendly scheme should preferably be 
   handled at edge nodes, preserving a mobility agnostic routing 
   infrastructure. Future research needs to search for such simple, 
   infrastructure transparent solutions, even though there are 
   reasonable doubts, whether the desired can be achieved in all cases.  
    
   Nevertheless, multicast services in mobile environments may soon 
   become indispensable, when multimedia distribution services such as 
   DVB-H [33] or IPTV will develop as a strong business cases for IP 
   portables. As IP mobility will unfold dominance and as efficient link 
   utilization will show a larger impact in costly radio environments, 
   the evolution of multicast protocols will naturally follow mobility 
   constraints. 
    
    
3.Characteristics of Multicast Routing Trees under Mobility 
    
   Multicast distribution trees have been studied from a focus of 
   network efficiency. Grounded on empirical observations Chuang and 
   Sirbu [34] proposed a scaling power-law for the total number of links 
   in a multicast shortest path tree with m receivers (prop. m^k). The 
   authors consistently identified the scale factor to attain the 
   independent constant k = 0.8. The validity of such universal, heavy-
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 11] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   tailed distribution suggests that multicast shortest path trees are 
   of self-similar nature with many nodes of small, but few of higher 
   degrees. Trees consequently would be shaped rather tall than wide. 
    
   Subsequent empirical and analytical work [35,36] debated the 
   applicability of the Chuang and Sirbu scaling law. Van Mieghem et al. 
   [35] proved that the proposed power law cannot hold for an increasing 
   Internet or very large multicast groups, but is indeed applicable for 
   moderate receiver numbers and the current Internet size N = 10^5 core 
   nodes. Investigating self-similarity Janic and Van Mieghem [37] semi-
   empirically substantiated that multicast shortest path trees in the 
   Internet can be modeled with reasonable accuracy by uniform recursive 
   trees (URT) [38], provided m remains small compared to N. 
    
   The mobility perspective on shortest path trees focus on their 
   alteration, i.e., the degree of topological changes induced by 
   movement. For receivers, and more interestingly for sources this may 
   serve as an outer measure for routing complexity. Mobile listeners 
   moving to neighboring networks will only alter tree branches 
   extending over a few hops. Source specific multicast trees 
   subsequently generated from source handover steps are not 
   independent, but highly correlated. They most likely branch to the 
   identical receivers at one or several intersection points. By the 
   self-similar nature, the persistent subtrees (of previous and next 
   distribution tree), rooted at any such intersection point, exhibit 
   again the scaling law behavior, are tall-shaped with nodes of mainly 
   low degree and thus likely to coincide. Tree alterations under 
   mobility have been studied in [28], both analytically and by 
   simulations. It was found that even in large networks and for 
   moderate receiver numbers more than 80 % of the multicast router 
   states remain invariant under a source handover. 
    
    
4. Link Layer Aspects 
    
4.1 General Background 
    
   Scalable group data distribution has the highest potential in leaf 
   networks, where large numbers of end systems reside. Consequently, it 
   is not surprising that most LAN network access technologies natively 
   support point-to-multipoint or multicast services. Of focal interest 
   to the mobility domain are wireless access technologies, which always 
   operate on a shared medium of limited frequencies and bandwidth. 
    
   Several aspects need consideration: First, dissimilar network access 
   radio technologies cause distinct group traffic transmissions. There 
   are: 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 12] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
    o connection-less link services of broadcast type, which mostly are 
   bound to limited reliability; 
    
    o connection-oriented link services of point-to-multipoint type, 
   which require more complex control and frequently exhibit reduced 
   efficiency; 
    
    o connection oriented link services of broadcast type, which are 
   restricted to unidirectional data transmission. 
    
   Second, point-to-multipoint service activation at the network access 
   layer requires a mapping mechanism from network layer requests. This 
   function is commonly achieved by L3 awareness, i.e., IGMP/MLD 
   snooping [63], which occasionally is complemented by Multicast VLAN 
   Registration (MVR). MVR allows sharing of a single multicast IEEE 
   802.1Q Virtual LAN in the network, while subscribers remain in 
   separate VLANs. This layer 2 separation of multicast and unicast 
   traffic can be employed as a workaround for point-to-point link 
   models to establish a common multicast link. 
    
   Thirdly, an address mapping between the layers is needed for common 
   group identification. Address resolution schemes depend on framing 
   details for the technologies in use, but commonly cause a significant 
   address overlap at the lower layer. 
    
4.2 Multicast for Specific Technologies 
    
4.2.1 802.11 WLAN 
    
   IEEE 802.11 WLAN is a broadcast network of Ethernet type, which 
   inherits multicast address mapping concepts from 802.3. In 
   infrastructure mode an access point operates as repeater, only 
   bridging data between the Base (BSS) and the Extended Service Set 
   (ESS). A mobile node submits multicast data to an access point in 
   point-to-point acknowledged unicast mode (when the ToDS bit is set). 
   An access point receiving multicast data from a MN simply repeats 
   multicast frames to the BSS and propagates them to the ESS as 
   unacknowledged broadcast. Multicast frames received from the ESS are 
   analogously treated. 
    
   Multicast frame delivery has the following characteristics: 
    
    o As an unacknowledged service it attains limited reliability. 
   Frames (and hence packet) loss arises from interference, collision, 
   or time-varying channel properties. 
    
    o Data distribution may be delayed, as unicast power save 
   synchronization via Traffic Indication Messages (TIM) does not apply. 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 13] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   Access points buffer multicast packets while waiting for a larger 
   DTIM interval, whenever stations use the power saving mode.  
    
    o Multipoint data may cause congestion, as the distribution system 
   floods multicast. Without further control, all access points of the 
   same subnet replicate multicast frames. 
    
   To limit or prevent the latter, many vendors have implemented 
   configurable rate limiting for multicast packets. Additionally, 
   IGMP/MLD snooping may be active at the bridging layer between the BSS 
   and the ESS or at switches interconnecting access points. 
    
4.2.2 802.16 WIMAX 
    
   IEEE 802.16 WIMAX combines a family of connection-oriented radio 
   transmission services, operating in distinguished, unidirectional 
   channels. The channel assignment is controlled by Base Stations, 
   which assign channel IDs (CIDs) within service flows to the 
   subscriber stations. Service flows may provide an optional Automatic 
   Repeat Request (ARQ) to improve reliability and may operate in point-
   to-point or point-to-multipoint (without ARQ) mode. 
    
   A WIMAX Base Station operates as L2 switch in full duplex mode, where 
   switching is based on CIDs. Two possible IPv6 link models for mobile 
   access deployment scenarios exist: Shared IPv6 prefix and point-to-
   point link model [39]. The latter treats each connection to a mobile 
   node as a single link, which on the IP layer conflicts with a 
   consistent group distribution via a shared medium (cf. section 4.1 
   for a workaround). 
    
   To invoke a multipoint data channel, the base station assigns a 
   common CID to all Subscriber Stations in the group. An IPv6 multicast 
   address mapping to these 16 bit IDs is proposed by copying either the 
   4 lowest bits, while sustaining the scope field, or by utilizing the 
   8 lowest bits derived from Multicast on Ethernet CS [40]. For 
   selecting group members, a Base Station may implement IGMP/MLD 
   snooping or IGMP/MLD proxying as foreseen in 802.16e-2005 [41].  
    
   A Subscriber Station will send multicast data to a Base Station as a 
   point-to-point unicast stream, which is forwarded to the upstream 
   access router. The access router may return multicast data to the 
   downstream Base Station by feeding into a multicast service channel. 
   On reception a Subscriber Station cannot distinguish multicast from 
   unicast streams.  
    
   Multicast services have the following characteristics: 
    


 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 14] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
    o The mapping of multicast addresses to CIDs needs standardization, 
   since different entities (Access Router, Base Station) may have to 
   perform the mapping.  
    
    o CID collisions for different multicast groups are very likely due 
   to the short ID space. As a consequence, multicast data transmission 
   may occur in joint point-to-multipoint groups of reduced 
   selectiveness.  
    
    o The point-to-point link model for mobile access contradicts a 
   consistent mapping of IP layer multicast onto 802.16 point-to-
   multipoint services. 
    
    o Multipoint channels cannot operate ARQ service and thus experience 
   a reduced reliability. 
    
4.2.3 3GPP 
    
   The 3GPP System architecture spans a circuit switched (CS) and a 
   packet switched (PS) domain, the latter General Packet Radio Services 
   (GPRS) incorporates the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) [42]. 3GPP PS 
   is connection-oriented and based on the concept of Packet Data 
   Protocol (PDP) Contexts. PDPs define point-to-point links between the 
   Mobile Terminal and the Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN). Internet 
   service types are PPP, IPv4 and IPv6, where the recommendation for 
   IPv6 address assignment associates a prefix to each (primary) PDP 
   context [43]. Current packet filtering practice causes inter-working 
   problems between Mobile IPv6 nodes connected via GPRS [44]. 
    
   As of UMTS Rel. 6 the IMS has been extended to include Multimedia 
   Broadcast and Multicast Services (MBMS). A point-to-multipoint GPRS 
   connection service is operated on radio links, while the gateway 
   service to Internet multicast is handled at the IGMP/MLD-aware GGSN. 
   Local multicast packet distribution is used within the GPRS IP 
   backbone resulting in the common double encapsulation at GGSN: global 
   IP multicast datagrams over GTP (with multipoint TID) over local IP 
   multicast.  
    
   The 3GPP MBMS has the following characteristics: 
    
    o There is no immediate layer 2 source-to-destination transition, 
   resulting in transition of all multicast traffic at the GGSN. 
    
    o As GGSN commonly are regional, distant entities, triangular 
   routing and encapsulation may cause a significant degradation of 
   efficiency.  
    
4.2.4 DVB-H / DVB-IPDC 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 15] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   Digital Video Broadcasting for Handhelds (DVB-H) is a unidirectional 
   physical layer broadcasting specification for the efficient delivery 
   of broadband, IP-encapsulated data streams. It was formally adopted 
   as ETSI standard [45] (see http://www.dvb-h.org). DVB uses a 
   mechanism called multi-protocol encapsulation (MPE), which enables a 
   transport of network layer protocols on top of a link layer built 
   from MPEG-2 transport streams and includes a forward error correction 
   (FEC). Thereby DVB cannot only support TV broadcasting, but offers an 
   IP Datacast Service. DVB-IPDC [33] consists of a number of 
   individual, application layer specifications, some of which are still 
   under development. Transport Streams (TS) form the basic logical 
   channels, identified by a 13 bit TS ID (PID). This together with a 
   multiplex service ID is associated with IPv4 or IPv6 addresses [46] 
   and used for selective traffic filtering at receivers. Upstream 
   channels may complement DVB-H by means of alternative technologies. 
    
   Multicast distribution services are defined by a mapping of groups 
   onto appropriate PIDs, which is managed at the IP Encapsulator [47]. 
   To increase flexibility and avoid collisions, this address resolution 
   is facilitated by dynamic tables, provided within the self-consistent 
   MPEG-2 TS. Mobility is supported in the sense that changes of cell 
   ID, network ID or Transport Stream ID are foreseen [48]. A multicast 
   receiver thus needs to re-locate multicast services it is subscribed 
   to, which is to be done in the synchronization phase, and update its 
   service filters. Its handover decision may depend on service 
   availability. An active service subscription (multicast join) will 
   need initiation at the IP Encapsulator / DVB-H Gateway, which cannot 
   be achieved in a pure DVB-H network setup.  
    
4.3 Vertical Multicast Handovers 
    
   A mobile multicast node may operate homogeneous (horizontal) or 
   heterogeneous (vertical) layer 2 handovers with or without layer 3 
   network changes. Consequently, multicast configuration context 
   transfer at network access' needs dedicated treatment. Media 
   Independent Handover (MIH) is addressed in IEEE 802.21 [49], but is 
   relevant also beyond IEEE protocols. Mobility services transport for 
   MIH naturally reside on the network layer and are currently in the 
   process of specification [50]. 
    
   MIH needs to assist in more than service discovery. Keeping in mind 
   complex, media dependent multicast adaptations, a possible absence of 
   MLD signaling in L2-only transfers and requirements originating from 
   predictive handovers, a multicast mobility services transport needs 
   to be sufficiently comprehensive and abstract to initiate a seamless 
   multicast handoff at network access. 
    
   Functions required for MIH include: 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 16] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
    o Service discovery 
    o Service context transformation 
    o Service context transfer 
    o Service invocation. 
    
    
5. Solutions 
    
5.1 General Approaches 
    
   Three approaches to mobile Multicast are common [51]:  
    
    o Bi-directional Tunnelling, in which the mobile node tunnels all 
   multicast data via its home agent. This fundamental multicast 
   solution hides all movement and results in static multicast trees. It 
   may be employed transparently by mobile multicast listeners and 
   sources, at the cost of triangular routing and possibly significant 
   performance degradations due to widely spanned data tunnels. 
    
    o Remote Subscription forces the mobile node to re-initiate 
   multicast distribution subsequent to handover, e.g., by submitting an 
   MLD listener report within the subnet a receiver newly attaches to. 
   This approach of tree discontinuation relies on multicast dynamics to 
   adapt to network changes. It not only results in rigorous service 
   disruption, but leads to mobility-driven changes of source addresses, 
   and thus cannot support session persistence under multicast source 
   mobility. 
    
    o Agent-based solutions attempt to balance between the previous two 
   mechanisms. Static agents typically act as local tunnelling proxies, 
   allowing for some inter-agent handover when the mobile node moves. A 
   decelerated inter-tree handover, i.e. 'tree walking', will be the 
   outcome of agent-based multicast mobility, where some extra effort is 
   needed to sustain session persistence through address transparency of 
   mobile sources. 
    
   MIPv6 [6] introduces bi-directional tunnelling as well as remote 
   subscription as minimal standard solutions. Various publications 
   suggest utilizing remote subscription for listener mobility only, 
   while advising bi-directional tunnelling as the solution for source 
   mobility. Such an approach avoids the 'tunnel convergence' or 
   'avalanche' problem [51], which refers to the responsibility of the 
   home agent to multiply and encapsulate packets for many receivers of 
   the same group, even if they are located within the same subnetwork. 
   However, it suffers from the drawback that multicast communication 
   roles are not explicitly known at the network layer and may change or 
   mix unexpectedly. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 17] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   None of the above approaches address SSM source mobility, except the 
   bi-directional tunnelling. 
    
    
5.2 Solutions for Multicast Listener Mobility 
    
5.2.1 Agent Assistance 
    
   There are proposals for agent assisted handovers for host based 
   mobility, which complement the unicast real-time mobility 
   infrastructure of Fast MIPv6 [21], the M-FMIPv6 [52,53], and of 
   Hierarchical MIPv6 [22], the M-HMIPv6 [54], and to context transfer 
   [55], which have been thoroughly analyzed in [27,56].  
   Network based mobility management, PMIPv6 [57], at its current stage 
   remains multicast transparent, as the MN experiences a point-to-point 
   home link fixed at its local mobility anchor (LMA). A PMIPv6 domain 
   thereby inherits the tunnel convergence problem; future optimizations 
   and extensions to shared links should foresee native multicast 
   distribution towards the edge network, including context transfer 
   between access gateways to aid the IP-mobility-agnostic MNs.  
   An approach based on dynamically negotiated inter-agent handovers is 
   presented in [58]. Aside from IETF work, countless publications 
   present proposals for seamless multicast listener mobility, e.g. [59] 
   provides a comprehensive overview. 
    
5.2.2 Multicast Encapsulation 
    
   Encapsulation of multicast data packets is an established method to 
   shield mobility and to enable access to remotely located data 
   services, e.g., streams from the home network. Applying generic 
   packet tunnelling in IPv6 [60] in a unicast point-to-point way will 
   in addition bridge multicast-agnostic domains, but inherits the 
   tunnel convergence problem and may cause traffic multiplication. 
    
   Multicast enabled environments may take advantage of point-to-
   multipoint encapsulation, i.e., generic packet tunnelling using an 
   appropriate multicast destination address in the outer header. Such 
   multicast-in-multicast encapsulated packets likewise enable reception 
   of remotely located streams, but do not suffer from the scaling 
   deficiencies of unicast tunnels. 
    
   For any use of encapsulation, the tunnelling entry point should 
   provide fragmentation to keep data packets within MTU size 
   constraints. 
    
5.2.3 Hybrid Architectures 
    
   Stimulated by the desire to avoid complexity at the Internet core 
   network, application layer and overlay proposals for (mobile) 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 18] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   multicast have recently raised interest. The possibility of 
   integrating multicast distribution on the overlay into the network 
   layer is being considered by the IRTF Scalable Adaptive Multicast 
   Research Group (SAM). 
    
   An early hybrid architecture of reactively operating proxy-gateways 
   located at the Internet edges was introduced by Garyfalos and 
   Almeroth [32]. The authors present Intelligent Gateway Multicast as a 
   bridge between mobility aware native multicast management in access 
   networks and mobility group distribution services in the Internet 
   core, which may be operated on the network or application layer. For 
   such hybrid architectures, a mobility-agnostic multicast backbone on 
   the overlay has been introduced in the Hybrid Shared Tree approach 
   [61]. 
    
   Currently SAM is developing general architectural approaches for 
   hybrid multicast solutions [62], which will require detailed design 
   in future work. 
    
5.2.4 MLD Extensions 
    
   MLD timer defaults [19] cause slow reaction of the multicast routing 
   infrastructure as well as of layer-3-aware access devices [63] on 
   client leaves, which may be disadvantageous for wireless links. This 
   tardy adaptation may be improved by carefully adjusting the Query 
   Interval. Alternatively, vendors have implemented listener node 
   tables at access routers to eliminate query timeouts on leaves 
   (explicit tracking).  
    
   A MN operating predictive handover, e.g., using FMIPv6, may 
   accelerate multicast service termination in the previous network by 
   submitting an early Done before handoff. MLD router Querying will 
   allow for a possible withdrawal in case of an erroneous prediction. 
   Backward context transfer may be used to ensure leave signalling, 
   otherwise. A further optimization is introduced by Jelger and Noel 
   [64] for the special case of the HA being a multicast router. A Done 
   message received through a tunnel from the mobile end node (through a 
   point-to-point link directly connecting the MN, in general), should 
   not initiate regular MLD membership queries with subsequent timeout. 
   Such explicit treatment of point-to-point links will reduce traffic 
   and accelerate the control protocol. Explicit tracking will cause 
   identical protocol behaviour. 
    
   While away from home, a MN may wish to rely on a proxy or standby 
   multicast membership service, optionally provided by a HA or proxy 
   agent. Such function relies on the ability to restart fast packet 
   forwarding; it may be desirable for the proxy router to remain part 
   of the multicast delivery tree, even though transmission of group 
   data is paused. To enable such proxy control, the authors in [64] 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 19] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   propose to extend MLD by a Listener Hold message exchanged between MN 
   and HA. This idea has been taken up in [54] and further developed to 
   a multicast router attendance control, allowing for a general 
   deployment of group membership proxies. Currently deployed IPTV 
   solutions use such mechanism in combination with a recent (video) 
   frame buffer, to enable fast channel switching (zapping).  
    
5.3 Solutions for Multicast Source Mobility 
    
5.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility Approaches 
    
   Solutions for the multicast source mobility problem can be devided in 
   three categories: 
    
    o Statically Rooted Distribution Trees:  
    
   Following a shared tree approach, Romdhani et al. [65] propose to 
   employ Rendezvous Points of PIM-SM as mobility anchors. Mobile 
   senders tunnel their data to these "Mobility-aware Rendezvous Points" 
   (MRPs). When restricted to a single domain this scheme is equivalent 
   to bi-directional tunneling. Focusing on interdomain mobile 
   multicast, the authors design a tunnel- or SSM-based backbone 
   distribution of packets between MRPs. 
    
    o Reconstruction of Distribution Trees:  
    
   Several authors propose construction of a completely new distribution 
   tree after the movement of a mobile source and therefore have to 
   compensate routing delays. M-HMIPv6 [54] tunnels data into previously 
   established trees rooted at mobility anchor points to compensate for 
   routing delays until a protocol dependent timer expires. The RBMoM 
   protocol [66] introduces additional Multicast Agents (MA) that 
   advertise their service range. The mobile source registers with the 
   closest MA and tunnels data through it. When moving out of the 
   previous service range, it will perform MA discovery, a re-
   registration and continue data tunneling with a newly established 
   Multicast Agent in its current vicinity. 
    
    o Tree Modification Schemes:  
    
   In the case of DVMRP routing, Chang and Yen [67] propose an algorithm 
   to extend the root of a given delivery tree for incorporating a new 
   source location in ASM. To fix DVMRP forwarding states and heal 
   reverse path forwarding (RPF) check failures, the authors rely on a 
   complex additional signaling protocol. 
    
5.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility Approaches 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 20] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   The shared tree approach of [65] has been extended to SSM mobility by 
   introducing the HoA address record to Mobility-aware Rendezvous 
   Points. These MRPs operate on extended multicast routing tables, 
   which simultaneously hold HoA and CoA and are thus enabled to 
   logically identify the appropriate distribution tree. Mobility thus 
   re-introduces rendezvous points to SSM routing. 
    
   Approaches of reconstructing SPTs in SSM have to rely on client 
   notification for initiating new router state establishment. At the 
   same time they need to preserve address transparency to the client. 
   To account for the latter, Thaler [68] proposes binding caches and 
   obtaining source address transparency analogous to MIPv6 unicast 
   communication. Initial session announcements and changes of source 
   addresses are distributed periodically to clients via an additional 
   multicast control tree rooted at the home agent. Source tree 
   handovers are then activated on listener requests.  
   Jelger and Noel [69] suggest handover improvements by employing 
   anchor points within the source network, supporting continuous data 
   reception during client initiated handovers. Client updates are to be 
   triggered out of band, e.g. by SDR. Receiver-oriented tree 
   construction in SSM thus remains unsynchronized with the source 
   handovers. 
    
   To address this synchronization problem at the routing layer, several 
   proposals concentrate on direct modification of distribution trees. 
   Based on a multicast Hop-by-Hop protocol, a recursive scheme of loose 
   unicast source routes with branch points, Vida et al [70] optimize 
   SPTs for moving sources on the path between source and first 
   branching point. O'Neill [71] suggests a scheme to overcome RPF check 
   failures originating from multicast source address changes in a 
   rendezvous point scenario by introducing extended routing 
   information, which accompanies data in a Hop-by-Hop option "RPF 
   redirect" header. The Tree Morphing approach of Schmidt and Waehlisch 
   [72] uses source routing to extend the root of a previously 
   established SPT, thereby injecting router state updates in a Hop-by-
   Hop option header. Using extended RPF checks the elongated tree 
   autonomously initiates shortcuts and smoothly reduces to a new SPT 
   rooted at the relocated source. Lee et al. [73] introduce a state 
   update mechanism for re-using major parts of established multicast 
   trees. The authors start from an initially established distribution 
   state centered at the mobile source's home agent. A mobile leaving 
   its home network will signal a multicast forwarding state update on 
   the path to its home agent and, subsequently, distribution states 
   according to the mobile source's new CoA are implemented along the 
   previous distribution tree. Multicast data then is intended to 
   natively flow in triangular routes via the elongation and updated 
   tree centered at the home agent. 
    
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 21] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
6. Security Considerations 
    
   This document discusses multicast extensions to mobility. It does not 
   define new methods or procedures. Security issues arise from source 
   address binding updates, specifically in the case of source specific 
   multicast. Threats of hijacking unicast sessions will result from any 
   solution jointly operating binding updates for unicast and multicast 
   sessions. Admission control issues may arise with new CoA source 
   addresses being introduced to SSM channels (cf. [74] for a 
   comprehensive discussion). Due to lack of feedback, admissions [75] 
   and binding updates [76] of mobile multicast sources require self-
   consistent authentication as achievable by CGAs. Future solutions 
   must address the security implications. 
    
    
7.Summary and Future Steps 
    
   This memo is intended to support a future design of mobile multicast 
   methods and protocols by 
    
        o providing a structured overview of the problem space that 
          multicast and mobility jointly generate at the IPv6 layer; 
    
        o referencing the implications and constraints arising from  
          lower and upper layers, and from deployment; 
    
        o briefly surveying conceptual ideas for currently available  
          solutions; 
    
        o including a comprehensive bibliographic reference base. 
    
   It is recommended that future steps towards extending mobility 
   services to multicast proceed to first solve the following problems: 
    
     1. Ensure seamless multicast reception during handovers,  
        meeting the requirements of mobile IPv6 nodes and networks. 
        Thereby address the problems of home subscription without  
        n-tunnels, as well as native multicast reception in those  
        visited networks, which offer a group communication service. 
    
     2. Integrate multicast listener support into unicast mobility  
        management schemes and architectural entities to define a  
        consistent mobility service architecture, providing equal  
        supporting for unicast and multicast communication. 
    
     3. Provide basic multicast source mobility by designing  
        address duality management at end nodes.  
    
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 22] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
8. IANA Considerations 
    
   There are no IANA considerations introduced by this draft. 
    
    
Appendix A. Implicit Source Notification Options 
    
   A multicast source will transmit data to a group of receivers without 
   the option of an explicit feedback channel. There are attempts though 
   to implicitly obtain information on listening group members. One 
   proposed approach allowed an IGMP/MLD querier to be informed of the 
   pure existence of receivers. Based on an extension of IGMP, the 
   Multicast Source Notification of Interest Protocol (MSNIP) [77] was 
   designed to allow for the multicast source querying its designated 
   router. However, work on MSNIP has been terminated by IETF.  
    
   A majority of real-time applications employ RTP [78] as its 
   application layer transport protocol, which is accompanied by its 
   control protocol RTCP. RTP is capable of multicast group distribution 
   and RTCP receiver reports are submitted to the same group in the 
   multicast case. Thus RTCP may be used to monitor, manage and control 
   multicast group operations, as it provides a fairly comprehensive 
   insight into group member statuses. However, RTCP information is 
   neither present at the network layer nor does multicast communication 
   presuppose the use of RTP. 
    
    
9. References 
 
Informative References 
                     
   1  S. Bradner "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 
      79, RFC 3979, March 2005. 
    
   2  Aguilar, L. "Datagram Routing for Internet Multicasting", In ACM 
      SIGCOMM '84 Communications Architectures and Protocols, pp. 58-63, 
      ACM Press, June, 1984. 
    
   3  S. Deering "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting", RFC 1112, August 
      1989. 
    
   4  G. Xylomenos and G.C. Plyzos "IP Multicast for Mobile Hosts", IEEE 
      Communications Magazine, 35(1), pp. 54-58, January 1997. 
    
   5  R. Hinden and S. Deering "Internet Protocol Version 6 
      Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998. 
    


 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 23] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                                                         
   6  D.B. Johnson, C. Perkins and J. Arkko "Mobility Support in IPv6", 
      RFC 3775, June 2004. 
    
   7  V. Devarapalli and F. Dupont "Mobile IPv6 Operation with IKEv2 and 
      the Revised IPsec Architecture", RFC 4877, April 2007. 
    
   8  Akyildiz, I and Wang, X. "A Survey on Wireless Mesh Networks", 
      IEEE Communications Magazine, 43(9), pp. 23-30, September 2005. 
    
   9  S. Bhattacharyya "An Overview of Source-Specific Multicast (SSM)", 
      RFC 3569, July 2003. 
    
   10 H. Holbrook, B. Cain "Source-Specific Multicast for IP", RFC 4607, 
      August 2006. 
    
   11 D. Waitzman, C. Partridge, S.E. Deering "Distance Vector Multicast 
      Routing Protocol", RFC 1075, November 1988. 
    
   12 D. Estrin, D. Farinacci, A. Helmy, D. Thaler, S. Deering, M. 
      Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Liu, P. Sharma, L. Wei "Protocol 
      Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol 
      Specification", RFC 2362, June 1998. 
    
   13 B. Fenner, M. Handley, H. Holbrook, I. Kouvelas: "Protocol 
      Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode PIM-SM): Protocol 
      Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006. 
    
   14 M. Handley, I. Kouvelas, T. Speakman, L. Vicisano "Bidirectional 
      Protocol Independent Multicast (BIDIR-PIM)", RFC 5015, October 
      2007. 
    
   15 A. Ballardie "Core Based Trees (CBT version 2) Multicast Routing", 
      RFC 2189, September 1997. 
    
   16 D. Thaler "Border Gateway Multicast Protocol (BGMP): Protocol 
      Specification", RFC 3913, September 2004. 
    
   17 T. Bates et al. "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, 
      January 2007. 
    
   18 S. Deering, W. Fenner and B. Haberman "Multicast Listener 
      Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999. 
    
   19 R. Vida and L. Costa (Eds.) "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 
      2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004. 
    


 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 24] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                                                         
   20 Arkko, J., Vogt, C., Haddad, W. "Enhanced Route Optimization for 
      Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, May 2007. 
    
   21 Koodli, R. "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068, July 2005. 
    
   22 Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El-Malki, K., Bellier, L. 
      "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management", RFC 4140, August 
      2005. 
    
   23 Loughney, J., Nakhjiri, M., Perkins, C., Koodli, R. "Context 
      Transfer Protocol (CXTP)", RFC 4067, July 2005. 
    
   24 Montavont, N., et al. "Analysis of Multihoming in Mobile IPv6", 
      draft-ietf-monami6-mipv6-analysis-04, Internet Draft - (work in 
      progress), November 2007. 
    
   25 Narayanan, V., Thaler, D., Bagnulo, M., Soliman, H. "IP Mobility 
      and Multi-homing Interactions and Architectural Considerations", 
      draft-vidya-ip-mobility-multihoming-interactions-01.txt, Internet 
      Draft - (work in progress), July 2007. 
    
   26 Savola, P., Haberman, B. "Embedding the Rendezvous Point (RP) 
      Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address", RFC 3956, November 2004. 
    
   27 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Predictive versus Reactive - 
      Analysis of Handover Performance and Its Implications on IPv6 and 
      Multicast Mobility", Telecommunication Systems, 30(1-3), pp. 123-
      142, November 2005. 
    
   28 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Morphing Distribution Trees - On 
      the Evolution of Multicast States under Mobility and an Adaptive 
      Routing Scheme for Mobile SSM Sources", Telecommunication Systems, 
      Vol. 33, No. 1-3, pp. 131-154, Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 
      December 2006. 
    
   29 Diot, C. et al. "Deployment Issues for the IP Multicast Service 
      and Architecture", IEEE Network Magazine, spec. issue on 
      Multicasting 14(1), pp. 78-88, 2000. 
    
   30 Eubanks, M.: http://multicasttech.com/status/, 2007. 
    
   31 Garyfalos, A., Almeroth, K. and Sanzgiri, K. "Deployment 
      Complexity Versus Performance Efficiency in Mobile Multicast", 
      Intern. Workshop on Broadband Wireless Multimedia: Algorithms, 
      Architectures and Applications (BroadWiM), San Jose, California, 
      USA, October 2004. Online: http://imj.ucsb.edu/papers/BROADWIM-
      04.pdf.gz 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 25] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                                                         
    
   32 Garyfalos, A., Almeroth, K. "A Flexible Overlay Architecture for 
      Mobile IPv6 Multicast", IEEE Journ. on Selected Areas in Comm., 23 
      (11), pp. 2194-2205, November 2005. 
    
   33 "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); IP Datacast over DVB-H: Set of 
      Specifications for Phase 1", ETSI TS 102 468; 
      "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); IP Datacast over DVB-H: 
      Implementation Guidelines for Mobility", ETSI TS 102 611. 
    
   34 Chuang, J. and Sirbu, M. "Pricing Multicast Communication: A Cost-
      Based Approach", Telecommunication Systems 17(3), 281-297, 2001. 
      Presented at the INET'98, Geneva, Switzerland, July 1998. 
    
   35 Van Mieghem, P., Hooghiemstra, G., Hofstad, R. "On the Efficiency 
      of Multicast", Transactions on Networking, 9, 6, pp. 719-732, 
      December 2001. 
    
   36 Chalmers, R.C. and Almeroth, K.C., "On the topology of multicast 
      trees", IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 11(1), 153-165, 2003. 
    
   37 Janic, M. and Van Mieghem, P. "On properties of multicast routing 
      trees", Int. J. Commun. Syst. 19(1), pp. 95-114, 2006. 
    
   38 Van Mieghem, P. "Performance Analysis of Communication Networks 
      and Systems", Cambridge University Press, 2006. 
    
   39 Shin, M. et al. "IPv6 Deployment Scenarios in 802.16 Networks", 
      draft-ietf-v6ops-802-16-deployment-scenarios-07, (work in 
      progress), Januar 2008. 
    
   40 Kim, S. et al. "Multicast Transport on IEEE 802.16 Networks", 
      draft-sekim-802-16-multicast-01, (work in progress), July 2007. 
    
   41 IEEE 802.16e-2005: IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area 
      networks Part 16: "Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband 
      Wireless Access Systems Amendment for Physical and Medium Access 
      Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed 
      Bands.", New York, February 2006. 
    
   42 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group 
      Services and System Aspects; IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 
      2, 3GPP TS 23.228, Rel. 5 ff., 2002 – 2007. 
    
   43 Wasserman, M. "Recommendations for IPv6 in Third Generation 
      Partnership Project (3GPP) Standards", RFC 3314, September 2002. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 26] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                                                         
   44 Chen, X., Rinne, J. and Wiljakka, J. "Problem Statement for MIPv6 
      Interactions with GPRS/UMTS Packet Filtering", draft-chen-mip6-
      gprs-07.txt, (work in progress), January 2007. 
    
   45 ETSI EN 302 304: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Transmission 
      System for Handheld Terminals (DVB-H)", European Standard 
      (Telecommunications series), November 2004. 
    
   46 Fairhurst, G. and Montpetit, M. "Address Resolution Mechanisms for 
      IP Datagrams over MPEG-2 Networks", RFC 4947, July 2007. 
    
   47 Montpetit, M. et al. "A Framework for Transmission of IP Datagrams 
      over MPEG-2 Networks", RFC 4259, November 2005. 
    
   48 Yang, X., Vare, J., Owens, T. "A Survey of Handover Algorithms in 
      DVB-H", IEEE Comm. Surveys, 8(4), 2006. 
    
   49 "Draft IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: 
      Media Independent Handover Services", IEEE LAN/MAN Draft IEEE 
      P802.21/D07.00, July 2007. 
    
   50 Melia, T. et al. "Mobility Services Transport: Problem Statement", 
      draft-ietf-mipshop-mis-ps-05, (work in progress), November 2007. 
    
   51 Jannetau, C., Tian, Y., Csaba, S. et al "Comparison of Three 
      Approaches Towards Mobile Multicast", IST Mobile Summit 2003, 
      Aveiro, Portugal, 16-18 June 2003, online http://www.comnets.rwth- 
      aachen.de/~o_drive/publications/ist-summit-2003-IPMobileMulticast- 
      paperv2.0.pdf. 
    
   52 Suh, K., Kwon, D.-H., Suh, Y.-J. and Park, Y. "Fast Multicast 
      Protocol for Mobile IPv6 in the fast handovers environments", 
      Internet Draft - (work in progress, expired), February 2004. 
    
   53 Xia, F. and Sarikaya, B. "FMIPv6 extensions for Multicast 
      Handover", draft-xia-mipshop-fmip-multicast-01, (work in progress, 
      expired), March 2007. 
    
   54 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Seamless Multicast Handover in a 
      Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Environment(M-HMIPv6)", draft-schmidt-
      waehlisch-mhmipv6-04.txt, (work in progress, expired), December 
      2005. 
    
   55 Jonas, K. and Miloucheva, I. "Multicast Context Transfer in mobile 
      IPv6", draft-miloucheva-mldv2-mipv6-00.txt, (work in progress, 
      expired), June 2005. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 27] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                                                         
   56 Leoleis, G., Prezerakos, G., Venieris, I. "Seamless multicast 
      mobility support using fast MIPv6 extensions", Computer Comm. 29, 
      pp. 3745-3765, 2006. 
    
   57 Gundavelli, S., et al. "Proxy Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-netlmm-
      proxymip6, (work in progress), February 2008. 
    
   58 Zhang, H. et al "Mobile IPv6 Multicast with Dynamic Multicast 
      Agent", draft-zhang-mipshop-multicast-dma-03.txt, (work in 
      progress), January 2007. 
    
   59 Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., Lach, H.-Y. et. al. "IP Mobile 
      Multicast: Challenges and Solutions", IEEE Comm. Surveys, 6(1), 
      2004. 
    
   60 Conta, A, Deering, S. "Generic Packet Tunneling in IPv6 - 
      Specification", RFC 2473, December 1998. 
    
   61 Waehlisch, M., Schmidt, T.C. "Between Underlay and Overlay: On 
      Deployable, Efficient, Mobility-agnostic Group Communication 
      Services", Internet Research, 17 (5), pp. 519-534, Emerald 
      Insight, Bingley, UK, November 2007. 
    
   62 Buford, J. "Hybrid Overlay Multicast Framework", draft-irtf-sam-
      hybrid-overlay-framework-01.txt, Internet Draft (work in 
      progress), January 2007. 
    
   63 Christensen, M., Kimball, K. and Solensky, F. "Considerations for 
      Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener 
      Discovery (MLD) Snooping Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006. 
    
   64 Jelger, C., Noel, T. "Multicast for Mobile Hosts in IP Networks: 
      Progress and Challenges", IEEE Wirel. Comm., pp 58-64, Oct. 2002. 
    
   65 Romdhani, I., Bettahar, H. and Bouabdallah, A. "Transparent 
      handover for mobile multicast sources", in P. Lorenz and P. Dini, 
      eds, 'Proceedings of the IEEE ICN'06', IEEE Press, 2006. 
    
   66 Lin, C.R. et al., "Scalable Multicast Protocol in IP-Based Mobile 
      Networks", Wireless Networks and Applications, 5, pp. 259-271, 
      2000. 
    
   67 Chang, R.-S. and Yen, Y.-S. "A Multicast Routing Protocol with 
      Dynamic Tree Adjustment for Mobile IPv6", Journ. Information 
      Science and Engineering 20, pp. 1109-1124, 2004. 
    


 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 28] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
                                                                         
   68 Thaler, D. "Supporting Mobile SSM Sources for IPv6", Proceedings 
      of ietf meeting Dec. 2001, individual.  
      URL: www.ietf.org/proceedings/01dec/slides/magma-2.pdf 
    
   69 Jelger, C. and Noel, T. "Supporting Mobile SSM sources for IPv6 
      (MSSMSv6)", Internet Draft (work in progress, expired), January 
      2002. 
    
   70 Vida, R., Costa, L., Fdida, S. "M-HBH - Efficient Mobility 
      Management in Multicast", Proc. of NGC '02, pp. 105-112, ACM Press 
      2002. 
    
   71 O'Neill, A. "Mobility Management and IP Multicast", draft-oneill-
      mip-multicast-00.txt, (work in progress, expired), July 2002. 
    
   72 Schmidt, T. C. and Waehlisch, M. "Extending SSM to MIPv6 - 
      Problems, Solutions and Improvements", Computational Methods in 
      Science and Technology 11(2), pp. 147-152. Selected Papers from 
      TERENA Networking Conference, Poznan, May 2005. 
    
   73 Lee, H., Han, S. and Hong, J. "Efficient Mechanism for Source 
      Mobility in Source Specific Multicast", in K. Kawahara and I. 
      Chong, eds, "Proceedings of ICOIN2006", LNCS vol. 3961, pp. 82-91, 
      Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. 
    
   74 Kellil, M., Romdhani, I., Lach, H.-Y., Bouabdallah, A. and 
      Bettahar, H. "Multicast Receiver and Sender Access Control and its 
      Applicability to Mobile IP Environments: A Survey", IEEE Comm. 
      Surveys & Tutorials 7(2), pp. 46-70, 2005. 
    
   75 Castellucia, C., Montenegro, G. "Securing Group Management in IPv6 
      with Cryptographically Based Addresses", Proc. 8th IEEE Int'l 
      Symp. Comp. and Commun., Turkey, July 2003, pp. 588-93. 
    
   76 Christ, O., Schmidt, T.C., Waehlisch, M. "A Light-Weight 
      Implementation Scheme of the Tree Morphing Protocol for Mobile 
      Multicast Sources ", Proc. of 33rd Euromicro Conf., pp. 149-156, 
      IEEE/CS Press, Sept. 2007. 
    
   77 Fenner, B. et al. "Multicast Source Notification of Interest 
      Protocol", draft-ietf-idmr-msnip-05.txt, (work in progress, 
      expired), March 2004. 
    
   78 Schulzrinne, H. et al. "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time 
      Applications", RFC 3550, July 2003. 
    
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 29] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   Work on exploring the problem space for mobile multicast has been 
   pioneered by Greg Daley and Gopi Kurup within their early draft 
   "Requirements for Mobile Multicast Clients" (draft-daley-magma-
   mobile). 
    
   Since then, many people have actively discussed the different issues 
   and contributed to the enhancement of this memo. The authors would 
   like to thank (in alphabetical order) Kevin C. Almeroth, Hans L. 
   Cycon, Hui Deng, Gorry Fairhurst, Zhigang Huang, Christophe Jelger, 
   Rajeev Koodli, Mark Palkow, Imed Romdhani, Hesham Soliman and last 
   but not least very special thanks to Stig Venaas for his frequent and 
   thorough advice. 
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Thomas C. Schmidt 
   HAW Hamburg, Dept. Informatik 
   Berliner Tor 7 
   D-20099 Hamburg, Germany 
   Phone: +49-40-42875-8157 
   Email: Schmidt@informatik.haw-hamburg.de 
     
    
   Matthias Waehlisch 
   link-lab 
   Hoenowerstr. 35 
   D-10318 Berlin, Germany 
   Email: mw@link-lab.net 
    
    
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 30] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                February 2008 
 
 
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008) This document is subject to the 
   rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as 
   set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding of the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    















 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch      Expires - August 2008               [Page 31] 

