

Network Working Group                                      W. Kameyama
Internet-Draft                                 GITS, Waseda University
Expires: October 22, 2004                               April 23, 2004


                A URN Namespace for the TV-Anytime Forum
                  draft-kameyama-tv-anytime-urn-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft expires on October 22, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that
   is engineered by the TV-Anytime Forum for naming persistent resources
   published by the TV-Anytime Forum including the TV-Anytime Forum
   Standards, XML (Extensible Markup Language) Document Type
   Definitions, XML Schemas, Namespaces, and other documents.

1. Introduction

   The TV-Anytime Forum produces many kinds of documents:



Kameyama                Expires: October 22, 2004               [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT  A URN Namespace for the TV-Anytime Forum      April 2004


   specifications, working documents, schemas, etc. that currently being
   considered for adoption by many standardization bodies such as ETSI
   (European Telecommunication Standardization Institute), DVB (Digital
   Video Broadcasting), ARIB (Association of Radio Industries and
   Businesses) and ATSC (Advance Television Systems Committee).

   The TV-Anytime Forum wishes to provide global, distributed,
   persistent, location-independent names for these resources.

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      "tva" requested.

   Registration information:

      Registration Version Number: 1
      Registration Date: 2004-04-23

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Name:        Wataru KAMEYAMA
      Title:       Vice Chairman and Secretary, The TV-Anytime Forum
      Affiliation: Graduate School of Global Information
                   and Telecommunication Studies, Waseda University
      Address:     1011 Okuboyama, Nishi-tomida, Honjo-shi, Saitama
                   367-0035, JAPAN
      Phone:       +81 495 24 6052
      Email:       wataru@waseda.jp

   Declaration of structure:

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs assigned by the
      TV-Anytime Forum will have the following hierarchical structure:

                  urn:tva:{category}:{string}

      where the "category" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to URN
      syntax requirements ([RFC2141]), and "{string}" is a string that
      confirms to URN syntax requirements ([RFC2141]).

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      The TV-Anytime Forum specifications have been publicly available
      at all stages during their development from
      "ftp://tva:tva@ftp.bbc.co.uk/Specifications/".  The final
      specifications are also available as formal ETSI (European



Kameyama                Expires: October 22, 2004               [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT  A URN Namespace for the TV-Anytime Forum      April 2004


      Telecommunication Standardization Institute) technical
      specification documents, ETSI TS 102 822 series.

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      The TV-Anytime Forum shall establish unique identifiers as
      appropriate.

      Uniqueness is guaranteed as long as the assigned "{category}" is
      never reassigned for another categories.  The TV-Anytime Forum is
      responsible for this.

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      The TV-Anytime Forum is committed to maintaining the accessibility
      and persistence of all resources that are officially assigned URNs
      by the organization.  Persistence of identifiers is dependent upon
      suitable delegation at the level of "category"s, and persistence
      of category assignment.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      All the assignments of identifiers are fully controlled and
      managed by the TV-Anytime Forum.

   Process of identifier resolution:

      The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      The "{category}" is case-insensitive.  Thus, the portion of the
      URN:

                  urn:tva:{category}:

      is case-insensitive for matches.  The remainder of the identifier
      shall be considered case-sensitive, and so URNs are only lexically
      equivalent if they are also lexically identical in the remaining
      {string} field.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      Validation shall be done by a syntax grammar corresponding to each



Kameyama                Expires: October 22, 2004               [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT  A URN Namespace for the TV-Anytime Forum      April 2004


      "{category}".

   Scope:

      Global.

3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.  They are
   provided for pedagogical reasons only.

         urn:tva:metadata:2002
         urn:tva:metadata:cs:IntentionCS:2002
         urn:tva:metadata:cs:ActionTypeCS:2002
         urn:tva:rmp:tvax


4. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.


References

   [RFC2141] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997

Author Address

   Wataru KAMEYAMA
   GITS, Waseda University
   1011 Okuboyama, Nishi-tomida, Honjo-shi, Saitama, 367-0035, JAPAN
   Phone: +81 495 24 6052
   Email: wataru@waseda.jp

















Kameyama                Expires: October 22, 2004               [Page 4]


