


MMUSIC WG                                                        R. Mahy
Internet-Draft                                                  SIP Edge
Expires: January 16, 2006                                  July 15, 2005


                  Remote Call Control via Mbus and SIP
                 draft-mahy-mmusic-mbus-remotecc-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   Mbus (Message Bus for Local Coordination) was designed with remote
   call control in mind as an Mbus profile.  This document discusses
   changes necessary to the long abandoned call control profile to
   address recent requrirement, and conditions of use to make the core
   Mbus appropriate for use among SIP systems on the Internet.







Mahy                    Expires January 16, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Mbus remote call control               July 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.   Proposed changes to the Mbus call control profile  . . . . . . 3
   4.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 6









































Mahy                    Expires January 16, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Mbus remote call control               July 2005


1.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

2.  Introduction

   A long-standing charter item of the SIP and SIPPING working groups
   was to design extensions to SIP [1] for call control [10].  In this
   vein, remote call control [5], the cooperation of a handful of
   loosely coupled user agents was extensively discussed, and several
   suggestions investigated.

   Mbus (Message Bus for Local Coordination) - RFC 3259 [3], is a
   lightweight message-oriented coordination protocol designed for
   inter-application communication.  Mbus was designed to run primarily
   over IP multicast, but also runs over unicast UDP datagrams.
   Unfortunately Mbus was not designed to work in settings where the
   Mbus applications are geographically local, but not topologically
   local.  (For example, a mobile phone with IP connectivity could be
   used as a remote control for a SIP-based video conferencing system
   which happens to be in the same room, but are in very different
   networks and addressing realms).

   Mbus control streams setup via SIP and SDP [9] addresses many of
   these limitations.  This companion document evaluates the possibility
   of resurrecting the long expired Mbus call control profile [11].

3.  Proposed changes to the Mbus call control profile

   The expired call control profile has many events for monitoring
   status which are a close duplicate of the dialog package [6], which
   is more expressive in a SIP environment.  In order to get the best of
   both worlds, the commands and events in the current profile should be
   split into two different profiles.  Note that this also can
   dramatically improve the congestion safety of the overall solution,
   as SIP message over 1300 bytes MUST be sent over congestion-safe
   transports such as TCP.

   The following list proposes a refactoring of the control primitives
   listed in the call control profile.  Several commands are combined or
   eliminated.  In addition, four new commands are added which complete
   a transfer, join two parties, and add and delete parties in an adhoc
   conference.






Mahy                    Expires January 16, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Mbus remote call control               July 2005


   make-call (sends an INVITE)
   end-call (sends a BYE, CANCEL, or 603 Declined as appropriate)
   accept (accepts an incoming call)
   alert (returns a 180 Ringing provisional response) - is this needed?
   reject (reject an incoming call with a specific response/reason)

   move (redirect or single-step transfer a call to specific target URI)
   complete-transfer (replaces two active or held calls with one call
       directly between to two targets -- REFER 1st call to INVITE with
       Replaces the 2nd call)

   hold (invoke the locally defined hold mechanism)
   retrieve (retrieve a call from hold)

   join (merge two calls into one conference)
   add-party (add a party to a conference)
   drop-party (remove a party from a conference)

   In addition to these changes there are some additional features for
   consideration that should probably be in separate profiles.  For
   example, setting volume setting, selected audio device, and Do Not
   Disturb or Forwarding status.  For example, it is unclear if Do Not
   Disturb should be configured via Mbus or via a presence [7]
   publication [8].

4.  Security Considerations

   To Be Written.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no requirements for IANA.

6.  Normative References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [3]  Ott, J., Perkins, C., and D. Kutscher, "A Message Bus for Local
        Coordination", RFC 3259, April 2002.

   [4]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.




Mahy                    Expires January 16, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Mbus remote call control               July 2005


   [5]  Mahy, R., "Remote Call Control in SIP using the REFER method and
        the session-oriented  dialog package",
        draft-mahy-sip-remote-cc-01 (work in progress), February 2004.

   [6]  Rosenberg, J., "An INVITE Inititiated Dialog Event Package for
        the Session Initiation  Protocol (SIP)",
        draft-ietf-sipping-dialog-package-06 (work in progress),
        April 2005.

   [7]  Rosenberg, J., "A Presence Event Package for the Session
        Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3856, August 2004.

   [8]  Niemi, A., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Extension for
        Event State Publication", RFC 3903, October 2004.

   [9]  Mahy, R., "Setting up Mbus Control Sessions with SIP and SDP",
        draft-mahy-mmusic-mbus-sdp-01.txt (work in progress), July 2005.

   [10]  <http://www.softarmor.com/wgdb/docs/
         draft-ietf-sipping-cc-framework-03.txt>

   [11]  <http://www.mbus.org/drafts/
         draft-ietf-mmusic-mbus-call-control-00.html>


Author's Address

   Rohan Mahy
   SIP Edge

   Email: rohan@cisco.com




















Mahy                    Expires January 16, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Mbus remote call control               July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Mahy                    Expires January 16, 2006                [Page 6]

