Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   Network Working Group                                 Vishwas Manral 
   Internet-Draft                                           IP Infusion 
   Expires: March 2009                                       Russ White 
   Intended Status: Informational                         Cisco Systems 
                                                           Manav Bhatia 
                                                         Alcatel-Lucent 
    
     Issues with existing Cryptographic Protection Methods for Routing 
                                 Protocols 
                                      
          draft-ietf-opsec-routing-protocols-crypto-issues-00.txt 
                                      
Status of this Memo 
    
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Routing protocols are designed to use cryptographic mechanisms to 
   authenticate data being received from a neighboring router to ensure 
   that it has not been modified in transit, and actually originated 
   from the neighboring router purporting to have originating the data.  
   Most of the cryptographic mechanisms defined to date rely on hash 
   algorithms applied to the data in the routing protocol packet, which 
   means the data is transported, in the clear, along with a signature 
   based on the data itself.  These mechanisms rely on the manual 
   configuration of the keys used to seed, or build, these hash based 
   signatures.  This document outlines some of the problems with manual 
   keying of these cryptographic algorithms. 
    
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this  
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119] 
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Problem Statement..............................................2 
   2. Open Shortest Path First (OSPFv2)..............................4 
      2.1 Management Issues with OSPF................................4 
      2.2 Technical Issues with OSPF.................................4 
   3. Open Shortest Path First (OSPFv3)..............................5 
      3.1 Management Issues with OSPFv3..............................6 
      3.2 Technical Issues with OSPFv3...............................6 
   4. Intermediate System to Intermediate System Routing Protocol (IS-
   IS)...............................................................7 
      4.1 Management Issues with IS-IS...............................7 
      4.2 Technical Issues with IS-IS................................8 
   5. Border Gateway Protocol (BGP-4)................................9 
      5.1 Management Issues with BGP-4..............................10 
      5.2 Technical Issues with BGP-4...............................10 
   6. The Routing Information Protocol (RIP)........................10 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................12 
   8. Acknowledgements..............................................12 
   9. IANA Considerations...........................................12 
   10. References...................................................12 
      10.1 Normative References.....................................12 
      10.2 Informative References...................................13 
   11. Contributor's Address........................................14 
   12. Author's Addresses...........................................14 
 
    
1. Problem Statement 
    
   Routing protocols, such as OSPF [RFC2328] [RFC5340], IS-IS [RFC1195],   
   and BGP-4 [RFC4271], rely on various mechanisms to create a 
   cryptographic digest of each transmitted routing protocol. 
   Traditionally, these digests are the results of a hash algorithm, 
   such as MD5 [RFC1321], across the contents of the packet being 
   transmitted, using a secret key as the hash base (or seed).  These 
   digests are recomputed by the receiving router, using the same key as 
   the originating router used to create the hash, and compared with the 
   transmitted digest to verify: 
    
   o  That the router originating this piece of data is authorized to 
      peer with the local router, and to transmit routing data.  This 
      generally protects against falsely generated routing data being 
      injected into a routing system by rogue systems. 
    
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   o  That the data has not been changed while transiting between the 
      two neighboring routers. 
    
   These sorts of authentication methods are not generally used to 
   protect the confidentiality of information being exchanged between 
   routers, since this information (entries in the routing table) is 
   generally freely available in many other context; if anyone has 
   access to the physical media between two routers exchanging routing 
   data, they will also probably have other ways to capture or otherwise 
   discover the contents of the routing tables in those routers. 
    
   The main problems with the authentication mechanisms defined today 
   revolve around: 
    
   o  Manual configuration of shared secret keys, especially in large 
      scale networks, poses a major management problem, especially as 
      there is generally no way to gracefully move from one secret key 
      to another. 
    
   o  In some cases, when manual keys are configured, some forms of 
      replay protection are disabled, allowing the routing protocol to 
      be attacked. 
    
   In fact, the MD5 digest algorithm was not designed to be used in the 
   way most routing protocols are using it, which can lead to serious 
   security implications in the future. 
    
   A preimage attack would enable someone to find an input message that 
   causes a hash function to produce a particular output. In contrast, a 
   collision attack finds two messages with the same hash, but the 
   attacker can't pick what the hash will be. Feasible collision attacks 
   against MD4, MD5, HAVAL-128, and RIPEMD were found by the Chinese 
   researcher Xiaoyun Wang with co-authors Dengguo Feng, Xuejia Lai, and 
   Hongbo Yu.  
    
   The collision vulnerability does not introduce any obvious or known 
   attacks on routing protocols. However pre-image attacks could cause 
   problems. 
    
   Protocols themselves have some built-in protection against collision  
   attacks. A lot of values for a lot of fields in the protocol are 
   invalid. For example, for OSPF the LSA type can be from 1 to 11. Any 
   other value in the field will result in the packet being dropped. 
    
   Assume two packets M and M' are generated which have the same hash. 
   The above condition will further reduce the probability of the two 
   messages also being correct messages from the protocol perspective, 
   as a lot of values are themselves not valid. 
    


Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
2. Open Shortest Path First (OSPFv2) 
  
   OSPF [RFC2328] describes the use of an MD5 digest with OSPF packets. 
   MD5 keys are manually configured. The OSPF packet Header includes an   
   authentication type field as well as 64 bits of data for use by the 
   appropriate authentication scheme. OSPF also provides for a non-   
   decreasing sequence number to be included in each OSPF protocol   
   packet to protect against replay attacks. 
    
2.1 Management Issues with OSPF 
    
   According to the OSPF specification [RFC2328], digests are applied 
   to packets transmitted between adjacent neighbors, rather than being 
   applied to the routing information originated by a router (digests 
   are not applied at the LSA level, but rather at the packet level). 
   [RFC2328] states that any set of OSPF routers adjacent across a 
   single link may use a different key to build MD5 digests than the key 
   used to build MD5 digests on any other link.  Thus, MD5 keys may be 
   configured, and changed, on a per-link basis in an OSPF network. 
    
   OSPF does not specify a mechanisms to negotiate keys, nor does it  
   specify any mechanism to negotiate the hash algorithms to be used. 
    
   With the proliferation of the number of hash algorithms, as well as  
   the need to continuously upgrade the algorithms, manually configuring  
   the information becomes very tedious. 
    
2.2 Technical Issues with OSPF
    
   While OSPF provides relatively strong protection through the 
   inclusion of MD5 signatures, with additional data and sequence 
   numbers in transmitted packets, there are still two possible attacks 
   against OSPF: 
    
   o  The sequence number is initialized to zero when forming an 
      adjacency with a newly discovered neighbor, and is also set to 
      zero whenever the neighbor is brought down.  If the 
      cryptographically protected packets of a router that is brought 
      down (for administrative or other reasons) are stored by a 
      malicious router, the new router could replay the packets from 
      the previous session, thus forcing traffic through the malicious 
      router.  Dropping of such packets by the router could result in 
      blackholes.  Also forwarding wrong packets could result in 
      routing loops. 
    
   o  OSPF allows multiple packets with the same sequence number. 
      This could mean the same packet can be replayed many times before 
      the next legitimate packet is sent.  An attacker may resend the 
      same packet repeatedly until the next hello packet is transmitted 
      and received, which means the hello interval determines the attack 
      window. 
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
    
   o  OSPF does not specify the use of any particular hash algorithm, 
      however the use of only MD5 is specified in the document. Most  
      OSPF implementations only support MD5. 
    
      Recently, attacks on the collision-resistance property of the MD5  
      and SHA-1 hash functions have been discovered; [RFC4270]  
      summarizes the discoveries. The attacks on MD5 are practical on  
      any modern computer. For this reason the use of these algorithms  
      needs to be discouraged. 
    
   o  OSPF on a broadcast network shares the same key between all  
      neighbors on a that network. Some OSPF packets are sent to a  
      multicast address.  
    
      This allows spoofing by any malicious neighbor very easy.  
      Possession of the key itself is used as an identity check. There  
      is no other identity check used. A neighbor could send a packet  
      specifying the packet came from some other neighbor and there  
      would be no way in which the attacked router could figure out the  
      identity of the packet sender. 
    
   o  OSPF neighbors on broadcast, NBMA and point-to-multipoint  
      networks are identified by the IP address in the IP header.  
      Because the IP header is not covered by the MAC in the 
      cryptographic authentication scheme as described in RFC 2328, an  
      attack can be made exploiting this vulnerability. 
 
      Assume the following scenario. 
 
      R1 sends an authenticated HELLO to R2. This HELLO is captured  
      and replayed back to R1, changing the source IP in the IP header  
      to that of R2. 
 
      R1 not finding itself in HELLO would deduce that the connection is  
      not bidirectional and would bring down the adjacency. 
    
3. Open Shortest Path First (OSPFv3) 
 
   OSPFv3 [RFC5340] relies on the IP Authentication Header described in 
   [RFC4302] and the IP Encapsulating Payload described in [RFC4303] to 
   cryptographically sign routing information passed between routers. 
   When using ESP, the null encryption algorithm [RFC2410] is used, so 
   the data carried in the OSPFv3 packets is signed, but not encrypted.  
   This provides data origin authentication for adjacent routers, and 
   data integrity which gives the assurance data transmitted by a router 
   has not changed in transit. 
    

Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   However it does not provide confidentiality of the information 
   transmitted. [RFC4552] mandates the use of ESP with null encryption 
   for authentication and also does encourage the use of confidentiality 
   to protect the privacy of the routing information transmitted, using 
   ESP encryption. 
    
   [RFC4552] describes OSPFv3's use of AH and ESP, and specifies 
   that only manual keying of routing information may be used. 
    
3.1 Management Issues with OSPFv3 
    
   The OSPFv3 security document [RFC4552] discusses, at length, the 
   reasoning behind using manually configured keys, rather than some 
   automated key management protocol such as IKEv2 [RFC4306]. The 
   primary problem is that all current key management mechanisms are 
   designed for a one-to-one correlation of keys, while OSPF adjacencies 
   are formed on a one-to-many basis.  This forces the system 
   administrator to use manually configured SAs and cryptographic keys 
   to provide the authentication and, if desired, confidentiality 
   services. 
    
   [RFC4552] states that 
    
      As it is not possible as per the current standards to provide 
      complete replay protection while using manual keying, the proposed 
      solution will not provide protection against replay attacks. 
    
   The primary administrative issue with manually configured SA's and 
   keys in the OSPFv3 case is the simple management issue of maintaining  
   matching sets of keys on all routers within a network.  [RFC4552] 
   does not require that all OSPFv3 routers have the same key configured 
   for every neighbor, so each set of neighbors connected to a single 
   link could have a different key configured.  While this makes it 
   easier to change the keys, by forcing the system administrator to 
   only change the keys on the routers on a  single link, the process of 
   manual configuration for all the routers in a network to change the 
   keys used for OSPFv3 digests and confidentiality on a periodic basis 
   can be difficult. 
    
3.2 Technical Issues with OSPFv3 
    
   The primary technical concern with the current specifications for 
   OSPFv3 is that when manual SA and key management is used as [RFC4302] 
   specifies, in section 3.3.2, Sequence Number Generation: "The sender 
   assumes anti-replay is enabled as a default, unless otherwise 
   notified by the receiver (see 3.4.3) or if the SA was configured 
   using manual key management." Replayed OSPFv3 packets can cause 
   several failures in a network, including: 
    
   o  Replaying hello packets with an empty neighbor list can cause all 
      the neighbor adjacencies with the sending router to be reset, 
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
      disrupting network communications. 
    
   o  Replaying hello packets from early in the designated router 
      election process on broadcast links can cause all the neighbor 
      adjacencies with the sending router to be reset, disrupting 
      network communications. 
    
   o  Replaying database description (DB-Description) packets can cause 
      all FULL neighbor adjacencies with the sending router to be reset, 
      disrupting network communications. 
    
   o  Replaying link state request (LS-Request) packets can cause all 
      FULL neighbor adjacencies with the sending router to be reset, 
      disrupting network communications. 
    
   o  Capturing a full adjacency process (from two-way all the way to 
      FULL state), and then replaying this process when the router is no 
      longer attached can cause a false adjacency to be formed, allowing 
      an attacker to attract and black hole traffic. 
    
   o  OSPFv3 on a broadcast network shares the same key between all  
      neighbors on that network. Some OSPF packets are sent to a  
      multicast address.  
    
      This allows spoofing by any malicious neighbor very easy.   
      Possession of the key itself is used as an identity check. There  
      is no other identity check used. A neighbor could send a packet  
      specifying the packet came from some other neighbor and there  
      would be no way in which the attacked router could figure out the  
      identity of the packet sender. 
    
4. Intermediate System to Intermediate System Routing Protocol (IS-IS)
 
   Integrated  IS-IS [RFC1195] uses HMAC-MD5 authentication with manual 
   keying, as described in [RFC5304]. There is no provision within IS-IS 
   to encrypt the body of a routing protocol message. 
    
4.1 Management Issues with IS-IS 
    
   [RFC5304] states that each LSP generated by an intermediate system is 
   signed with the HMAC-MD5 algorithm using a key manually defined by 
   the network administrator.  Since authentication is performed on the 
   LSPs transmitted by an intermediate system, rather than on the 
   packets transmitted to a specific neighbor, it is implied that all 
   the intermediate systems within a single flooding domain must be 
   configured with the same key for authentication to work correctly. 
   The initial configuration of manual keys for authentication within an 
   IS-IS network is simplified by a state where LSPs containing HMAC-MD5 
   authentication TLVs are accepted, but the digest is not validated. 
   Once an initial set of keys is configured on all routers, however, 
   changing those keys becomes much more difficult. 
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
    
   IS-IS [RFC1195] does not specify a mechanism to negotiate keys, nor 
   does it specify any mechanism to negotiate the hash algorithms to be 
   used. 
    
   With the proliferation of the number of hash algorithms, as well as  
    
   the need to continuously upgrade the algorithms, manually configuring  
   the information becomes very tedious. 
    
4.2 Technical Issues with IS-IS 
    
   [RFC5304] states: "This mechanism does not prevent replay attacks, 
   however, in most cases, such attacks would trigger existing 
   mechanisms in the IS-IS protocol that would effectively reject old 
   information."  The few cases where existing mechanisms in the IS-IS 
   protocol would not effectively reject old information is the case of 
   hello packets (IIHs) used to discover neighbors, and SNP packets. 
    
   As described in IS-IS [RFC1195], a list of known neighbors is 
   included in each hello transmitted by an intermediate system, to 
   ensure two-way communications with any specific neighbor before 
   exchanging link state databases.   
    
   IS-IS does not provide a sequence number. Hence IS-IS packets are  
   liable to replay attacks; any packet can be replayed at any point  
   of time, as long as the keys used are the same.  
    
   A hello packet containing a digest within a TLV, and an empty  
   neighbor list, could be replayed, causing all adjacencies with the  
   original transmitting intermediate system to be restarted. 
    
   A replay of an old CSNP packets could cause LSPs to be flooded, thus 
   causing an LSP storm. 
    
   IS-IS specifies the use of the hash algorithm HMAC-MD5 to protect  
   IS-IS PDUs. 
    
   IS-IS does not have a notion of Key ID. During Key rollover, each  
   message received has to be checked for integrity against all keys 
   that are valid. A DoS attack may be caused by sending IS-IS packets 
   with random hashes. This will cause the IS-IS packet to be checked 
   for authentication with all possible keys, thus increasing the amount 
   of processing required.  
    
   Recently, attacks on the collision-resistance property of the MD5 and 
   SHA-1 hash functions have been discovered; [RFC4270] summarizes the  
   discoveries. The attacks on MD5 are practical on any modern computer. 
   For this reason, the use of these algorithms needs to be discouraged. 
    
   HMACs are not susceptible to any known collision-reduction attack.  
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   However, IS-IS should provide a way to upgrade to other stronger  
   algorithms. 
    
   IS-IS on a broadcast network shares the same key between all 
   neighbors on that network.  
    
   This makes spoofing by any malicious neighbor very easy since IS-IS 
   PDUs are sent to a link layer multicast address. Possession of the 
   key itself is used as an identity check and no other identity check 
   is performed. A neighbor could send a packet specifying the packet 
   came from some other neighbor and there would be no way in which the 
   attacked router could figure out the identity of the packet sender.  
    
   As the lifetime is not covered in the authentication, an IS-IS router 
   can receive its own self generated LSP segment with zero lifetime 
   remaining. In that case, if it has a copy with non-zero lifetime, it 
   purges that LSP i.e., it increments the current sequence number and 
   floods all the segments again. This is much worse in IS-IS, as there 
   exists only one LSP other than the pseudonode LSPs for the LANs on 
   which it is the Designated Intermediate System (DIS). 
    
   This way an attack can force the router to flood all segments, which 
   can be quite a lot if the number of routes is large. It also causes 
   the sequence number of all the LSPs to increase fast. If the sequence 
   number increases to the maximum (0xFFFFFFFF), the IS-IS process must 
   shut down for around 20+ minutes (MaxAge + ZeroAgeLifetime) to allow 
   the old LSPs to age out of all the router databases. 
    
5. Border Gateway Protocol (BGP-4) 
 
   BGP-4 [RFC4271] uses TCP [RFC0793] for transporting routing 
   information between BGP speakers which have formed an adjacency. 
    
   [RFC2385] describes the use of TCP MD5 signature option for providing 
   data origin authentication and data integrity protection of these BGP 
   packets, and [RFC3562] gives suggestions for choosing the key length 
   for the ad-hoc keyed-MD5 mechanism specified in [RFC2385]. There is 
   no provision for confidentiality for any of these BGP messages. 
    
   This problem is made worse by the nature of the environment where BGP 
   is typically used, between autonomous networks (under different  
   administrative control). While routers running interior gateway 
   protocols may all be configured using the same keys, and have their 
   key rollover policies coordinated or set by the same administrative 
   authority, two BGP peering BGP speakers may be in different 
   administrative domains, with different policies for key strength, 
   rollover times, etc. An autonomous system must often support a large 
   number of keys on different BGP borders, since each connecting AS 
   represents a different administrative entity. 
    

Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
5.1 Management Issues with BGP-4 
    
   Each pair of BGP speakers forming an adjacency may have a different 
   MD5 shared key, facilitating the configuration and changing of keys 
   across a large scale network.  Manual configuration and maintenance 
   of cryptographic keys on all routers is a challenge in any large 
   scale environment, however.  Most BGP implementations will accept BGP 
   packets with a bad digest for the hold interval negotiated between 
   BGP peers at peering startup, allowing MD5 keys to be changed without 
   impacting the operation of the network.  This technique does, 
   however, allow some short period of time, during which an attacker 
   may inject BGP packets with false MD5 digests into the network and 
   can expect those packets to be accepted, even though their MD5 
   digests are not valid. 
    
5.2 Technical Issues with BGP-4 
    
   Since BGP relies on TCP [RFC0793] for transporting data between BGP 
   speakers, BGP can rely on TCP's protections against data corruption 
   and replay to prevent replay attacks against BGP sessions.  A great 
   deal of research has gone into the difficulty or ease with which an 
   attacker can overcome these protections, including [TCP-WINDOW] and 
   [BGP-ATTACK].  Most implementations of BGP have modified their TCP 
   implementations to resolve the security vulnerabilities described in 
   these references, where possible. 
    
   However, as mentioned earlier, MD5 is vulnerable to collision 
   attacks, and can be attacked through several means, such as those 
   explored in [MD5-ATTACK]. 
    
   Though it can be argued that the collision attacks do not have a 
   practical implication in this scenario, the use of MD5 is 
   discouraged.  
    
   Routers performing cryptographic processing of packets in software 
   may be easier to attack. An attacker may be able to transmit enough 
   traffic with false digests to a router that the router's processor 
   and memory resources are consumed, causing the router to be unable to 
   perform normal processing. This is particularly problematic at 
   connections to devices not under local administrative control. 
    
6. The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) 
 
   The initial version of RIP was specified in STD34 [RFC1058]. This 
   version did not provide for any authentication or authorization of 
   routing data, and thus was vulnerable to any of the various attacks 
   against routing protocols. This was one of the reasons why this 
   protocol has been moved to Historic status long ago [RFC1923]. 
    


Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   RIPv2, originally specified in [RFC1388], then [RFC1723], has been 
   finalized in STD56 [RFC2453]. This version of the protocol provides 
   for authenticating packets by carrying a digest. The details thereof 
   have initially been provided in "RIP-2 MD5 Authentication" [RFC2082]; 
   "RIPv2 Cryptographic Authentication" [RFC4822] obsoletes [RFC2082] 
   and adds details of how the SHA family of hash algorithms can be used 
   to protext RIPv2, whereas [RFC2082] only specified the use of Keyed 
   MD5. 
    
   o  The sequence number is initialized to zero, at the beginning of  
      time, and is also set to zero whenever the neighbor is brought  
      down. If the cryptographically protected packets of a router that  
      is brought down (for administrative or other reasons) are stored  
      by a malicious router, the new router could replay the packets  
      from the previous session thus forcing traffic through the  
      malicious router.  Dropping of such packets by the router could  
      result in blackholes.  Also forwarding wrong packets could      
      result in routing loops. 
    
   o  RIPv2 allows multiple packets with the same sequence number. 
      This could mean the same packet can be replayed many times before 
      the next legitimate packet is sent.  An attacker may resend the 
      same packet repeatedly until the next hello packet is transmitted 
      and received, which means the hello interval determines the attack 
      window. 
    
   o  RIPv2 does not specify the use of any particular hash algorithm. 
      Currently, RIP implementations only support keyed MD5 [RFC2082]. 
      MD5 is vulnerable to attacks [MD5-ATTACK]. 
    
   o  RIPv2 Cryptographic Authentication [RFC4822] does not cover the 
      UDP and the IP headers. It is thus possible for an attacker to  
      modify the fields in the above headers without any of the routers  
      getting to know about it. 
    
      There isn't much that can be done by modifying the UDP header as 
      RIP only uses it to compute the length of the RIP packet. Any  
      changes introduced in the UDP header would fail the RIP  
      authentication, and this attack will thus, not work. 
    
      However, RIP uses the source IP address from the IP header to  
      determine the RIP neighbor from which it has learnt the RIP  
      Updates.  This can be used by an attacker to disrupt the RIP  
      routing sessions between two routers R1 and R2, as shown in the  
      following examples: 
    
      Scenario 1: 
      
      R1 sends an authenticated RIP message to R2 with a cryptographic  
      sequence num X. 
    
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 11] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
      The attacker merely needs get hold of a higher sequence number  
      packet from the LAN. It could also be a packet originated by R2  
      either from this session, or from some earlier session. 
    
      The attacker can then replay this packet to R2 by changing the  
      source IP to that of R1. 
    
      R2 would now no longer accept any more RIP Updates from R1 as  
    
      those would have a lower cryptographic sequence number. After 180  
      secs (or less), R2 would time out R1 and bring down the RIP  
      session. 
    
      Scenario 2: 
    
      R1 announces a route with cost C1 to R2. This packet can be  
      captured by an attacker. Later, if this cost changes and R1  
      announces this with some other cost C2, the attacker can replay  
      the captured packet by modifying the source IP to some new  
      arbitrary IP address. It can this way masquerade as some other  
      router. 
    
      R2 will accept this route and the router as a new gateway, and  
      would use the non existent router as a next hop for that network.  
      This would obviously only work if C1 < C2. 
    
7. Security Considerations  
    
   This draft outlines security issues arising from the manual keying of 
   cryptographic keys for various routing protocols.  No changes to any   
   protocols are proposed in this draft, and no new security   
   requirements result.  
       
8. Acknowledgements  
     
   We would like to acknowledge Sam Hartman, Ran Atkinson, Steve Kent 
   and Brian Weis for their initial comments on this draft.  Thanks to 
   Merike Kaeo and Alfred Hoenes for reviewing many sections of the 
   draft and providing lot of useful comments. 
    
9. IANA Considerations  
 
   This document places no requests to IANA. 
    
   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an 
   RFC. 
    
10. References 
 
10.1 Normative References 
    
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 12] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   [RFC0793]   Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7, 
               RFC 793, September 1981. 
    
   [RFC1195]   Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and 
               dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990. 
    
   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC2328]   Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998. 
    
   [RFC2385]   Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP  
               MD5 Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998. 
    
   [RFC2453]   Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2", RFC 2453, November 1998 
    
   [RFC5340]   Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., Moy, J., and Lindem, A., "OSPF  
               for IPv6", RFC 5340, July 2008. 
    
   [RFC5304]   Li, T. and Atkinson, R., "Intermediate System to 
               Intermediate System (IS-IS) Cryptographic  
               Authentication", RFC 5304, October 2008. 
    
   [RFC4271]   Rekhter , Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway 
               Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006. 
    
   [RFC4302]   Kent, S., "IP Authentication Header", 
               RFC 4302, December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4303]   Kent, S., "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)", 
               RFC 4303, December 2005. 
    
   [RFC4552]   Gupta, M. and N. Melam, "Authentication/Confidentiality 
               for OSPFv3", RFC 4552, January 2006 
    
   [RFC4822]   R. Atkinson and M. Fanto, "RIPv2 Cryptographic  
               Authentication", RFC 4822, February 2007 
    
10.2 Informative References 
    
   [RFC1058]   Hedrick, C., "Routing Information Protocol", RFC 1058, 
               June 1988. 
    
   [RFC1321]   Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm", RFC  
               1321, April 1992 
    
   [RFC1388]   Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2 Carrying Additional 
               Information", RFC 1388, January 1993. 
    
    
    
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 13] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   [RFC1723]   Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2 - Carrying Additional 
               Information", STD 56, RFC 1723, November 1994. 
   [RFC1923]   Halpern, J. and Bradner, S., "RIPv1 Applicability  
               Statement for Historic Status", RFC 1923, March 1996 
    
   [RFC2082]   Baker, F. and Atkinson, R., "RIP-2 MD5  
               Authentication", RFC 2082, January 1997 
    
   [RFC2410]   Kent, S. and Glenn, R., "The NULL Encryption Algorithm  
               and Its Use With IPsec", RFC 2410, November 1998 
    
   [RFC3562]   Leech, M., "Key Management Considerations for the TCP  
               MD5 Signature Option", RFC 3562, July 2003. 
    
   [RFC4270]   Hoffman, P. and B. Schneier, "Attacks on Cryptographic 
               Hashes in Internet Protocols", RFC 4270, November 2005. 
    
   [RFC4306]   Kaufman, C., "The Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2)  
               Protocol", RFC 4306, December 2005 
    
   [BGP-ATTACK]  Convery, S. and M. Franz, "BGP Vulnerability Testing: 
                 Separating Fact from FUD v1.00", June 2003. 
    
   [TCP-WINDOW]  Watson, T., "TCP Reset Spoofing", October 2003. 
    
   [MD5-ATTACK]   Wang, X. et al., "Collisions for Hash Functions MD4, 
                  MD5, HAVAL-128 and RIPEMD", August 2004,   
                  http://eprint.iacr.org/2004/199   
 
11. Contributor's Address 
 
   Sue Hares 
   NextHop 
   USA 
   Email: shares@nexthop.com 
 
12. Author's Addresses 
 
   Manav Bhatia  
   Alcatel-Lucent 
   Bangalore, India  
   Email: manav@alcatel-lucent.com  
    
   Vishwas Manral  
   IP Infusion  
   Almora, Uttarakhand 
   India  
   Email: vishwas@ipinfusion.com  
    
   Russ White 
   Cisco Systems 
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 14] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
   RTP North Carolina  
   USA 
   Email: riw@cisco.com 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any   
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an   
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use   
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this   
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository   
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 15] 
Internet-Draft      Routing Protocol Protection Issues      October 2008 
 
 
    


















































Manral, White and Bhatia                                       [Page 16] 
