



IETF                                                          P. Kyzivat
Internet-Draft                                          US VRS Providers
Intended status: Informational                          January 20, 2015
Expires: July 24, 2015


Telecommunications Relay Service Purpose for the Call-Info Header Field
                in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
            draft-kyzivat-dispatch-trs-call-info-purpose-01

Abstract

   This document defines and registers a value of "original-identity"
   for the "purpose" header field parameter of the Call-Info header
   field in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 24, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Kyzivat                   Expires July 24, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   The United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) sponsors
   specialized Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS) for US residents
   who are deaf, deaf-blind, and hard-of-hearing.  These "relay"
   services translate audio telephone calls to/from any user of the
   public telephone system into other modalities (such as American Sign
   Language) that can be used by these TRS users.  These services are
   being updated to employ SIP signaling.

   TRS services are supplied by a number of private TRS service
   providers.  Individual TRS users enroll with one provider, and the
   providers peer with one another and with public telecommunications
   providers to provide connectivity equivalent with the basic telephone
   network.  Users enrolled with one provider are legally entitled to
   request and receive relay services from any of the other providers on
   a call-by-call basis.  In that case the default provider acts as an
   intermediary between the TRS user's device and the provider selected
   by the user to provide the service for the call.

   Telephone users who call a TRS user are by default routed to the
   default provider for that user, and provided TRS relay service by the
   default provider.  However, callers are also entitled to call a TRS
   provider of their choice and request connection to a TRS user
   enrolled with a different provider.  In that case the TRS provider
   called by the user provides the relay service and the default
   provider acts as an intermediary.

   For a provider to receive reimbursement for providing relay service
   on a call the FCC requires that the provider supply call detail
   including the IP address of the device the TRS user is using for the
   call.  When the service provider that is rendering the service is not
   the one enrolling the user this information may not be available
   naturally in the SIP signaling.

   In some simple cases the IP address of the deaf user could be present
   in the signaling as the Contact URI of the caller or callee.  However
   this is often not case due to the presence of intermediate devices



Kyzivat                   Expires July 24, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


   acting as B2BUAs.  B2BUAs often modify the Contact URI, because they
   need the downstream entity to contact the B2BUA rather than the
   actual contact.  There are relay services that actually need the
   "real" contact URI, and TRS is one of them.

   This document identifies requirements for a new mechanism, not
   currently available in SIP, for the described environment to
   function, and defines a SIP mechanism to meet those requirements.

2.  Requirements

   [TRS-1]  The mechanism must support carrying the IP address of the
      source of a request in an INVITE request.

   [TRS-2]  The mechanism must support carrying the IP address of the
      target of an INVITE request in the responses to that request.

   [TRS-3]  The mechanism must work in the presence of B2BUA
      intermediaries in the signaling path.

   [TRS-4]  It must be possible for intermediaries to insert the IP
      address on behalf of the source or recipient.

   [TRS-5]  It must be possible for intermediaries to remove or
      obfuscate the IP address to enforce trust and privacy policies.

   [TRS-6]  The mechanism must support topologies where the source and/
      or target use a signaling protocol other than SIP (e.g.  H.323)
      and an intermediary converts the signaling to/from SIP.

3.  Mechanism

   To provide a mechanism that supplies the needed information in common
   deployments, this document calls for using the SIP Call-Info header
   field to carry a URI containing the IP address of the deaf user.  To
   distinguish this use of Call-Info from other uses, a new 'purpose'
   parameter value ("original-identity") is used.  For example:

      Call-Info: <sip:10.1.1.1>; purpose=original-identity

   A Call-Info with this purpose can be inserted by a server in requests
   and responses in the following cases:

   o  in requests sent toward a peer TRS server when this server knows
      the the device originating the request is an enrolled TRS device;






Kyzivat                   Expires July 24, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


   o  in responses sent toward a peer TRS server when this server knows
      that the target of the corresponding request is an enrolled TRS
      device.

4.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations for the extension defined herein are
   comparable to those for the Contact-URI.  The security considerations
   of [RFC3261] apply to this extension and deal with disclosure of this
   information to entities that are not in the signaling path for the
   call.

   In the case where the caller or callee wishes to withhold its
   identity from the other UA in the call, the considerations of
   [RFC3323] can be employed.  Because 'original-identity' is used to
   enable an intermediary to provide service, user-provided-privacy is
   not an option, and network-provided-privacy is the only option.  TRS
   service providers MUST act as a privacy service and remove or
   anonymize the URI in a Call-Info with purpose 'original-identity'
   when providing 'header' privacy.

   [NOTE: I would prefer to avoid having to define specific extensions
   to RFC3323 for this, and complex normative requirements.  But I'm not
   sure it is possible to avoid doing so.]

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines and registers a new predefined value "original-
   identity" for the "purpose" header field parameter of the Call-Info
   header field (defined in [RFC3261]), following the procedures
   specified in [RFC3968].

   IANA is requested to revise the existing entry for the Call-Info
   header Field in the "Header Field Parameters and Parameter Values"
   table of the "Session Initiation Protool (SIP) Parameters" registry,
   by adding a reference to this document.

6.  Informative References

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3323]  Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.





Kyzivat                   Expires July 24, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


   [RFC3968]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Header Field Parameter Registry for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", BCP 98, RFC 3968, December
              2004.

Author's Address

   Paul Kyzivat
   US VRS Providers
   Hudson, MA
   US

   Email: pkyzivat@alum.mit.edu






































Kyzivat                   Expires July 24, 2015                 [Page 5]
