


Network Working Group                                   O. Kolkman (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Intended status: Informational                           October 2, 2008
Expires: April 5, 2009


                            RFC Editor Model
                     draft-iab-rfc-editor-model-00

Status of This Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 5, 2009.

Abstract

   The RFC Editor performs a number of functions that may be performed
   by various persons or entities.  The RFC Editor model presented in
   this document divides the responsibilities for the RFC Series into
   four functions: The RFC Editor, the Independent Submission Editor,
   the RFC Production, and the RFC Publisher.  The model intends to
   increase flexibility and operational support options, provide for the
   orderly succession of the RFC Editor, and ensure the continuity of
   the RFC series, while maintaining RFC quality, maintaining timely
   processing, ensuring document accessibility, reducing costs, and
   increasing cost transparency.





Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  IAOC Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  Expenses for the RFC Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  RFC Editor Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  RFC Editor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Independent Submission Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.3.  RFC Production  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.4.  RFC Publisher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     3.5.  RFC Editorial Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   4.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Acknowledgements Section  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Appendix A.  Internet Draft editing details . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

































Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


1.  Introduction

   The IAB, on behalf of the Internet technical community, is concerned
   with ensuring the continuity of the RFC Series, orderly RFC Editor
   succession, maintaining RFC quality, and RFC document accessibility.
   The IAB is also sensitive to the concerns of the IAOC about providing
   the necessary services in a cost effective and efficient manner.

   The definition of the RFC series is described in RFC 4844 [1].
   Section 3.1 defines "RFC Editor":


 | 3.1. RFC Editor
 |
 |  Originally, there was a single person acting as editor of the RFC
 |  Series (the RFC Editor).  The task has grown, and the work now
 |  requires the organized activity of several experts, so there are RFC
 |  Editors, or an RFC Editor organization.  In time, there may be
 |  multiple organizations working together to undertake the work
 |  required by the RFC Series.  For simplicity's sake, and without
 |  attempting to predict how the role might be subdivided among them,
 |  this document refers to this collection of experts and organizations
 |  as the "RFC Editor".
 |
 |  The RFC Editor is an expert technical editor and series editor,
 |  acting to support the mission of the RFC Series.  As such, the RFC
 |  Editor is the implementer handling the editorial management of the
 |  RFC Series, in accordance with the defined processes.  In addition,
 |  the RFC Editor is expected to be the expert and prime mover in
 |  discussions about policies for editing, publishing, and archiving
 |  RFCs.

   RFC 4844 makes no attempt to explore the internal organization of the
   RFC Editor.  However, RFC 4844 envisions changes in the RFC Editor
   organizational structure.  In discussion with the Internet community,
   the IAB considered changes that increase flexibility and operational
   support options, provide for the orderly succession of the RFC
   Editor, and ensure the continuity of the RFC series, while
   maintaining RFC quality, maintaining timely processing, ensuring
   document accessibility, reducing costs, and increasing cost
   transparency.  The model set forth below is the result of those
   discussions.  The model examines the internal organization of the RFC
   Editor, yet it remains consistent with RFC 4884.

   The IAB approved the RFC Editor model described in this document on
   October 1, 2008.





Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


2.  IAOC Implementation

   The model is constructed in such a way that it allows for all these
   functions to be implemented jointly or under separate contractual
   arrangements.  In fact, a bidder could put together a proposal that
   includes one or more subcontractors.  Since the reporting structure
   would depend on the manner that the contracts are awarded, and they
   are subject to change over time.  As a result, the model describes
   only responsibilities, procedures, and process.  The exact
   implementation is a responsibility of the IAOC.

2.1.  Expenses for the RFC Editor

   The expenses discussed in this document are not new expenses.  They
   are part of the IASA budget.  Today, these expenses are part of the
   RFC Editor contract with ISI.

3.  RFC Editor Model

   The RFC Editor model divides the responsibilities for the RFC Series
   into the following:

   o  RFC Editor

   o  Independent Submission Editor

   o  RFC Production

   o  RFC Publisher

   The RFC Series Production and Process under this structure is
   schematically represented by the figure below.






         [TO BE DONE] For now see:
         http://www.iab.org/documents/resources/RFCEditorProd.png











Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


3.1.  RFC Editor

   The RFC Editor is a single person, and this person is responsible
   for:

   1.  Identifying appropriate steps for RFC Series continuity

   2.  Participate in IAOC reviews of the RFC Publisher and RFC
       Publication functions to ensure the above mentioned continuity

   3.  RFC Style Manual publication for use by authors, editors, and the
       RFC publisher

   4.  RFC errata process management

   5.  Liaison with the IAB

   There are many potential issues with respect to RFC Series
   continuity.  To name a few: Look and feel of the series, indexing
   methodologies, accessibility of the publications, IPR and copyright
   issues, and formatting issues.  After identifying the appropriate
   steps to address such issues, the implementation of those steps
   resides mostly with the RFC production and publishing functions.
   Since the IAOC maintains oversight of the implementation, RFC Editor
   participation in reviews of that implementation is expected.

   The RFC Editor is a senior managerial position with a strong
   understanding of the IETF process and seasoned management skills.
   The RFC editor may seek support from an advisory board (see
   Section 3.5).

   The IAOC has two alternative selection methods for selecting the
   individual to serve as the RFC Editor.

   The first alternative involves a Request for Proposal (RFP) process
   run by the IAOC.  The IAOC would seek a person with the listed
   qualifications in a broadly distributed RFP.  The winner would be
   selected by the IAOC in consultation with the IAB, and then, the IAOC
   would contract for the services.  Contract terms, including length of
   contract, extensions and renewals, shall be as defined in an RFP.
   The opportunity to bid shall be broadly available.  Expenses to
   support the administrative operation of the RFC Editor would be part
   of the awarded contract and be part of the IASA budget.

   The second alternative involves a nomination and confirmation
   process.  Candidates are nominated, and then an individual with the
   listed qualifications is selected by the Internet community and
   confirmed by the IAB.  An approach similar to the one used by the IAB



Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


   to select an IAOC member every other year as described in RFC 4333
   could be used.  A stipend (if provided) and expenses to support the
   administrative operation of the RFC Editor selected in this manner
   would be part of the IASA budget.

3.2.  Independent Submission Editor

   The Independent Submission Editor is a single person, and this person
   is responsible for:

   1.  Independent Submissions approval and processing

   2.  Forwarding RFCs in the independent stream to RFC Production

   3.  Independent Submissions RFC errata review and approval

   The Independent Submission Editor is a senior position for which the
   following qualifications are desired:

   1.  Technical competence

   2.  Deep familiarity with the RFC series

   3.  An ability to assess the technical competence of potential
       Editorial Board members

   4.  Good standing in the technical community in and beyond the IETF

   The Independent Submission Editor may seek support from an advisory
   board (see Section 3.5).

   The individual with the listed qualifications will be selected by the
   community and confirmed by the IAB.  An approach similar to the one
   used by the IAB to select an IAOC member every other year as
   described in RFC 4333 could be used.  A stipend (if provided) and
   expenses to support the administrative operation of the Independent
   Submission Editor selected in this manner would be part of the IASA
   budget.

3.3.  RFC Production

   RFC Production is performed by a paid contractor, and the contractor
   responsibilities include:

   1.   Editing inputs from all RFC streams to comply with the RFC Style
        Manual





Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


   2.   Creating records of edits performed on documents

   3.   Engaging in dialogue with authors when clarification is needed

   4.   Creating records of dialogue with documents authors

   5.   Requesting advice from the RFC Editor as needed

   6.   Provide suggestions to the RFC Editor as needed

   7.   Coordinating with IANA to obtain registry information

   8.   RFC number assignment

   9.   Forwarding ready-to-publish documents to the RFC Publisher

   10.  Forwarding records of edits and author dialogue to RFC Publisher

   11.  Liaison with IESG and IAB

   The RFC Production contractor is to be selected by the IAOC through
   an RFP process, possibly as part of the same contract as the RFC
   Editor.  The IAOC would seek a bidder who, among other things, is
   able to provide a timely and cost effective service against the
   established style and production guidelines.  Contract terms,
   including length of contract, extensions and renewals, shall be as
   defined in an RFP.  The opportunity to bid shall be broadly
   available.

3.4.  RFC Publisher

   The RFC Publisher responsibilities include:

   1.  Announce and provide online access to RFCs

   2.  Provide online system to submit RFC Errata

   3.  Provide online access to approved RFC Errata

   4.  Provide backups

   5.  Provide storage and preservation of records

   6.  Authenticate RFCs for legal proceedings

   Implementation of the RFC publisher function can be pursued in two
   different ways.




Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


   The first alternative is to extend the IETF Secretariat contract to
   include these services.  Expenses to support these services would be
   part of the revised contract.

   The second alternative is a separate vendor selected by the IAOC
   through an RFP process, possibly as part of the same contract as the
   RFC Editor.  Expenses to support service would be part of the awarded
   contract.

3.5.  RFC Editorial Board

   Today the RFC Editor is supported by an Editorial Board.  This board
   is expected to evolve into one or two advisory boards that support
   the review work of Independent Submissions Editor and provide input
   and guidance to the RFC Editor.  The board or boards exist at the
   pleasure of their advisee, and the members serve at the pleasure of
   their advisee.  The existence the board or boards is simply noted
   within this model.

4.  IANA considerations

   This document defines several functions within the overall RFC Editor
   structure, and it places the responsibility for coordination of
   registry value assignments with the RFC Production function.  The
   IAOC will facilitate the establishment of the relationship between
   the RFC Production function and IANA.

   This document does not create a new registry nor does it register any
   values in existing registries.

5.  Security considerations

   The same security considerations as those in RFC 4844 apply: The
   processes for the publication of documents must prevent the
   introduction of unapproved changes.  Since the RFC Editor maintains
   the index of publications, sufficient security must be in place to
   prevent these published documents from being changed by external
   parties.  The archive of RFC documents, any source documents needed
   to recreate the RFC documents, and any associated original documents
   (such as lists of errata, tools, and, for some early items, non-
   machine readable originals) need to be secured against failure of the
   storage medium and other similar disasters.

   The IAOC ought to take these security considerations into account
   during the implementation of this RFC Editor model.






Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


6.  Acknowledgements Section

   The RFC Editor model was conceived and discussed in hallways and on
   mail lists.  The first itteraton of the text on which this document
   is based was first drafted by Leslie Daigle, Russ Housley, and Ray
   Pelletier.  In addition to the members of the IAOC and IAB, major and
   minor contributions were made by (in alphabetical order): Bob Braden,
   Brian Carpenter, Paul Hoffman, John Klensin, Subramanian Moonesamy,
   and Jim Schaad.

   The IAOC members at the time the RFC Editor model was approved were
   (in alphabetical order): Fred Baker, Bob Hinden, Russ Housley, Ole
   Jacobsen, Ed Juskevicius, Olaf Kolkman, Ray Pelletier (non-voting),
   Lynn St.Amour, and Jonne Soininen.  In addition, Marshall Eubanks was
   serving as the IAOC Scribe.

   The IAB members at the time the RFC Editor model was approved were
   (in alphabetical order): Loa Andersson, Gonzalo Camarillo, Stuart
   Cheshire, Russ Housley, Olaf Kolkman, Gregory Lebovitz, Barry Leiba,
   Kurtis Lindqvist, Andrew Malis, Danny McPherson, David Oran, Dave
   Thaler, and Lixia Zhang.  In addition, the IAB included two ex-
   officio members: Dow Street, who was serving as the IAB Executive
   Director, and Aaron Falk, who was serving as the IRTF Chair.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC Series and
        RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.

7.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Huston, G. and B. Wijnen, "The IETF Administrative Oversight
        Committee (IAOC) Member Selection Guidelines and Process",
        BCP 113, RFC 4333, December 2005.

Appendix A.  Internet Draft editing details

   [This appendix is to be removed at publication]

   $Id: draft-iab-rfc-editor-model.xml 2 2008-10-02 15:48:52Z olaf $









Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Olaf M. Kolkman

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl


   Internet Architecture Board











































Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              RFC Editor Model                October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.












Kolkman (Ed.) & IAB       Expires April 5, 2009                [Page 11]

