





Internet Engineering Task Force                                  SIPPING
Internet Draft                                               Schulzrinne
                                                             Columbia U.
draft-schulzrinne-sipping-emergency-req-00.txt
February 21, 2003
Expires: August 2003


        Requirements for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-based
                            Emergency Calls

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document enumerates requirements for emergency calls in VoIP and
   general Internet multimedia systems. We divide the requirements into
   "last-mile" and "end-to-end". Last-mile solutions only exchange the
   emergency call center's circuit-switched access by an IP-based
   system.  The requirements for end-to-end IP-based emergency calling
   address functional and security issues for determining the correct
   emergency address, for identifying the appropriate emergency call
   center and for identifying the caller and its location. While we
   focus on systems that employ the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP),
   many of the requirements also apply to other environments, such as
   those using H.248/Megaco or H.323.






Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


1 Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

2 Introduction

   Users of telephone-like services expect to be able to call for
   emergency help, such as police, the fire department or an ambulance,
   regardless of where they are, what (if any) service provider they are
   using and what kind of device they are using. Unfortunately, the
   mechanisms for emergency calls that have evolved in the public
   circuit-switched telephone network (PSTN) are not quite appropriate
   for evolving IP-based voice and real-time multimedia communications.
   This document outlines some of the requirements that end systems and
   network elements such as SIP proxies need to satisfy in order to
   provide emergency call services that offer at least the same
   functionality as existing PSTN services, while hopefully making
   emergency calling more robust, cheaper to implement and multimedia-
   capable.

   In the future, users of other real-time and near real-time services
   may also expect to be able to summon emergency help. For example,
   instant messaging (IM) users may want to use such services. IM is
   particularly helpful for hearing-disabled users [3] and in cases
   where bandwidth is scarce. For lack of a better term, we will use the
   term "caller" or "emergency caller" to refer to the person placing an
   emergency call or sending an emergency IM.

   The emergency calls described in this document differ from the
   emergency telecommunications service (ETS) described in [4]. In ETS,
   relatively small numbers of emergency workers need to maintain
   communication even when parts of the infrastructure are destroyed or
   disabled. Emergency calls, on the other hand, are placed by civilians
   to call for emergency services such as fire, ambulance and police
   services. Thus, these two services are complementary.

3 Definitions

        Emergency call center (ECC): An emergency call center (ECC)
             receives emergency calls within a specific geographic area
             and dispatches emergency services, such as fire, police and
             rescue services.  An ECC may also serve as a backup for
             another ECC and, in backup mode, dispatch emergency
             services outside of its normal service region. In the
             United States and Canada, ECCs are called Public Safety
             Access Points (PSAPs).



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


        Internet Protocol ECC (IECC): An Internet protocol emergency
             call center (IECC) is an ECC that uses Internet protocols,
             such as SIP for call signaling, RTP for media delivery, to
             receive emergency calls.

        Call taker: A call taker is an agent, typically a government
             employee, at the ECC that accepts calls and may dispatch
             emergency help.  (Sometimes the functions of call taking
             and dispatching are handled by different groups of people,
             but these divisions of labor are not generally visible to
             the outside and thus do not concern us here.)

        Basic emergency service: Basic emergency service allows a user
             to reach an ECC serving its current location, but the ECC
             may not be able to determine the identity or geographic
             location of the caller (except by having the call taker ask
             the caller).

        Enhanced emergency service: Enhanced emergency services add the
             ability to identify the caller identity and/or caller
             location to basic emergency services. (Sometimes, only the
             caller location may be known, e.g., from a public access
             point that is not owned by an individual.)

        Last-mile emergency service: In last-mile emergency service, the
             caller uses the existing PSTN infrastructure to place an
             emergency call.  Only the path from the "selective router"
             to the ECC uses IP-based communications. The call may well
             be placed from a VoIP device, but is assumed to enter the
             PSTN very close to the location of the caller. The use of
             Internet protocols is invisible to the caller.

        End-to-end emergency service: In end-to-end emergency service,
             the caller and ECC both use Internet protocols end-to-end.

4 Last-Mile Access

   In last-mile access, an ECC replaces an analog (CAMA) or digital
   (ISDN) trunk with packet-based access, typically over one or more
   high-speed access lines such as DSL or leased lines. The packet-based
   access terminates in the "selective router" that normally hands off
   calls to the ECC. Thus, the ECC becomes an EICC, but no larger scale
   infrastructure changes are required.


        Last-mile access is motivated by cost and call setup
        considerations. It may be cheaper to use IP-based
        technology for the access link and ECC-internal



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


        communications. Also, many existing (US) PSAPs use analog
        technology, so-called CAMA trunks, to receive emergency
        calls. These trunks, originally designed for operator
        positions, can pulse out the ten or 20-digit (for wireless)
        caller's number, but as dialed digits. Thus, they add
        several seconds of call setup delay.  This can be
        particularly disconcerting since it affects the time until
        the call taker can pick up the call. IP-based
        communications, using, for example, SIP as a call signaling
        protocol, can effectively eliminate this extra caller
        identification delay. (Additional delays are caused by the
        often very low speed access to the mapping database that
        maps caller identity to geographic location.) Finally,
        since pending calls do not consume access network
        resources, such systems may be more robust in the face of
        overload.

        M1: Coexistence: Due to the investment required, not all ECCs
             will convert to IP-based access at the same time. Thus,
             emergency calls MUST work in a network where some ECCs use
             existing (analog) technology, some ISDN, others IP. In
             particular, existing back-up relationships between ECCs
             must continue to work.

        M2: Call setup delay: The call setup delay MUST NOT be no larger
             than for existing analog trunks and SHOULD be significantly
             smaller.

        M3: Call identification: Signaling from the PSTN switch must be
             able to convey both ten and 20-digit caller identities (ANI
             -- automatic number identification) used in North America
             and other digit strings used elsewhere.

        M4: Call transfer: Call takers MUST be able to transfer active
             sessions to other call takers within the same ECC and to
             other ECCs, even those not using Internet

        M5: Conferencing: Occasionally, supervisors, translators or
             other specialists need to participate in an emergency call.
             Thus, it MUST be possible to add one or more parties, not
             necessarily located in the IECC, to any emergency call at
             any time.

        M6: Monitoring and recording: In many jurisdictions, both sides
             of all emergency calls are automatically recorded as
             potential legal evidence. Thus, it MUST be possible to
             record and timestamp all signaling and media from all
             successful, failed and aborted calls.



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 4]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


        M7: Transition to end-to-end: Protocols and architecture SHOULD
             be chosen so that a last-mile IECC can receive emergency
             calls placed by IP endpoints without major system changes
             or hardware upgrades.

        M8: Authentication of incoming calls: The IECC MUST be able to
             ascertain that the calls it receives are indeed originating
             from the selective router.

        M9: Authentication of the IECC: The selective router MUST be
             able to be assured that the calls it places reach the
             desired IECC rather than an impostor.

        M10: Confidentiality: Call signaling and media streams MUST be
             protected against unauthorized disclosure to third parties.

        M11: Robustness: An IECC SHOULD be able to automatically route
             all incoming calls to another backup IECC, even if the
             access link(s) to the primary IECC are inoperative. Any
             such redirection MUST be authenticated.

        M12: Overflow handling: An IECC SHOULD be able to automatically
             route calls to another IECC if the (expected) waiting time
             exceeds a configured threshold.

5 End-to-End IP-Based Emergency Calls

   End-to-end emergency calls originate on an Internet device, traverse
   IP networks and terminate on an IP-capable ECC (IECC).

   As noted, emergency calls need to be identified as such (Section 5.1)
   and be routed to the appropriate emergency call center (Section 5.2).
   The ECC needs to determine who (Section 5.3) placed the call from
   where (Section 5.4). Emergency calls may not be subject to access
   restrictions placed on non-emergency calls. Also, some call features
   may interfere with emergency calls, particularly if triggerd
   accidentally (Section 6).

5.1 Emergency Address

   The emergency address is used by the emergency caller to declare a
   call to be an emergency call and to guide the call to an ECC. The
   emergency address could a be "sip", "sips" or "tel" URI, or some
   other, yet-to-be-defined URI scheme.

        A1: Universal: Each device and all network elements MUST
             recognize one or more global emergency call identifiers,
             regardless of the location of the device, the service



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 5]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


             provider used (if any) or other factors.


             SIP is not specific to one country or service provider
             and devices are likely to be used across national or
             service provider boundaries. Since services such as
             disabling mandatory authentication for emergency calls
             (S1) requires the cooperation of outbound proxies, the
             outbound proxy has to be able to recognize the
             emergency address and be assured that it will be
             routed as an emergency call. Thus, a simple
             declaration on a random URI that it is an emergency
             call will likely lead to fraud and possibly attacks on
             the network infrastructure. A universal address also
             makes it possible to create user interface elements
             that are correctly configured without user
             intervention. UA features could be made to work
             without such an identifier, but the user interface
             would then have to provide an unambiguous way to
             declare a particular call an emergency call.

        A2: Local: Since many countries have already deployed national
             emergency numbers, such as 911 in North America and 112 in
             large parts of Europe, UAs, proxies and call routers MUST
             recognize local emergency numbers. In addition, they SHOULD
             recognize emergency numbers that are found elsewhere.


             The latter requirement is meant to help travelers that
             may not know the local emergency number and
             instinctively dial the number they are used to from
             home. However, it is unlikely that all systems could
             be programmed to recognize any emergency number used
             anywhere as some of these numbers are used for non-
             emergency purposes, in particular extensions and
             service numbers.

        A3: Recognizable: Emergency calls MUST be recognizable by user
             agents, proxies and other network elements. To prevent
             fraud, an address identified as an emergency number for
             call features or authentication override MUST also cause
             routing to an ECC.

        A5: Minimal configuration: Any local emergency numbers SHOULD be
             configured automatically, without user intervention.


             A new UA "unofficially imported" into an organization



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 6]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


             from elsewhere should have the same emergency
             capabilities as one officially installed.

        A6: Secure configuration: Devices SHOULD be assured of the
             correctness of the local emergency numbers that are
             automatically configured.


             If we assume a fixed, global emergency service
             identifier that requires no configuration and only
             configure local "traditional" emergency numbers, users
             are not likely to suddenly dial some random number if
             a rogue configuration server introduces this as an
             additional emergency number. The ability to override
             all locally configured emergency number is of more
             concern.

        A7: Testable: A user SHOULD be able to test whether a particular
             address reaches emergency help, without actually causing
             emergency help to be dispatched or consuming ECC call taker
             resources.

5.2 Identifying the Appropriate Emergency Call Center

   From the previous section, we take the requirement of a single (or
   small number of) emergency addresses which are independent of the
   caller's location. However, since for reasons of robustness,
   jurisdiction and local knowledge, ECCs only serve a small region,
   having the call reach the correct ECC is crucial. While an ECC may be
   able to transfer an errant call, any such transfer is likely to add
   tens of seconds to call setup latency and is prone to errors. (In the
   United States, there are about 5,000 PSAPs.)

   There appear to be two basic architectures for translating an
   emergency address into the correct IECC. We refer to these as
   caller-based and mediated. In caller-based resolution, the caller's
   UA consults a directory and determines the correct IECC based on its
   location. For mediated resolution, a SIP (outbound) proxy or redirect
   server performs this function. Note that the latter case includes the
   architecture where the call is effectively routed to a copy of the
   database, rather than having some non-SIP protocol query the
   database.  (It appears undesirable to have either the UA or every
   outbound proxy server contain a copy of the location-to-ECC mapping
   since this table changes frequently.)

   The problem is harder than for traditional web or email services.
   There, the originator knows which entity it wants to reach,
   identified by the email address or HTTP URL. However, the emergency



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 7]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


   caller only dialed an emergency address. Depending on the location,
   any of several ten thousand destinations could be valid. In addition,
   the caller probably does not care which specific ECC answers the
   call, but rather that it be an accredited ECC, e.g., one run by the
   local government authorities. (Many ECCs are run by private entities.
   For example, universities and corporations with large campuses often
   have their own emergency response centers.)

        I1: Correct IECC: The system MUST reach the correct IECC
             regardless of the location of the caller. In particular,
             the location determination should not be fooled by the
             location of IP telephony gateways or dial-in lines into a
             corporate LAN (and dispatch emergency help to the gateway
             or campus, rather than the caller), multi-site LANs and
             similar arrangements.

        I2: Choice of IECCs: The system SHOULD offer the emergency
             caller a choice as to whether he wants to reach a local
             private emergency response center, e.g., on a corporate
             campus, or the government-run emergency call center
             responsible for his current location.


             This choice is often, but not always, provided today.
             For example, in some cases, the local campus emergency
             center is reachable by a different number or 9-911
             reaches the external ECC, while 911 reaches campus
             security.

        I3: Assuring IECC identity: The emergency caller SHOULD be able
             to determine conclusively that he has reached an accredited
             emergency call center.


             This requirement is meant to address the threat that a
             rogue, possibly criminal, entity pretends to accept
             emergency calls.

             Implementations SHOULD allow callers to proceed, with
             appropriate warnings or user confirmations, if the identity
             of the destination IECC cannot be verified.


             Verification can fail for any number of reasons, such
             as lack of a common certificate chain, especially when
             traveling, call forwarding, or the expiration of
             certificates. Accreditation, e.g., in the case of
             corporate or university campuses, may not exist.



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 8]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


        I4: Traceable resolution: Particularly for mediated resolution,
             the caller SHOULD be able to definitively and securely
             determine who provided the resolution answer.

        I5: Assuring directory identity: The querier (UA or server) MUST
             be able to assure that it is querying the intended
             directory.

        I6: Query response integrity: The querier MUST be able to be
             confident that the query or response has not been tampered
             with.

        I7: Assuring update integrity: Any update mechanism for the
             directory MUST ensure that only authorized users can change
             directory information. An audit trail MUST be provided.

        I8: Call setup latency: The directory lookup SHOULD add minimal
             delay to the call setup. Since outbound proxies will likely
             be asked to resolve the same geographic coordinates
             repeatedly, a suitable time-limited caching mechanism
             SHOULD be supported (see also "Ix").

        I9: Multiple directories: A UA or proxy SHOULD be able to use
             multiple different directories to resolve the emergency
             address. We do not assume that a single directory has
             worldwide or even nationwide coverage.


             This allows competing or regional data sources.

        I10: Referral: All directories SHOULD refer out-of-area queries
             to an appropriate default or region-specific directory.


             This requirement alleviates the potential for
             misconfigurations to cause calls to fail, particularly
             for caller-based queries.

        I9: Multiple protocols: It MAY be useful if directories support
             multiple query protocols, such as SIP (for proxying), LDAP,
             a SOAP-based query and others. A mandatory-to-implement
             protocol


             It appears likely that the resolution mechanism will
             be needed by a variety of session protocols and user
             applications.




Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 9]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


        I11: Robustness: The resolution mechanism MUST allow to deploy
             systems that are robust in the face of partial network and
             directory server failures. Caching MAY be used to mitigate
             temporary unavailability of directories or network
             connectivity.

        I12: Incrementally deployable: An Internet-based emergency call
             system MUST be able to deployed incrementally. In the
             initial stages of deployment, an emergency call may not
             reach the optimal ECC.

5.3 Identifying the Caller

   Enhanced emergency call systems provide the ECC with the identity and
   location of the caller. In PSTN-based systems, the identity is
   represented by the number of the terminal the call is placed from. In
   a SIP-based system, we have two distinct identities, namely the
   address of the terminal (Contact header field) and the identity (name
   and/or AOR) of the person using the terminal. Depending on the
   circumstances, only one of them may be available. For example, from a
   public terminal ("Internet payphone"), only the Contact address may
   be useful.

   In most jurisdictions, callers do not have a choice as to whether
   they want to reveal their location or identity; such disclosure is
   typically mandated by law. Emergency numbers are generally not meant
   for anonymous tips. [TBD: Are there any exceptions?]

        C1: Identity: The system SHOULD allow to identify both the
             caller's identity and his or her terminal address.

        C2: Privacy override: The end system MUST be able to
             automatically detect that a call is an emergency call so
             that it can override any privacy settings that conflict
             with emergency calling.  (Whether this override can be
             configured by the user or is considered a condition of
             service is considered a legal matter, not a protocol
             issue.)


             Since emergency calls are often placed by children, by
             people using somebody else's end system or by people
             in panic, any configuration should be automated rather
             than relying on user interaction at the time of the
             call. Delaying a call until the user discovers that
             they have to answer some screen prompt or deal with a
             voice prompt in an unfamiliar language is likely to
             lead to large call setup delays or call failures. This



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 10]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


             does not preclude that end systems can allow, on a
             call-by-call basis, to configure special call
             parameters.

5.4 Identifying the Caller Location

   This section supplements the requirements outlined in [2]. Thus, the
   requirements enumerated there are not repeated here. In general, we
   can distinguish two modes of operation: direct and indirect location
   provision. In direct location provision, the calling end system knows
   its own location and can convey this location to the ECC. In an
   indirect system, the caller is identified by a permanent or temporary
   identifier, which the ECC then uses to map the caller to a current
   location. (In the current North American enhanced emergency calling
   system, the landline terminal phone number is mapped to a location
   using the so-called ALI database. For wireless phones, a temporary
   identifier is created and then mapped to the location information.)

   (This is somewhat similar to terminal-based and network-based
   location services in wireless "911' services. However, even in direct
   location provision, the terminal may well acquire the location
   information from a third party, e.g., a wireless location beacon or a
   DHCP server.)

        L1: Multiple location providers: For indirect locations, ECCs
             MUST be able to access different location providers. The
             location provider may be tied to the service provider or
             may be independent of the service provider.


             This requirement avoids that all users have to rely on
             a single location provider. This requirement is hard
             to avoid if there are no traditional national
             application-layer service providers.

        L2: Civil and geographic: Where possible, both civil (street
             address) and geographic (longitude/latitude) information
             SHOULD be provided.


             While geographic information can usually be translated
             into civil coordinates, some coordinates, such as
             building numbers and floors, are more easily provided
             as civil coordinates since they do not require a
             detailed surveying operation. For direct location
             determination, it may also be easier for the user to
             check civil coordinates for correctness.




Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 11]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


6 Call Setup and Call Features

        S1: Authentication override: In many jurisdictions, emergency
             calls can be placed by any device, regardless of whether it
             has subscribed for service. Similarly, outbound proxies and
             other call filtering elements MUST be able to be configured
             so that they allow unauthenticated emergency calls.

        S2: Mid-call features: The end system MUST be able to recognize
             an emergency call and allow configuration so that certain
             call features are not triggered accidentally. For example,
             it may be inappropriate to transfer the ECC or put it on
             hold. An end system MAY make it more difficult to
             disconnect an on-going emergency call or accept other
             incoming calls while in an emergency call.


             Call transfer initiated by the emergency caller is
             likely only to be a problem if a PSTN gateway or B2BUa
             is in the call path. It is not clear how much effort
             should be expended on preventing intentional, as
             opposed to accidental, disconnection, since callers
             can typically find physical-layer means to terminate
             the call.

        S3: Testable: Users SHOULD be able to test the ability to place
             an emergency call without actually invoking an emergency
             response.


             This capability is unfortunately missing from the
             current PSTN.

7 Security Considerations

   Confidentiality, integrity and authentication are core requirements
   for multiple aspects of emergency calling. Threats exist at the
   infrastructure and individual call level. Security threats are
   identified throughout this document.

   An adversary could corrupt call information or ECC resolution to
   cause emergency calls to fail subtly, without the caller necessarily
   noticing.  This can be done on a call-by-call basis or by corrupting
   elements that perform the resolution, including the directory
   described in Section 5.2, Internet routing tables or DNS.
   (Obviously, there are typically other ways to make emergency calls
   fail completely, an approach phone-wire cutting burglars have
   practiced for years. However, the ability to spoof an ECC requires



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 12]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


   physical access to the PSTN cable plant, while this may not be
   required in the IP case.)

   Here, we do not consider attacks on the emergency call infrastructure
   itself. The techniques for dealing with such attacks are likely to be
   similar as those for protecting other network infrastructure,
   although the stakes may well be higher.

8 References

9 Normative References

   [1] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in rfcs to indicate requirement
   levels," RFC 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1997.

   [2] J. Cuellar, J. Morris, and D. Mulligan, "Geopriv requirements,"
   internet draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, Jan. 2003.  Work in
   progress.

10 Informative References

   [3] N. Charlton, M. Gasson, G. Gybels, M. Spanner, and A. van Wijk,
   "User requirements for the session initiation protocol (SIP) in
   support of deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired individuals,"
   RFC 3351, Internet Engineering Task Force, Aug. 2002.

   [4] H. C. Folts, C. Beard, and K. Carlberg, "Requirements for
   emergency telecommunication capabilities in the Internet," internet
   draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, Oct. 2002.  Work in progress.

11 Acknowledgments

   Your name here.

12 Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Dept. of Computer Science
   Columbia University
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue
   New York, NY 10027
   USA
   electronic mail: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 13]

Internet Draft        Emergency Call Requirements      February 21, 2003


   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.












Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 14]







                           Table of Contents



   1          Conventions used in this document ...................    2
   2          Introduction ........................................    2
   3          Definitions .........................................    2
   4          Last-Mile Access ....................................    3
   5          End-to-End IP-Based Emergency Calls .................    5
   5.1        Emergency Address ...................................    5
   5.2        Identifying the Appropriate Emergency Call Center
   ................................................................    7
   5.3        Identifying the Caller ..............................   10
   5.4        Identifying the Caller Location .....................   11
   6          Call Setup and Call Features ........................   12
   7          Security Considerations .............................   12
   8          References ..........................................   13
   9          Normative References ................................   13
   10         Informative References ..............................   13
   11         Acknowledgments .....................................   13
   12         Authors' Addresses ..................................   13



























Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 1]

