

Network Working Group                                       M. Wasserman
Internet-Draft                                                ThingMagic
Expires: November 28, 2004                                  May 30, 2004


   Updates to RFC 2418 Regarding the Role of IETF Working Group Chairs
             draft-wasserman-rfc2418-chair-role-update-00.txt

Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as
    Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on November 28, 2004.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

    This document is an update to RFC 2418 that strengthens the
    recommended separation between the Working Group Chair and Document
    Editor roles.  It states that a single person should not serve in
    both roles for a single document, except temporarily in exceptional
    situations.










Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Chair Role Update                    May 2004


Table of Contents

    1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

    2.  Specific Changes to RFC 2418 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

    3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

    4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

    5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

    6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
    6.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
    6.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  6
































Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Chair Role Update                    May 2004


1.  Introduction

    In RFC 2418 [RFC2418], the second paragraph of section 6.3 states
    that "As a general practice, the Working Group Chair and Document
    Editor positions are filled by different individuals to help ensure
    that the resulting documents accurately reflect the consensus of the
    working group and that all processes are followed."  However, this
    practice is not uniformly followed in all WGs and areas, occasionally
    resulting in situations where the IETF processes are not followed in
    a sufficiently fair or open manner.

    WG Chairs should not be expected to make dispassionate and fair
    judgements about the quality, completeness and acceptability of their
    own work, nor should they be responsible for ensuring that their own
    work has been adequately reviewed.

    Furthermore, having the WG Chair role and the Document Editor role
    filled by the same person removes one level of appeal when WG members
    do not agree with the decisions of the Document Editor.

    The need for separation between the WG Chair and Document Editor
    roles has been further underscored by recent IETF activities intended
    to increase the document shepherding responsibilities of WG Chairs.

    This document is an update to RFC 2418 that strengthens the
    separation between these roles.

2.  Specific Changes to RFC 2418

    The following paragraphs supersede the second paragraph of RFC 2418,
    section 6.3:

    It is important that the Working Group Chair and Document Editor
    positions are filled by different individuals to help ensure that the
    resulting documents accurately reflect the consensus of the working
    group and that all processes are followed.  In particular, a single
    individual should not serve in the WG Chair and Document Editor or
    Author roles for a single document.

    In many cases, a WG may have more than one WG Chair, and if one WG
    Chair serves as the Document Editor or Author for a WG document, the
    other WG Chair(s) may serve in the WG Chair role for that document.
    In those cases, the role of each WG Chair should be made clear to the
    WG and restated in any situations where there may be confusion
    regarding those roles.  In particular, the Document Editor or Author
    should recuse himself from all document handling decisions involving
    the document, including the response to any related appeals.




Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Chair Role Update                    May 2004


    In rare cases, perhaps due to a role change or chair resignation, a
    lone WG Chair may serve as the Document Editor for a WG document
    temporarily, but that situation should be avoided when possible, and
    corrected as quickly as practical.

3.  IANA Considerations

    This document makes no request of IANA.

    Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
    RFC.

4.  Security Considerations

    This document describes a modification to the role of WG chairs in
    the IETF document handling process.  It has no security
    considerations.

5.  Acknowledgements

    This document reflects a discussion that was held on the MPOWR
    mailing list in late 2003 and early 2004.

    This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
    2629 [RFC2629].

6.  References

6.1  Normative References

    [RFC2418]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
               Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

6.2  Informative References

    [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
               June 1999.














Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Chair Role Update                    May 2004


Author's Address

    Margaret Wasserman
    ThingMagic
    One Broadway, 14th Floor
    Cambridge, MA  02142
    USA

    Phone: +1 617 758 4177
    EMail: margaret@thingmagic.com
    URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com/








































Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Chair Role Update                    May 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
    has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
    IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
    standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
    claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
    licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
    obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
    proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
    be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
    Director.


Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
    included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Chair Role Update                    May 2004


    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
    Internet Society.











































Wasserman              Expires November 28, 2004                [Page 7]


