






Network Working Group                                         Enke Chen
Internet Draft                                         Redback Networks
Expiration Date: October 2002                             Yakov Rekhter
                                                       Juniper Networks

                   List of the Current BGP Documents

                    draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt


1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


2. Abstract

   This document lists the most recent RFCs and Internet Drafts that are
   related to the BGP protocol and its applications.  It is expected
   that this document will be updated on a on-going basis.














Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 1]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


3. Introduction

   This document lists the most recent RFCs and Internet Drafts that are
   related to the BGP protocol and its applications.  It is expected
   that this document will be updated on a on-going basis.


4. Protocol Specification

   Y. Rekhter, T. Li, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", Work in
   Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-17.txt>, January 2002.

      This document contains the base protocol specifications.

   S. Hares, J. Haas, S. Willis, J. Burruss, J. Chu, "Definitions of
   Managed Objects for the Fourth Version of the Border Gateway Protocol
   (BGP-4)", <draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-mib-09.txt>, March 2002.

      This document describes managed objects used for managing the
      Border Gateway Protocol Version 4.

   R. Chandra, P. Traina, T. Li, "BGP Communities Attribute", RFC 1997,
   August 1996.

      This document describes an extension to BGP which may be used to
      pass additional information to both neighboring and remote BGP
      peers.

      The intention of the proposed technique is to aid in policy
      administration and reduce the management complexity of maintaining
      the Internet.

   A. Heffernan, "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5 Signature
   Option", <draft-ietf-idr-rfc2385bis-01.txt>, March 2002.

      This document describes a TCP extension to enhance security for
      BGP.  It defines a new TCP option for carrying an MD5 [RFC1321]
      digest in a TCP segment.  This digest acts like a signature for
      that segment, incorporating information known only to the
      connection end points.  Since BGP uses TCP as its transport, using
      this option in the way described in this paper significantly
      reduces the danger from certain security attacks on BGP.

   T. Bates, R. Chandra, E. Chen, "BGP Route Reflection - An Alternative
   to Full Mesh IBGP", RFC 2796, April 2000.

      BGP, as originally defined, requires that all BGP speakers within
      a single AS must be fully meshed.  This represents a serious



Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 2]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


      scaling problem.

      This document describes the use and design of a method known as
      "Route Reflection" to alleviate the the need for "full mesh" IBGP.


   P. Traina, D. McPherson, J. Scudder, "Autonomous System
   Confederations for BGP", RFC 3065, February 2001.

      BGP, as originally defined, requires that all BGP speakers within
      a single AS must be fully meshed.  This represents a serious
      scaling problem.

      This document describes an extension to BGP which may be used to
      create a confederation of autonomous systems that is represented
      as a single autonomous system to BGP peers external to the
      confederation, thereby removing the "full mesh" requirement.  The
      intention of this management complexity of maintaining a large
      autonomous system.


   C. Villamizar, R. Chandra, R. Govindan, "BGP Route Flap Damping", RFC
   2439, November 1998.

      To maintain scalability of a routed internet, it is necessary to
      reduce the amount of change in routing state propagated by BGP in
      order to limit processing requirements.  The primary contributors
      of processing load resulting from BGP updates are the BGP decision
      process and adding and removing forwarding entries.

      A BGP implementation must be prepared for a large volume of
      routing traffic. A BGP implementation cannot rely upon the sender
      to sufficiently shield it from route instabilities.  The
      mechanisms described in this document are designed to prevent
      sustained oscillations.  These mechanisms allow routing
      instability to be contained at an AS border router bordering the
      instability.

   R. Chandra, J. Scudder, "Capabilities Advertisement with BGP-4",
   <draft-ietf-idr-rfc2842bis-00.txt>, February 2002.

      This document defines new Optional Parameter, called Capabilities,
      that is expected to facilitate introduction of new capabilities in
      BGP.


   T. Bates, R. Chandra, D. Katz, Y. Rekhter, "Multiprotocol Extensions
   for BGP-4", <draft-ietf-idr-rfc2858bis-01.txt>, April 2002.



Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 3]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


      This document defines extensions to BGP-4 to enable it to carry
      routing information for multiple Network Layer protocols (e.g.,
      IPv6, IPX, etc...). The extensions are backward compatible - a
      router that supports the extensions can interoperate with a router
      that doesn't support the extensions.

   E. Chen, "Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4", RFC 2918, September
   2000.

      This document defines a new Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
      capability termed 'Route Refresh Capability', which would allow
      the dynamic exchange of route refresh request between BGP speakers
      and subsequent re-advertisement of the respective Adj-RIB-Out.
      One possible application of this capability is to facilitate non-
      disruptive routing policy changes.


   E. Chen, Y. Rekhter, "Cooperative Route Filtering Capability for
   BGP-4", Work in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-route-filter-05.txt>,
   January 2002.

      This document defines a BGP-based mechanism that allows a BGP
      speaker to send to its BGP peer a set of route filters that the
      peer would use to constrain/filter its outbound routing updates to
      the speaker.


   E. Chen, S. Sangli, "Address Prefix Based Outbound Route Filter for
   BGP-4", Work in Progress, <draft-chen-bgp-prefix-orf-04.txt>, April
   2002.

      This document defines a new Outbound Router Filter type for BGP,
      termed "Address Prefix Outbound Route Filter", that can be used to
      perform address prefix based route filtering. This ORF-type
      supports prefix length or range based matching, wild-card based
      address prefix matching, as well as the exact address prefix
      matching for address families.


   S. Sangli, Y. Rekhter, R. Fernando, J. Scudder, E. Chen, "Graceful
   Restart Mechanism for BGP", Work in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-
   restart-03.txt>, April 2002.

      This document proposes a mechanism for BGP that would help
      minimize the negative effects on routing caused by BGP restart. An
      End-of-RIB marker is specified and can be used to convey routing
      convergence information.  A new BGP capability, termed "Graceful
      Restart Capability", is defined which would allow a BGP speaker to



Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 4]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


      express its ability to preserve forwarding state during BGP
      restart. Finally, procedures are outlined for temporarily
      retaining routing information across a TCP transport reset.


   P. Marques, F. Dupont, "Use of BGP-4 Multiprotocol Extensions for
   IPv6 Inter-Domain Routing", RFC 2545, March 1999.

      BGP-4 Multiprotocol Extensions [BGP-MP] defines the format of two
      BGP attributes (MP_REACH_NLRI and MP_UNREACH_NLRI) that can be
      used to announce and withdraw the announcement of reachability
      information.  This document defines how compliant systems should
      make use of those attributes for the purpose of conveying IPv6
      routing information.


   Q. Vohra, E. Chen, "BGP support for four-octet AS number space", Work
   in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-as4bytes-04.txt>,  September 2001.

      Currently the Autonomous System number is encoded in BGP as a two-
      octets field. This document describes extentions to BGP to carry
      the Autonomous System number as a four-octets field.


   S. Sangli, D. Tappan, Y. Rekhter, "BGP Extended Communities
   Attribute", Work in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ext-
   communities-03.txt>, March 2002.

      The Extended Community Attribute provides two important
      enhancements over the existing BGP Community Attribute: (1) it
      provides an extended range, ensuring that communities can be
      assigned for a plethora of uses, without fear of overlap, and (2)
      the addition of a Type field provides structure for the community
      space.

      The addition of structure allows the application of policy based
      on the application for which the community value will be used. For
      example, one can filter out all communities of a particular type,
      or allow only certain values for a particular type of community.
      Without structure this can only be accomplished by explicitly
      enumerating all community values which will be denied or allowed.

   E. Rosen, Y. Rekhter, et al., "BGP/MPLS VPNs", Work in Progress,
   <draft-ietf-ppvpn-rfc2547bis-01.txt>, January 2002.

      This document describes a method by which a Service Provider may
      use an IP backbone to provide VPNs for its customers.  MPLS is
      used for forwarding packets over the backbone, and BGP is used for



Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 5]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


      distributing routes over the backbone.  The primary goal of this
      method is to support the case in which a client obtains IP
      backbone services from a Service Provider or Service Providers
      with which it maintains contractual relationships.  The client may
      be an enterprise, a group of enterprises which need an extranet,
      an Internet Service Provider, an application service provider,
      another VPN Service Provider which uses this same method to offer
      VPNs to clients of its own, etc.  The method makes it very simple
      for the client to use the backbone services.  It is also very
      scalable and flexible for the Service Provider, and allows the
      Service Provider to add value.

   Y. Rekhter, E. Rosen, "Carrying Label Information in BGP-4", RFC
   3107, May 2001.

      When BGP is used to distribute a particular route, it can be also
      be used to distribute an MPLS label which is mapped to that route.
      This document specifies the way in which this is done.  The label
      mapping information for a particular route is piggybacked in the
      same BGP Update message that is used to distribute the route
      itself.

   K. Patel, S. Hares, "Aspath Based Outbound Route Filter for BGP-4",
   Work in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-aspath-orf-00.txt>, July 2001.

      This document defines a new Outbound Router Filter type for BGP,
      termed "Aspath Outbound Route Filter", that can be used to perform
      aspath based route filtering. This ORF-type supports aspath based
      route filtering as well as regular expression based matching, for
      address groups.

   E. Chen, S. Sangli, "Dynamic Capability for BGP-4", Work in Progress,
   <draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-02.txt>, April 2002.

      This document defines a new BGP capability termed "Dynamic
      Capability", which would allow the dynamic update of capabilities
      over an established BGP session. This capability would facilitate
      non-disruptive capability changes by BGP speakers.

   E. Chen, V. Gillet, "Subcodes for BGP Cease Notification Message",
   Work in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-cease-subcode-00.txt>, October
   2001.

      This document defines several subcodes for the BGP Cease
      NOTIFICATION message that would provide more information to aid
      network operators in co-relating network events and diagnosing BGP
      peering issues.




Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 6]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


   E. Chen, J. Yuan, "AS-wide Unique BGP Identifier for BGP-4", Work in
   Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-identifier-00.txt>, February 2002.

      To accommodate situations where the current requirements for the
      BGP Identifier are not met, this document relaxes the definition
      of the BGP Identifier to be a 4-octet unsigned, non-zero integer,
      and relaxes the "uniqueness" requirement so that only AS-wide
      uniqueness of the BGP Identifiers is required. These revisions to
      the base BGP specification do not introduce any backward
      compatibility issue.


5. Analysis/Applications

   P. Traina, "Experience with the BGP-4 protocol", RFC 1773, March
   1995.

      The purpose of this document is to document how the requirements
      for advancing a routing protocol to Draft Standard have been
      satisfied by Border Gateway Protocol version 4 (BGP-4).  This
      report documents experience with BGP.  This is the second of two
      reports on the BGP protocol.  As required by the Internet
      Architecure Board (IAB) and the Internet Engineering Steering
      Group (IESG), the first report will present a performance analysis
      of the BGP protocol.


   P. Traina, "BGP-4 Protocol Analysis", RFC 1774, March 1995.

      The purpose of this report is to document how the requirements for
      advancing a routing protocol to Draft Standard have been satisfied
      by the Border Gateway Protocol version 4 (BGP-4). This report
      summarizes the key features of BGP, and analyzes the protocol with
      respect to scaling and performance. This is the first of two
      reports on the BGP protocol.

   J. Hawkinson, T. Bates, "Guidelines for creation, selection, and
   registration of an Autonomous System (AS)", RFC 1930, March 1996.

      This document discusses when it is appropriate to register and
      utilize an Autonomous System (AS), and lists criteria for such.

   E. Chen, and T. Bates, "An Application of the BGP Community Attribute
   in Multi-home Routing", RFC 1998, August 1996.

      This document presents an application of the BGP community
      attribute in simplifying the implementation and configuration of
      routing policies in the multi-provider Internet. It shows how the



Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 7]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


      community based configuration can be used to replace the AS-based
      customization of the BGP "LOCAL_PREF" attribute, a common method
      used today.  Not only does the technique presented simplifies
      configuration and management at the provider level, it also
      represents a paradigm shift in that it gives the potential for the
      customer to control its own routing policy with respect to its
      service provider, as well as providing the ability for policy
      configuration to be done at a prefix based granularity rather than
      the more common AS based granularity.

   J. Stewart, T. Bates, R. Chandra, and E. Chen, "Using a Dedicated AS
   for Sites Homed to a Single Provider", RFC 2270, January 1998.

      With the increased growth of the Internet, the number of customers
      using BGP4 has grown significantly. RFC1930 outlines a set of
      guidelines for when one needs and should use an AS. However, the
      customer and service provider (ISP) are left with a problem as a
      result of this in that while there is no need for an allocated AS
      under the guidelines, certain conditions make the use of BGP4 a
      very pragmatic and perhaps only way to connect a customer homed to
      a single ISP.  This paper proposes a solution to this problem in
      line with recommendations set forth in RFC1930.

   E. Chen, and J. Stewart, "A Framework for Inter-Domain Route
   Aggregation", RFC 2519, February 1999.

      This document presents a framework for inter-domain route
      aggregation and shows an example router configuration which
      'implements' this framework.  This framework is flexible and
      scales well as it emphasizes the philosophy of aggregation by the
      source, both within routing domains as well as towards upstream
      providers, and it also strongly encourages the use of the 'no-
      export' BGP community to balance the provider-subscriber need for
      more granular routing information with the Internet's need for
      scalable inter-domain routing.

   D. McPherson, V. Gill, D. Walton, and A. Retana, "BGP Persistent
   Route Oscillation Condition", Work in Progress, <draft-ietf-idr-
   route-oscillation-01.txt>, February 2002.

      It has recently been discovered that in particular configurations,
      the BGP scaling mechanisms defined in "BGP Route Reflection - An
      Alternative to Full Mesh IBGP" and "Autonomous System
      Confederations for BGP" will introduce persistent BGP route
      oscillation.  This document discusses the two types of persistent
      route oscillation that have been identified, describes when these
      conditions will occur, and provides some network design guidelines
      to avoid introducing such occurrences.



Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 8]





Internet Draft       draft-chen-bgp-reference-03.txt          April 2002


6. Author Information


   Enke Chen
   Redback Networks, Inc.
   350 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA 95134
   email: enke@redback.com

   Yakov Rekhter
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   1194 N. Mathilda Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   e-mail: yakov@juniper.net





































Chen & Rekhter                                                  [Page 9]


