

Network Working Group                                            A. Eble
Internet-Draft                                                      fsck
Expires: March 26, 2004                               September 26, 2003


             Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies
                       draft-aeble-ooo-replies-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 26, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Email has come to be the single most important application of modern
   Information Technology. It is often considered business critical.
   Most current email systems have means for automated replies to
   incoming messages. These are mostly used for so-called out-of-office
   replies or OoO-replies for short.

   This document discusses problems of out-of-office replies and
   suggests best practices and controls that should be put in place.








Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


1. Terminology

   This document occasionally uses terms that appear in capital letters.
   When the terms "MUST", "SHOULD", "RECOMMENDED", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD
   NOT", and "MAY" appear capitalized, they are being used to indicate
   particular requirements of this specification. A discussion of the
   meanings of these terms appears in RFC2119.

   In this document, the sender of the original message is called sender
   or originator and the recipient of said message addressee or
   recipient. The out-of-office reply will then originate at the
   recipient's side.







































Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


2. Introduction

   Email is the most prominent application in information technology.
   Many companies rely on its timely delivery, the asynchronicity of the
   medium and the anonymity especially compared to the telephone. Since
   people expect an email to be delivered almost immediately even to
   addressees on the other side of the world, it is singularly annoying
   to many not to receive a reply to a message declared urgent. Thus,
   modern email systems offer the capability of so-called out-of-office
   replies where the addressee sets up an automated agent to
   automatically reply to incoming messages. While this feature sounds
   interesting and useful, the possible misconfiguration and abuse far
   surpasses its usefulness.






































Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


3. Problems

3.1 Mailing Lists

   Many employees in technical positions subscribe to mailing lists,
   most to several simultaneously. If every message from the mailing
   list generates an automated OoO reply, the list contributors will be
   annoyed or, even worse, the list will be swamped with OoO messages,
   thus effectively posing a denial-of-service attack. This especially
   counts for large lists hosted on systems with limited bandwidth.

   In addition, OoO replies will possibly generate traffic about the
   reply from annoyed subscribers, thus lowering the signal/noise ratio
   significantly.

3.2 Security Considerations

   OoO replies are known to contain job information about the addressee.
   This is particularly interesting if the job is in a sensitive area
   like Human Resources, account management or some sort of security
   position. Any such information may help a hostile person
   significantly to launch a social engineering attack against the
   organization.

   "Social Engineering" is the process of gleaning potentially sensitive
   information from third parties or making them initiate processes that
   are  available only to personnel inside the organization being
   attacked.























Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


4. Suggested Practices

   Wherever possible, OoO replies SHOULD NOT be used. If they have to be
   used, their use should be tightly controlled:

   1.  OoO replies SHOULD only be used internal to any organization.
       Any mailbox available for contact with external parties SHOULD be
       a role-based mailbox to which several employees have access.
       Outgoing replies SHOULD have a From: header from that role
       mailbox, not from the person replying. This serves the purposes
       of

       *  being always available to the external party

       *  keeping sensitive information in-house.

       Role-based mailboxes SHALL NOT generate OoO replies ever.

   2.  OoO replies MUST NOT include job information of the addressee.

   3.  OoO replies SHALL NOT be generated in response to emails with a
       Header "Precedence: bulk", "Precedence: junk" or "Precedence:
       list".

   4.  OoO systems MUST remember which originators were already notified
       and MUST NOT resend another OoO reply during a configurable
       timeframe. This timeframe SHOULD vary between one week and one
       month.

   5.  An OoO reply MUST NOT be generated in response to emails

       1.  from an address that ends with -REQUEST

       2.  originating from Postmaster

       3.  originating from UUCP,

       4.  originating from MAILER,

       5.  originating from MAILER-DAEMON.

       These addresses have a high probability of being used by
       automated services of the given mail system and thus might be
       able to create a mail loop. This has to be avoided by all means.

   6.  An OoO reply MUST NOT be generated in response to messages that
       are tagged as spam. OoO replies are a great way for spammers to
       harvest addresses for further mailings.



Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


   7.  The Postmaster role either MUST be able to turn off the OoO reply
       feature for every user on the system or MUST be able to delegate
       this task to an appropriate party (like a system administrator).
















































Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", March 1997.


Author's Address

   Axel Eble
   Frankfurt Security Consulting Kooperative
   Aussiger Str. 7
   Rodgau  63110
   DE

   Phone: +49 178 285-3265
   EMail: axel.eble@fsck.de



































Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Security Best Practices: Out-of-Office Replies            September 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Eble                     Expires March 26, 2004                 [Page 9]

