



Network Working Group                                              X. Fu
Internet-Draft                                               C. Dickmann
Expires: April 19, 2006                         University of Goettingen
                                                            J. Crowcroft
                                                 University of Cambridge
                                                        October 16, 2005


         General Internet Signaling Transport (GIST) over SCTP
                     draft-fu-nsis-ntlp-sctp-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The General Internet Signaling Transport (GIST) protocol currently
   uses TCP or TLS over TCP for connection mode operation.  This
   document describes the usage of GIST over the Stream Control
   Transmission Protocol (SCTP).  The use of SCTP can take the advantage
   of features provided by SCTP, namely streaming-based transport,
   support of multiple streams to avoid head of line blocking, and the



Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


   support of multi-homing to provide network level fault tolerance.
   Additionally, the support for some extensions of SCTP is also
   discussed, namely its Partial Reliability Extension and the usage of
   TLS over SCTP.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology and Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  GIST Over SCTP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Stack-Configuration-Data information for SCTP . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Changes to GIST State Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  Multi-homing Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.4.  PR-SCTP Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
       3.4.1.  Changes to API between GIST and NSLP  . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.5.  TLS over SCTP Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9


























Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the usage of the General Internet Signaling
   Transport (GIST) protocol [1] over the Stream Control Transmission
   Protocol (SCTP) [2].

   GIST, in its initial specification for connection mode operation,
   runs on top of a byte-stream oriented transport protocol providing a
   reliable, in-sequence delivery, i.e., using the Transmission Control
   Protocol (TCP) [4] for signaling message transport.  However, some
   NSLP context information has a definite lifetime, therefore, the GIST
   transport protocol must accommodate flexible retransmission, so stale
   NSLP messages that are held up by congestion can be dropped.
   Together with the head-of-line blocking issue and other issues with
   TCP, these considerations argue that implementations of GIST should
   support the Stream Control Transport Protocol (SCTP)[2] as an
   optional transport protocol for GIST, especially if deployment over
   the public Internet is contemplated.  Like TCP, SCTP supports
   reliability, congestion control, fragmentation.  Unlike TCP, SCTP
   provides a number of functions that are desirable for signaling
   transport, such as multiple streams and multiple IP addresses for
   path failure recovery.  In addition, its Partial Reliability
   extension (PR-SCTP) [5] supports partial retransmission based on a
   programmable retransmission timer.

   This document shows how GIST should be used with SCTP to provide
   these additional features to deliver the GIST C-mode messages (which
   can in turn carry NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol (NSLP) [6] messages
   as payload).  More specifically:
      how to use the multiple streams feature of SCTP.
      how to handle the message oriented nature of SCTP.
      how to take the advantage of multi-homing support of SCTP.

   Additionally, this document also discusses how to support two
   extensions of SCTP, namely PR-SCTP [5] and TLS over SCTP [7].

   The method described in this document does not require any changes of
   GIST or SCTP.  It is only required that SCTP implementations support
   the optional feature of fragmentation of SCTP user messages.


2.  Terminology and Abbreviations

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL", in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14, RFC 2119 [3].  Other terminologies and abbreviations used in
   this document are taken from related specifications (e.g., [1] and



Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


   [2]) as follows:
   o  TLS - Transport Layer Security
   o  SCTP - Stream Control Transmission Protocol
   o  PR-SCTP - SCTP Partial Reliability Extension
   o  MRM - Message Routing Method
   o  MRI - Message Routing Information
   o  MRS - Message Routing State
   o  MA - A GIST Messaging Association is a single connection between
      two explicitly identified GIST adjacent peers on the data path.  A
      messaging association may use a specific transport protocol and
      known ports.  If security protection is required, it may use a
      specific network layer security association, or use a transport
      layer security association internally.  A messaging association is
      bidirectional; signaling messages can be sent over it in either
      direction, and can refer to flows of either direction.
   o  SCTP Association - A protocol relationship between SCTP endpoints,
      composed of the two SCTP endpoints and protocol state information.
      An association can be uniquely identified by the transport
      addresses used by the endpoints in the association.  Two SCTP
      endpoints MUST NOT have more than one SCTP association between
      them at any given time.
   o  Stream - A sequence of user messages that are to be delivered to
      the upper-layer protocol in order with respect to other messages
      within the same stream.


3.  GIST Over SCTP

3.1.  Stack-Configuration-Data information for SCTP

   A new MA-Protocol-ID type, "SCTP", is defined in this document for
   using SCTP as GIST transport protocol.

   In order to run GIST over SCTP, the Stack-Proposal and Stack-
   Configuration-Data objects need to recognize the SCTP MA-Protocol-ID
   type, and interpret it for the transport protocol negotiation during
   the GIST MA setup handshake (e.g., whether SCTP runs alone or
   together with TLS).  As an example, assuming SCTP MA-Protocol-ID type
   is 3, TLS is 2 and TCP is 1, then Stack-Proposal for different
   transport will be:
      SCTP only: 3
      TLS over SCTP: 3, 2
      TCP only: 1
      TLS over TCP: 1, 2

   An SCTP association is opened in the downstreaming direction, i.e.,
   from the querying node towards the responder node.  In order to
   establish an association, a port needs to be negotiated.  Therefore,



Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


   a Higher-Layer-Addressing format for the GIST Stack-Configuration-
   Data object needs to be defined.  The content of Higher-Layer-
   Addressing depends on the node type:
   o  Querying node: No information (only padding)
   o  Responding node: 2-byte port number at which the connection will
      be accepted

   TBD: The number of streams may also be part of it and negotiated
   between a GIST Querying node and Responding node.

3.2.  Changes to GIST State Maintenance

   A GIST MA is established over an SCTP association, which comprises
   one or more SCTP streams.  Each of such streams can be used for one
   or multiple NSLP sessions (i.e., one or more MRSs).  After completing
   a GIST MA setup, which implicitly establishes a bi-directional SCTP
   stream, C-mode messages can be sent over the SCTP association in
   either direction.  Due to multi-streaming support of SCTP, it is easy
   to maintain sequencing of messages that affect the same resource
   (e.g., the same NSLP session), rather than maintaining the all
   messages along the same transport connection/association in a
   correlated fashion as TCP (which imposes strict (re)ordering and
   reliability per transport level).

   It is up to local policy when to create a new stream within an SCTP
   association.

3.3.  Multi-homing Consideration

   Multi-homing support is an important feature of SCTP and potentially
   provides a better path failure recovery for GIST transport.  However,
   this feature requires appropriate interpretation (even re-adjustment)
   of the keying information for both MA and MRI tables.  For instance,
   if the communicating end hosts have multiple IP addresses and use
   them for signaling, usually the primary IP addresses will be used for
   creating and maintaining corresponding MRS.  This will also involve
   how to reuse MA table.  It may be beneficial if additional MRM and
   state keying methods for multi-homed signaling scenarios.  A future
   version of this document will add more text on this aspect.

3.4.  PR-SCTP Support

   A variant of SCTP, PR-SCTP [5] provides a "timed reliability"
   service.  It allows the user to specify, on a per message basis, the
   rules governing how persistent the transport service should be in
   attempting to send the message to the receiver.  Because of the chunk
   bundling function of SCTP, reliable and unreliable messages can be
   multiplexed over a single PR-SCTP association.  Therefore, a GIST



Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


   over SCTP implementation SHOULD attempt to establish a PR-SCTP
   association instead of a standardq SCTP association, if available, to
   support more flexible transport features for potential needs of
   different NSLPs.  Concerning the use of PR-SCTP in GIST, at least the
   following change to the API between GIST and NSLP needs to be
   considered.

3.4.1.  Changes to API between GIST and NSLP

   In the GIST-NSLP API SendMessage() primitive, the current values of
   the Transfer-Attribute "Reliability" can be either 'unreliable' or
   'reliable' as specified in [1].  When PR-SCTP is used, some
   distinction from standard SCTP needs to be introduced.  The
   SendMessage() primitive already contains a Timeout value, which
   specifies how long GIST should attempt to send a message before
   indicating an error.  In the case of PR-SCTP this value should be
   used as the timer value for the "timed reliablity".  If no "timed
   reliability" is available, the Timeout parameter should have no
   impact on SCTP.

3.5.  TLS over SCTP Support

   GIST using TLS over SCTP is similar to GIST using TLS over TCP ([1],
   Section 5.7.3).  One should note that an SCTP association with TLS
   support takes advantages of SCTP, such as multi-streaming and multi-
   homing.


4.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of both [1] and [2] apply.  Further
   security analysis is needed to consider any additional security
   vulnerabilities, and will be included in an updated draft.


5.  IANA Considerations

   A new MA-Protocol-ID (SCTP) needs to be assigned, with a recommended
   value of 3.


6.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank John Loughney and Jan Demter for
   their helpful suggestions.


7.  References



Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Schulzrinne, H. and R. Hancock, "GIST: General Internet
        Signaling Transport", draft-ietf-nsis-ntlp-08 (work in
        progress), September 2005.

   [2]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Sharp, C., Schwarzbauer,
        H., Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M., Zhang, L., and V. Paxson,
        "Stream Control Transmission Protocol", RFC 2960, October 2000.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [4]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7, RFC 793,
        September 1981.

   [5]  Stewart, R., Ramalho, M., Xie, Q., Tuexen, M., and P. Conrad,
        "Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Partial Reliability
        Extension", RFC 3758, May 2004.

   [6]  Hancock, R., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., and S. Van den
        Bosch, "Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS): Framework", RFC 4080,
        June 2005.

   [7]  Jungmaier, A., Rescorla, E., and M. Tuexen, "Transport Layer
        Security over Stream Control Transmission Protocol", RFC 3436,
        December 2002.






















Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Xiaoming Fu
   University of Goettingen
   Institute for Informatics
   Lotzestr. 16-18
   Goettingen  37083
   Germany

   Email: fu@cs.uni-goettingen.de


   Christian Dickmann
   University of Goettingen
   Institute for Informatics
   Lotzestr. 16-18
   Goettingen  37083
   Germany

   Email: mail@christian-dickmann.de


   Jon Crowcroft
   University of Cambridge
   Computer Laboratory
   William Gates Building
   15 JJ Thomson Avenue
   Cambridge  CB3 0FD
   UK

   Email: jon.crowcroft@cl.cam.ac.uk




















Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               GIST over SCTP                 October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Fu, et al.               Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 9]


