INTERNET-DRAFT                                                J. Salsman
Filename: <draft-salsman-www-device-upload-08.txt>        Bovik Research 
FOR TEXT SEE:  http://www.bovik.org/device-upload.html  23 November 1999

               Form-based Device Input and Upload in HTML

Status of this Memo

   This draft extends an established protocol for the Internet
   community.  This draft does not specify an Internet standard 
   of any kind.  Discussion and suggestions for improvement are 
   requested.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
     with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

NOTICE

   The complete text of this draft has been replaced by the following 
   submission to the World Wide Web Consortium:

     http://www.bovik.org/device-upload.html

Abstract
   
   Currently, HTML forms allow the producer of the form to request 
   information, including files of data, from the operator using the 
   form. However, this capability is limited because HTML forms don't 
   provide a way to ask the operator to submit input from arbitrary 
   sources such as audio devices like microphones. Since input and 
   upload from various devices is a feature that will benefit many 
   applications, this draft proposes an extension to the HTML INPUT 
   type="file" form element. Motivations include language instruction 
   assistance, voice transcription, and high-quality speech 
   transmission under low-bandwidth conditions. 

   For the complete text of this document, please see:
     http://www.bovik.org/device-upload.html

   Any questions should be addressed to the author:
     mailto:JSalsman@bovik.org (James Salsman)

Filename: <draft-salsman-www-device-upload-08.txt>

