

Network Working Group                                      Keith Allen 
Internet Draft                                            Weijing Chen 
Expiration Date: April 2003             SBC Technology Resources, Inc. 
                                                                       
                                                          October 2002 
 
 
 
                    IPv6 for Large Access Providers 
                      draft-allen-lap-ipv6-00.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document discusses how Large Access Providers (LAP) could use 
   IPv6 to solve current technical challenges.  In particular, IPv6∆s 
   large address space and optional header mechanism can be used to 
   provide scalable and manageable broadband Internet access and 
   Virtual Private Network (VPN) services.  A new optional header to 
   support forwarding-plane based VPNs is proposed. 
    
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1.   Introduction.................................................2 
   2.   Large Access Provider Problems...............................2 
   3.   IPv6 Solutions...............................................3 
   3.1.   IPv6 for Mass Market Broadband Internet Access..............3 
   3.1.1.  IPv6 Broadband Access Operation..........................4 
   3.1.2.  IPv4 Support.............................................5 
   3.1.3.  Advantages of using IPv6 for Broadband Access............5 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 1] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   3.2.   Virtual Private Networking..................................5 
   3.2.1.  IPv6 Connectionless VPN Operation........................6 
   3.2.2.  Internet Access and VPN Site Discovery Problems..........7 
   3.2.3.  VPN Site Discovery Solution..............................7 
   3.2.4.  Internet Access Solution.................................8 
   3.2.5.  IPv6 Connectionless VPN Advantages.......................9 
   4.   VPN Header Details..........................................10 
   5.   Security Consideration......................................11 
   6.   Conclusion..................................................11 
   7.   References..................................................11 
   8.   Authors' Addresses..........................................12 
    
 
1.   Introduction 
 
   Large providers of Internet access are faced with difficult demands 
   that could be met by IPv6.  This paper will show how large access 
   providers could use IPv6 to meet their service needs and at the same 
   time position them to support the evolution to IPv6.  This paper 
   will also propose some new capabilities for IPv6 to help meet the 
   needs of large access providers. 
 
2.   Large Access Provider Problems 
 
   Two of the hardest problems faced by large and very large access 
   providers are: 
 
      1. Providing broadband access to large numbers of subscribers 
        while offering them advanced capabilities such as QoS. 
      2. Implementing VPNs on a large scale. 
       
   Currently, the industry seems to be turning towards the use of 
   connections of one type or another to address these problems, rather 
   than applying the datagram principles on which the Internet was 
   founded.  Many large access providers, particularly telcos, use ATM 
   connections and PPP to provide users with a means to access the 
   network.  Some schemes for providing QoS will rely upon additional 
   connections such as additional ATM connections and PPP sessions or 
   MPLS label switched paths.  The current solutions for VPNs also rely 
   upon connections, usually MPLS paths. 
 
   Adding connections to the Internet and trying to maintain them will 
   in the end prove to be unduly complicated, increasing operational 
   expenditures and slowing new service activations.  Instead, this is 
   a good time to take a step back and consider what makes a networking 
   technology successful.  
    
   There are two networking technologies that have achieved global 
   deployment: telephony (PSTN) and IP.  These two technologies are 
   globally successful because they are scalable and manageable.  But 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 2] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   what makes them scalable and manageable?  Both technologies have two 
   interesting traits that lend themselves to scalability and 
   manageability: 
 
      1. Each subscriber on either network has a globally unique address 
        that can be used to route communications to them. 
      2. All of the permanent state associated with a subscriber is 
        maintained at their connection point with the network.  No 
        internal network resources need to be allocated for any 
        particular subscriber. 
 
   Basically, the simple idea behind both networks is: get the 
   subscriber connected to some interface on the network, give them an 
   address, and let them go.  The management of some new feature (such 
   as DHCP or Caller ID) requires only the simple configuration of the 
   subscriber∆s router or switch interface.  Resources internal to the 
   network need to be administered and engineered, but on an aggregate 
   basis, not per-subscriber.  Once the administration and engineering 
   of resources internal to the network is required for each subscriber 
   (e.g. threading a permanent connection through the network, or 
   creating virtual routing functions on a set of routers), easy 
   manageability goes out the window. 
    
   Just to clarify, the connections being discussed here are 
   connections that are dedicated to individual subscribers and 
   established and maintained through administrative means by the 
   service provider.  This does not include the connections (links or 
   trunks) between switches or routers; all networks require these.  
   Nor does it include the connections established on-demand through 
   signaling in a telephone network. 
    
3. IPv6 Solutions 
 
   So how can IPv6 solve these problems and at the same remain true to 
   the Internet∆s connectionless heritage?  The broadband access and 
   VPN problems are addressed separately below. 
 
3.1. IPv6 for Mass Market Broadband Internet Access 
 
   The challenge for large access providers in the broadband Internet 
   access market is to connect the masses of residential and business 
   subscribers on one side of their network with ISPs, Application 
   Service Providers, and perhaps enterprise networks on the other side 
   of their network.  Traditionally, Layer 2 or Layer 2.5 technologies 
   have been employed for this.  IPv6, however, offers a much more 
   scalable and manageable alternative.  Consider that the job of a 
   large access provider is to get a packet of data from a subscriber∆s 
   premises across the provider∆s local network to an ISP or ASP, and 
   the reverse for traffic going the other direction.  IPv6 is an ideal 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 3] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   technology for this, especially given its large address space and 
   routing header mechanism. 
 
3.1.1.    IPv6 Broadband Access Operation 
    
   Here∆s how access providers can use IPv6 for broadband subscribers.  
   Assume for the moment that a broadband Internet access subscriber 
   has an IPv6-capable computer (or PDA, Internet appliance, etc.).  As 
   this computer boots up it will acquire an IPv6 address (which we∆ll 
   call its Ùcare-ofˆ address) from the access provider (e.g. DSL or 
   cable company) through either stateless [RFC2462] or stateful 
   [RFC2131] address autoconfiguration.  It cannot at this point, 
   however, reach the public Internet.  It can, though, communicate 
   with the subscriber∆s ISP, which is also connected to the same IPv6 
   network.  The computer next sends a directed DHCP request to an 
   access gateway belonging to the subscriber∆s ISP, requesting an IPv6 
   address (which we∆ll call its Ùhomeˆ address) from the ISP.  This 
   request includes authentication information.  Alternatively, the 
   computer can be assigned a static IPv6 address from the ISP.   
    
   The subscriber∆s computer now has two IPv6 addresses: a care-of 
   address received from the access provider, and a home address 
   received from the ISP.  The home address is going to be the 
   computer∆s main address.  Traffic sent from this computer will have 
   the home address as the IP source address, and traffic from other 
   subscribers will be directed to this home address.  Any traffic sent 
   to the home address will be delivered to the ISP gateway from which 
   the address was acquired.  That gateway must then forward the 
   traffic to the care-of address assigned to the computer.   
    
   To make sure this forwarding occurs, the ISP gateway must associate, 
   or Ùbind,ˆ the home address with the care-of address.  This binding 
   can be accomplished in two ways.  The first is to borrow the 
   Ùbinding updateˆ message from mobile IP.  Using this approach, after 
   acquiring both addresses, the subscriber∆s computer would send a 
   binding update message to the ISP gateway, binding its home address 
   with its care-of address.  The other approach would instead have the 
   subscriber∆s computer include the care-of address in the DHCP 
   request.  The ISP gateway could then bind the home address with the 
   care-of address when the home address is allocated. 
 
   Once the binding is in place, the ISP gateway then uses IPv6∆s 
   routing header [RFC2460] capability (rather than IPv6 encapsulation) 
   to forward Internet traffic to the subscriber.  The route specified 
   by the IPv6 header and this routing header will have two hops. The 
   first hop is the care-of address and the second hop is the home 
   address.  The care-of address will get the packet to the 
   subscriber∆s computer.  The computer∆s internal protocol stack will 
   then recognize the home address and process the packet.  
 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 4] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   The above describes routing traffic from the Internet to the 
   subscriber.  Traffic sent from the subscriber to the Internet 
   follows the reverse route, also with a two-hop route specified by 
   IPv6 header and routing header.  The first hop is the ISP access 
   gateway∆s address and the next hop is the Internet destination 
   address.  The routing header is added into each IPv6 packet by the 
   protocol stack inside the subscriber∆s computer.  This will ensure 
   that all of the subscriber∆s traffic is routed through the ISP. 
 
3.1.2.    IPv4 Support 
 
   IPv6 support for address and routing headers make it well suited for 
   broadband access, especially when subscribers natively use IPv6.  
   During the transition from IPv4 to IPv6, an IPv4-in-IPv6 tunneling 
   approach could be used.  That is, an access node (e.g. modem or home 
   gateway) on the subscriber∆s premises could take any IPv4 packets 
   from the subscriber, encapsulate them in an IPv6 packet, and forward 
   them to the ISP.  IPv6 packets would be transferred by the access 
   node without modification. 
 
3.1.3.    Advantages of using IPv6 for Broadband Access 
 
   IPv6 offers many advantages over the Layer 2 and 2.5 technologies 
   currently used for broadband Internet access.  One is the simple 
   ability for the access provider to Ùpingˆ a subscriber∆s interface.  
   Due to IPv6∆s enormous address space and support for address 
   autoconfiguration, address management would be fairly simple.  
   Finally, it would replace the need to establish connections between 
   each subscriber and their ISP with a single, uniform, scalable, and 
   manageable IPv6 network.  Not only would these capabilities help to 
   simplify operations for service providers, it could also help speed 
   the introduction of IPv6 and actually help subscribers by solving 
   the problems associated with private addresses and Network Address 
   Translation (NAT). 
 
3.2. Virtual Private Networking 
 
   Another problem being faced by large access providers is 
   implementing VPNs for large numbers of subscribers.  Most of the 
   industry∆s focus is on either Layer 3 VPNs as specified in [RFC2547] 
   or Layer 2 VPNs, but IPv6 provides the basis for a connectionless 
   approach to VPNs that will likely be more scalable and easier to 
   manage than RFC 2547 L3VPNs or L2VPNs. 
 
   First, consider the reasons why subscribers want VPNs: 
    
      1. Security.  Subscribers want to control the traffic that comes 
        in across their network interfaces. 
      2. Private Addresses.  Subscribers don∆t want to be constrained in 
        the assignment of addresses. 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 5] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
      3. Ease-of-use.  Subscribers want to offload some of the 
        management of their network by buying a VPN instead of 
        individual links between sites. 
      4. Economics.  Again, subscribers want to buy a VPN instead of 
        individual links between sites. 
      5. Quality of Service (QoS).  Subscribers want QoS guarantees and 
        Service Level Agreements (SLAs). 
    
   Quickly scanning this list reveals that certainly the private 
   address issue can be solved with IPv6.  IPv6∆s enormous address 
   space will make it possible to give subscribers sizable ranges of 
   addresses for them to use.  As for the other needs, typically the 
   reason why subscribers buy individual links between sites is 
   security.  Security is really the key to VPNs.  If security can be 
   maintained, many subscribers will give up the maintenance of 
   individual links between sites and turn to VPNs. 
    
   The security approach taken by RFC 2547 is to limit the reachability 
   of addresses in VPNs.  This requires building not only many 
   connections (and even layered connections) internal to the network, 
   but also a rather elaborate control plane consisting of virtual 
   routers exchanging routing information. 
    
   Instead of this control plane approach to security, however, 
   consider instead a more direct, forwarding plane approach.  Instead 
   of limiting reachability, why not simply stop unwanted packets from 
   being delivered to VPN subscribers at the network egress?  The key 
   to this, of course, is to know which packets subscribers want and 
   which they don∆t.  This could be accomplished by securely marking 
   each packet as belonging to a particular VPN when that packet enters 
   the network.  IPv6∆s optional header mechanism is a perfect means 
   for accomplishing this.  We propose, with details below, the 
   definition of an IPv6 optional header for VPNs.  The main purpose of 
   this optional header is to carry a VPN identifier that marks a 
   packet as belonging to a particular VPN. 
    
3.2.1.    IPv6 Connectionless VPN Operation 
 
   Given this proposed capability to label VPN packets in IPv6, an 
   access provider would create a VPN for a subscriber by first 
   assigning a unique VPN ID to that subscriber.  A unique VPN ID could 
   be an IPv6 address prefix under control of the access provider, or a 
   number allocated out of a separate space. 
    
   The access provider then enables VPN processing on each interface on 
   the Provider Edge (PE) routers serving a site in the VPN.  The VPN 
   ID assigned to the subscriber is included with the VPN interface 
   configuration.  When the PE receives a packet on a VPN interface, it 
   adds the VPN header, containing the VPN ID, into the packet and 
   sends it on its way.  Any egress packets on the VPN interface are 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 6] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   first checked to make sure they have the VPN header and that the VPN 
   ID inside matches that assigned to the interface.  Any packets that 
   do not are discarded. For those that do, the VPN header is stripped 
   and the packet is delivered. 
 
   An alternative to this would be for the Customer Edge (CE) equipment 
   to add and strip the VPN headers, with the PE gear merely checking 
   to make sure the VPN ID is valid. 
 
   The access provider will have to make sure that ALL packets with VPN 
   headers entering its network are valid by comparing them with the 
   VPN id assigned to the interface.  If the interface does not have 
   VPN processing enabled, or if the VPN IDs do not match, the packet 
   will either have to be dropped or stripped of its VPN header. 
 
   To enable interworking between different VPNs, it might be necessary 
   for PE router interfaces to be configurable with some small number 
   of VPN IDs (instead of just one), and to allow packets with any VPN 
   ID on the list to pass.  Also, it might be necessary to either turn 
   off the VPN rejection mechanism or to have a fairly large number of 
   VPN IDs on peering points between access providers.  Turning off the 
   capability would mean the access providers entering into the peering 
   relationship would have to trust each other, but trust is also 
   required for VPN route exchanges in the RFC 2547 approach. 
    
3.2.2.    Internet Access and VPN Site Discovery Problems 
    
   Two key issues, VPN Internet access and VPN site neighborhood 
   discovery, must be solved to make this approach feasible.  
   Fortunately IPv6 routing header and multicast address capabilities 
   are well suited to solve these problems.   
    
   The VPN header mechanism proposed above will keep traffic inside a 
   VPN from getting outside the VPN, and traffic outside the VPN from 
   getting inside it.  Users on VPNs, however, often need to access 
   sites that are not part of their VPN.  Also, routers at each VPN 
   site need to know how to route traffic to other VPN sites.  The 
   following sections describe how this can be implemented. 
    
3.2.3.    VPN Site Discovery Solution 
    
   Often a VPN subscriber will have many sites, so the CE routers at 
   these different sites will need a means to discover each other and 
   to discover how to route packets among themselves.  Before 
   describing this, however, some terms must be defined. 
    
   In addition to assigning a VPN ID to each VPN, the VPN subscriber 
   will also be assigned an IPv6 address range to use as they choose.  
   Addresses in this range will be referred to as Ùhomeˆ addresses.  
   The interfaces connecting the CE routers to the service provider∆s 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 7] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   network are also assigned IPv6 addresses, but these addresses come 
   out of the service provider∆s address range, not the subscriber∆s 
   address range.  These addresses will be referred to as Ùcare ofˆ 
   addresses. 
    
   One final action is required of the service provider when first 
   establishing a VPN: the assignment of an IPv6 multicast address for 
   each VPN.  A slight modification to the CE routers could then enable 
   them to multicast routing protocol discovery packets (e.g. OSPF HELO 
   packets) on this multicast address.  This will enable all of the CE 
   routers in a VPN to discover each other, and they will all appear to 
   be Ùone hopˆ away from each other. 
    
   When the routers discover each other using the multicast address, 
   they will be identified by their Ùhomeˆ addresses.  To actually 
   communicate directly with another CE, however, a CE will need to 
   know its peer∆s Ùcare ofˆ address.  The equivalent of an ARP 
   [RFC826] protocol will be needed, but this is straightforward.  Each 
   CE can then multicast a modified ARP message to find other CE's 
   Ùcare ofˆ address that can be used to reach other CE with a 
   particular CE's home address. 
    
   A CE router can then forward an IPv6 packet to another CE router by 
   adding a routing header into the packet.  The resulted route 
   specified by IPv6 header and this new routing header will have two 
   hops.  The first hop is the other CE's care of address and the 
   second hop is the original destination address of the packet. 
    
   Note that even if a site not part of the VPN somehow gets added to 
   the multicast group, it will still not be able to exchange routing 
   information with any routers inside the VPN due to the VPN header 
   checking mechanism. 
    
3.2.4.    Internet Access Solution 
    
   Typically traffic to or from a site outside the VPN is passed 
   through a firewall to prevent security violations, while traffic 
   between sites within the VPN is not.  Forwarding-plane based VPNs 
   will work the same way.  A firewall will have a separate interface 
   (logical or physical) to the IPv6 service provider∆s network.  The 
   PE serving this interface will not be configured with a VPN ID, and 
   thus will drop any egress packets on this interface with a VPN ID, 
   and drop or strip the VPN header out of any ingress packets that 
   have a VPN header.   
    
   In addition to knowing how to route packets to other VPN sites, as 
   described in the previous section, each CE router will also need to 
   know how to route traffic destined outside the VPN.  Once a default 
   route to the Internet through firewall is established at one or more 
   of the VPN sites, this information will also get propagated among 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 8] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   the CE routers using their routing protocol.  A CE router at a site 
   without a firewall will then automatically learn to route Internet-
   bound traffic securely to a VPN site equipped with a firewall.  To 
   actually forward the traffic it will add a routing header just as it 
   did for other inter-site traffic.  After arriving at the remote site 
   the traffic will then pass through the firewall and out to the 
   Internet.  Return traffic will follow the reverse route, assuming 
   the subscriber has correctly advertised the route to the network 
   service provider using BGP. 
 
   Provided with the ability to automatically discover all the CE 
   routers in a VPN, and to forward packets between them, CE routers 
   can then implement the necessary routing functions to enable VPN 
   users to securely communicate with each other, and to also access 
   other sites through a firewall. 
 
3.2.5.    IPv6 Connectionless VPN Advantages 
 
   This forwarding plane based approach to implementing VPNs has many 
   advantages. 
    
   Service provider simplicity.  This forwarding plane approach to VPNs 
   aligns with the traits that keep networks scalable and manageable: 
   service state is maintained at the subscriber∆s interface.  Internal 
   resources do not have to be allocated and maintained for a 
   particular subscriber.  Establishing a VPN for a subscriber requires 
   only two simple one-time steps: allocating a VPN ID for the 
   subscriber, and allocating an IPv6 multicast address for the 
   subscriber.  For each site in the VPN, the service provider must 
   then of course establish a link to the site.  After that, the 
   service provider simply has to configure the PE interface serving 
   the site with the VPN ID assigned to the subscriber. 
    
   Subscriber simplicity.  The subscriber can continue to use whatever 
   internal routing protocol they want without change.  Configuring a 
   CE router takes only two simple steps (in addition to those required 
   to set up any other router).  First, the subscriber must configure 
   the CE router∆s WAN interface with the Ùcare ofˆ address assigned by 
   the service provider.  Second, the subscriber must also configure 
   that interface with the multicast address assigned by the service 
   provider.  After that, the router can join the multicast group and 
   automatically discover the other sites. 
    
   Compatibility.  This approach also works well for IPv4 VPN and L2VPN 
   subscribers.  For IPv4 VPN, IPv4-in-IPv6 tunneling instead of IPv6 
   routing headers is used to encapsulate packet.  A CE at a VPN site 
   takes any IPv4 packets from the subscriber, encapsulates them in an 
   IPv6 packet, and forwards them to the other site.  Encapsulating L2 
   (VLAN) frames in IPv6 packets can easily support L2VPNs.  Because 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                  [Page 9] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   the network connecting the CE routers is a routable IPv6 network, 
   spanning tree algorithms can be used for L2VPNs. 
 
   Hardware-based solution.  This VPN security approach relies on 
   hardware instead of software.  The packet processors serving all 
   interfaces, not just VPN interfaces, will have to do more work to 
   validate VPN headers, and even add and strip them.  It does, 
   however, relieve routers from having to implement large numbers of 
   virtual routers and the software control mechanisms to coordinate 
   them.  It also eliminates the need for the large numbers of MPLS 
   paths and paths within paths required to support VPNs.  Finally, 
   since Moore∆s law continues to hold for hardware but does not apply 
   to software, it favors the forwarding plane approach to VPN 
   security. 
 
   Reviewing the VPN subscriber needs listed above reveals that IPv6 
   could be augmented to meet them all.  The security mechanism 
   proposed here can provide the security required by VPN users.  IPv6 
   already provides a generous address space.  Given these, the cost 
   and hassle of maintaining separate links between sites will no 
   longer be necessary for many subscribers. 
 
   The only remaining issue from the list above is QoS.  VPN 
   subscribers, though, are not the only users requiring QoS.  QoS is 
   being addressed for both IPv4 and IPv6, and connectionless QoS 
   mechanisms can still be utilized in a connectionless VPN. 
 
4.   VPN Header Details 
 
   This section provides the details on the proposed VPN ID header for 
   IPv6.  The VPN ID header is a specific option of the more generic 
   destination options header (header type 60).  It has the following 
   format: 
    
      31            24 23           16 15            8 7             0 
                      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
                      |0 1 1|type = ? | length = 9    |   VPN hop     | 
      +---------------------------------------------------------------+ 
      |                                                               | 
      |                         VPN ID (8 octets)                     | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     
   The first three bits of the first octet are 011 and the remaining 
   five bits is the Destination Option Type number (to be determined). 
   The meaning of first three bits is spelled out in [RFC2460].  The 
   values specified here (011) require that nodes not recognizing this 
   option type should discard the packet and that the option data (VPN 
   hop count) may change en-route.  Discarding the packet is a 
   conservative choice meant to ensure that if a packet is somehow 
   delivered to a node not capable of processing VPN headers the packet 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                 [Page 10] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
   is dropped rather than possibly delivered to a site outside the VPN.  
   VPN hop count is an 8-bit unsigned integer.  It will be incremented 
   by 1 by each peering node of a VPN provider that forwards the 
   packet. VPN ID is the 64-bit identifier of each VPN.  
 
5.   Security Consideration 
    
   For broadband Internet access service, packet security is neither 
   better nor worse than a typical Internet access connection. 
    
   For VPN service, if the PE devices under the control of the access 
   provider are properly configured with VPN ID(s), packets will not 
   enter a VPN unless authorized to do so.  If the CE devices under the 
   control of the VPN subscriber are properly configured with home 
   address, care-of address, and multicast address, packets will not 
   leave a VPN unless in a manner consistent with the policies of the 
   VPN.  
    
6.   Conclusion 
 
   IPv6 is well-suited to provide solutions to problems currently faced 
   by large Internet access providers.  It∆s multicast and routing 
   header capabilities can be used for mass market broadband Internet 
   access, and the addition of the proposed VPN header will provide a 
   forwarding-plane based solution for VPNs.  Using native IPv6 to 
   solve these problems will avoid the scalability and manageability 
   problems inherent with permanent connection based solutions, while 
   positioning service providers to serve customers who are migrating 
   to IPv6. 
 
7.   References 
 
   [RFC826] "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol", D. Plummer, 
   November, 1982.  
    
   [RFC2026] "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", S. 
   Bradner, October, 1996. 
 
   [RFC2131] "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", R. Droms, March 
   1997. 
    
   [RFC2460] "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification", S. 
   Deering, R. Hinden, December, 1998.  
 
   [RFC2462] "IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration", S. Thomson, T. 
   Narten, December 1998. 
    
   [RFC2547bis] "BGP/MPLS VPNsˆ, draft-ietf-ppvpn-rfc2547bis-02.txt, E. 
   Rosen, Y. Rekhter, etc, July, 2002. 
 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                 [Page 11] 
Internet Draft       draft-allen-LAP-IPv6-00.txt            Oct. 2002 
 
 
    
8.   Authors' Addresses 
    
   Keith Allen 
   SBC Technology Resources, Inc. 
   9505 Arboretum Blvd. 
   Austin, Texas 78759 
   Phone: +1 512 372 5741 
   Email: kallen@tri.sbc.com 
    
   Weijing Chen 
   SBC Technology Resources, Inc. 
   9505 Arboretum Blvd. 
   Austin, Texas 78759 
   Phone: +1 512 372 5710 
   Email: wchen@tri.sbc.com 
    
 
 
 
Allen and Chen            Expire April 2003                 [Page 12] 
