


Mobopts Research Group                                             C. Ng
Internet-Draft                                                    K. Aso
Intended status: Informational                                 Panasonic
Expires: January 9, 2009                                    July 8, 2008


              On Mobile IPv6 Optimization and Multihoming
                    draft-ng-mobopts-multihoming-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 9, 2009.


















Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


Abstract

   This memo explores the possible areas of extensions to MIPv6 route
   optimization in the considerations of multihomed nodes.  The
   intention is to raise awareness in the research community, leading to
   a possible extension to RFC 4651.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Multihomed Mobile Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Approaches for Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.2.1.  Mobile Node with Multiple Home Addresses . . . . . . .  4
       2.2.2.  Mobile Node with Multiple Care-of Addresses  . . . . .  6
     2.3.  Security Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.  Multihomed Correspondent Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.1.  Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.2.  Approaches for Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.3.  Security Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  Multihomed Anchor Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.1.  Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.2.  Approaches for Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.3.  Security Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.  Informative Reference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 20





















Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


1.  Introduction

   RFC 4651 [1] discussed and analyzed various techniques of optimizing
   the Route Optimization in Mobility Support in IPv6 (Mobile IPv6, or
   MIPv6) [2].  One area in which RFC 4651 had not considered, which was
   in fact mentioned as a future research area, is the consideration of
   multihomed nodes.

   As different access technologies continues to emerge, the likelihood
   of a node being multihomed increases.  Additionally, a node can enjoy
   various benefits, such as more resilience to link failures or network
   congestions, as documented in various literature (e.g. see [3], [4],
   [5]).  Thus, it could be expected that in future, a substantial
   portion of nodes involved in Mobile IPv6 signaling will be
   multihomed.

   Narayanan et. al provided a good analysis in the interaction of
   between various mobility and multihoming protocols in [6] from an
   architectural perspective.  The present memo is not meant to
   duplicate the work there.  Instead, it is our intention to analyze if
   there are opportunities for optimization when multihomed node is
   involved in Mobile IPv6 signaling.

   For this purpose, this memo first considers the case where the mobile
   node is multihomed in Section 2, and then the case where the
   correspondent node is multihomed in Section 3.  Finally, the case
   where the anchor node (i.e. home agent, mobility anchor point, etc)
   is multihomed will be considered in Section 4.























Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


2.  Multihomed Mobile Node

   The case where the mobile node is multihomed is covered in various
   literature, for example, see [5] [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].  As such,
   this analysis will only focus on those not covered by these
   literature.

2.1.  Scenario

   There are two main possibilities of a multihomed mobile node.  In the
   first case, the mobile node can have multiple home addresses.  This
   is possibly a result of the home network being multihomed, or the
   mobile node itself is subscribed to multiple mobility service
   providers.  In the second case, the mobile node can have multiple
   care-of addresses.  This is likely due to the mobile node attaching
   multiple interfaces to different access routers, or due to an access
   router advertising multiple prefixes.

   The first case is largely similar to a multihomed IPv6 node, and is
   currently being studied by the IETF SHIM6 Working Group.  As such,
   our analysis will be confined to those optimization that are possible
   with respect to the Mobile IPv6 signaling.

   Similarly, the second case of multiple care-of addresses was
   previously analyzed by the IETF Monami6 Working Group (currently, the
   WG is merged with other mobility related effort in the Mobility
   Extension Working Group).  Thus, we will limit our analysis to
   optimizing the signaling used in Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization.

2.2.  Approaches for Optimization

2.2.1.  Mobile Node with Multiple Home Addresses

   o  Including Multiple Home Addresses in Binding Update

      When a mobile node has multiple home addresses, it will need to
      send multiple binding updates to a correspondent node or home
      agent, one for each home address.  One way to reduce the number of
      signaling messages is thus to allow a binding update message to
      contain multiple home addresses -- i.e. multiple home address
      options in the destination header.  However, since the destination
      header would typically be processed before the mobility header, a
      cleaner way to do this might be to create new mobility option to
      carry the home address, and include multiple such options in the
      binding update message.






Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


   o  Re-using Care-of Keygen Tokens

      For route optimization signaling with a correspondent node, the
      mobile node need not perform separate return routability
      procedures for each of the home addresses.  Instead, one pair of
      HoTI/HoT message exchange for each home address is sufficient.
      The care-of keygen tokens can be used independently with each home
      keygen token.  Below illustrates the use of three home addresses
      with one care-of address.


          Mobile Node                                 Correspondent Node
              |                                                |
              |------- HoTI for HoA1 (tunneled via HA) ------->|
              |<---- HoT(HoK1) for HoA1 (tunneled via HA) -----|
              |------- HoTI for HoA2 (tunneled via HA) ------->|
              |<---- HoT(HoK2) for HoA1 (tunneled via HA) -----|
              |------- HoTI for HoA3 (tunneled via HA) ------->|
              |<---- HoT(HoK3) for HoA3 (tunneled via HA) -----|
              |-------------------- CoTI --------------------->|
              |<----------------- CoT(CoK) --------------------|
              |---------------- BU for HoA1 ------------------>|
              |---------------- BU for HoA2 ------------------>|
              |---------------- BU for HoA3 ------------------>|
              |                                                |

      Here, HoK1, HoK2, HoK3 are the home keygen tokens for the home
      addresses HoA1, HoA2, HoA3 of the mobile node respectively, and
      CoK is the care-of keygen token for the care-of address CoA of the
      mobile node.


   o  Binding Multiple Home Addresses in Correspondent Node

      If multiple home addresses is included in a single binding update
      message sent to the correspondent node, multiple home nonce
      indices must be specified as well.  The main consideration next is
      whether multiple mobility management key (Kbm) should be
      generated, one for each home address; or a single unified Kbm
      should be used.  Using multiple Kbm has the advantage of
      flexibility.  The mobile node may later choose to update the
      bindings associated to a single home address without having to
      generate a new Kbm. Using a single Kbm would be the more natural
      choice if multiple home addresses are specified in a single
      binding update.  This way, only one Authenticator value is needed.

      When multiple Kbm are used, multiple Authenticator values must be
      present in the binding update message.  A binding update message



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


      would be something similar to the following:


          IPv6 Header
              Source = MN's CoA
              Destination = CN
          Destination Header
              Home Address Option = MN's HoA1
              Home Address Option = MN's HoA2
              Home Address Option = MN's HoA3
          Mobility Header
              Message Type = Binding Update
              Nonce Indices Option
                 Home Nonce Index for HoA1
                 Care-of Nonce Index for CoA
              Nonce Indices Option
                 Home Nonce Index for HoA2
                 Care-of Nonce Index for CoA
              Nonce Indices Option
                 Home Nonce Index for HoA3
                 Care-of Nonce Index for CoA
              Binding Authorization Data
                 Authenticator value using keygen for HoA1
              Binding Authorization Data
                 Authenticator value using keygen for HoA2
              Binding Authorization Data
                 Authenticator value using keygen for HoA3

      The reader would note that this looks like a simple aggregation of
      three binding updates into a single message.  The complexity in
      processing such a binding update message may not be justified for
      the mere saving of bandwidth compared to the sending of three
      separate binding updates (one for each home address).

      The other alternative will be to use a single Kbm. In this case,
      the Kbm may be generated by:

           Kbm = SHA1 (HoK1 | HoK2 | HoK3 | CoK)

      Only one Authenticator value is needed in this case, although
      multiple Nonce Indices Options are still needed.


2.2.2.  Mobile Node with Multiple Care-of Addresses

   Binding of multiple care-of addresses to a home agent is already
   being developed in [8], and its security consideration discussed in
   [7] and [11].  As such, they would not be duplicated here.  Instead,



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


   we focus on the binding of multiple care-of addresses to a
   correspondent node, and some approaches to optimizing the signaling.

   o  Binding Multiple Care-of Addresses at Correspondent Node

      When a mobile node wishes to bind multiple care-of addresses to
      its home address at a correspondent node, the current approach
      specified in [8] is to use a Binding Identifier (BID) to reference
      each care-of address binding.  So, assuming a mobile node MN with
      three care-of addresses CoA1, CoA2, and CoA3, it will send one
      HoTI message and three CoTI messages (one for each care-of
      address) to the correspondent node CN.  After collecting the
      keygen tokens, it will send three binding update messages, one for
      each care-of address, and each with a different BID value.  This
      is illustrated below.


            Mobile Node                              Correspondent Node
          ----------------                           ------------------
          CoA1  CoA2  CoA3                                    |
            |     |     |------- HoTI (via HA) -------------->|
            |     |     |<------- HoT (via HA) ---------------|
            |------------------------ CoTI ------------------>|
            |<-------------------- CoT (CoK1) ----------------|
            |     |------------------ CoTI ------------------>|
            |     |<-------------- CoT (CoK2) ----------------|
            |     |     |------------ CoTI ------------------>|
            |     |     |<-------- CoT (CoK3) ----------------|
            |---------------- BU (BID=1, using Kbm1) -------->|
            |     |---------- BU (BID=2, using Kbm2) -------->|
            |     |     |---- BU (BID=3, using Kbm3) -------->|


      As we can see from above, the mobile node will need to gather
      three care-of keygen tokens (CoK1, CoK2, CoK3) and combine each of
      them with the home keygen token (HoK) to form three mobility
      management keys (Kbm1, Kbm2, and Kbm3).  Each of these keys is
      then used to protect the binding update message.

      The next logical step for optimization is to combine all the
      binding update messages into one message, or what is known a Bulk
      BU.  This means that multiple care-of addresses are included in
      the Bulk BU message.  As in Section 2.2.1, we could continue to
      use multiple Authenticator values or a single Authenticator value.
      Using multiple Authenticator values would mean using each of the
      three keys Kbm1, Kbm2 and Kbm3 to generate a cryptographic
      checksum of the Bulk BU.  Using a single Authenticator value means
      that the care-of keygen tokens should be combined to form a single



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


      key, Kbm*, possibly given by:

           Kbm* = SHA1 (HoK | CoK1 | CoK2 | CoK3)

      With this, only one Authenticator value is needed, although
      multiple Nonce Indices Options is still required in the Binding
      Update message to contain all the care-of nonce indices.  The
      Authenticator value given by

           First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (Kbm*, (care-of address
                                        | correspondent | BU)))

      could either remain the same and use the care-of address that
      appears as the source of the binding update in the calculation, or
      one could change the Authenticator value into the following to use
      all three care-of addresses:

           First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (Kbm*, (CoA1 | CoA2 | CoA3
                                        | correspondent | BU)))


   o  Optimizing based on Usage of Care-of Addresses

      Another approach to optimization would be to remove redundant
      signaling based on the usage of care-of addresses.  Return
      routability procedure establishes the validity of a care-of
      address as a source address of a packet sent from the home
      address, and the reachability of the home address at the care-of
      address (when care-of address is used as destination).  If, in a
      scenario, it is not necessary to establish both the validity and
      the reachability of a care-of address, then one could reduce the
      amount of signaling messages needed in the return routability
      procedure to establish only the needed characteristics of the
      care-of address.  It is not possible to do so with only one
      care-of address, since a pair of packet exchange is required to
      prove anything.  However, with multiple care-of addresses, such
      optimization becomes possible.

      In one example, a mobile node MN with multiple care-of addresses
      (CoA1 and CoA2) could assign different usage for each of its
      care-of addresses.  For instance, CoA1 could be only used for
      transmitting data to the correspondent node CN, whereas CoA2 is
      only used for receiving data from CN.  In this case, it is not
      necessary to establish the reachability of CoA1 as a destination
      address.  Neither is it useful to establish the validity of CoA2
      as a source address.  An approach for optimization is thus to send
      a CoTI from CoA1 to CN.  In this CoTI message, it is indicated
      that CoA1 is a transmit-only address and CoA2 is specified as a



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


      receive-only address.  CN then generates the paired care-of keygen
      token, PCoK, using

           PCoK = First (64, HMAC_SHA1 (Kcn, (CoA1 | CoA2 | nonce | 3)))

      The last octet '3' is used to differentiate the PCoK from a normal
      CoK.  This included in a CoT message that is sent to the receive-
      only care-of address CoA2.  Finally, to complete the optimized
      return routability procedure (which could be aptly termed as
      "Paired Return Routability Procedure"), MN sends a binding update
      message to CN.  The binding update message is sent from CoA1, and
      includes new option to indicate that the source address is a
      transmit-only address and specify that CoA2 is a receive-only
      address.  The Authenticator value is given by

           First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (PKbm, (CoA1 | CoA2
                                        | correspondent | BU)))

      where the paired mobility management key, PKbm, is given by

           PKbm = SHA1 ( HoK | PCoK )

      If a binding acknowledgement is sent, it should be sent to the
      receive-only care-of address CoA2.  The message sequence
      illustrates the paired return routability procedure.


            Mobile Node                             Correspondent Node
           ------------                             ------------------
            CoA1  CoA2                                      |
              |--------------- HoTI (via HA) -------------->|
              |     |<--------- HoT (via HA) ---------------|
              |-------------- CoTI (pair=CoA2) ------------>|
              |     |<---------- CoT (PCoK) ----------------|
              |--------------- BU (Pair=CoA2) ------------->|
              |     |<------------- BAck -------------------|


      The CN must in this case record in its binding cache that CoA1 is
      only used to receive data from MN, and CoA2 is only used to
      transmit data to MN.


   o  Optimizing based on Network Infrastructure

      The above pairing of care-of addresses can also be used within a
      controlled network infrastructure, such as those provided by
      cellular operators, or a network with Source Address Validation



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


      Architecture (SAVA) in place.  Characteristics of such a network
      infrastructure is that it guarantees the reachability of an
      address as a destination address if the validity of the address as
      a source address is proven, and vice versa.  This can be achieved,
      for instance in a cellular operator controlled network with
      aggressive ingress filtering on all network components.

      With such a network infrastructure in place, it is no longer
      necessary for a correspondent node to use both the CoTI and CoT
      messages to establish the reachability of a care-of address as a
      destination address and validity of the care-of address as a
      source address.  Since establishing one characteristic (eg.
      validity as source) implies the other (eg. reachability as
      destination), the CoTI and CoT messages can be used to test two
      care-of addresses.  This optimization is similar to the pairing of
      two care-of addresses in the above discussion of Paired Return
      Routability Procedure.


2.3.  Security Threats

   At first glance, it seems that the inclusion of multiple home
   addresses (see Section 2.2.1) and multiple care-of addresses (see
   Section 2.2.2) in a single binding update message would not expose
   the recipient to additional security threats other than those already
   existed in the original binding update mechanism of RFC 3775 (see
   [12]).  Similarly, the use of the Pairing Return Routability
   Procedure does not seems to have additional security concerns
   compared with using multiple Return Routability procedures, if the
   assumptions behind its usage are valid (i.e. care-of addresses are
   used for transmitting or receiving only, or the underlying network
   infrastructure guarantees the reachability or validity given one is
   proven).  This is because these optimizations utilize all components
   of the original return routability procedure -- they merely optimize
   by merging some messages into one.  Of-course, it is only prudent for
   one to analyze the security threats more rigorously before actually
   adopting any of these optimizations.  The author hereby invites
   interested researchers to do so, and discuss the security
   implications for inclusion in future version of this draft.












Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


3.  Multihomed Correspondent Node

3.1.  Scenario

   There are two main possibilities why a correspondent node can be
   multihomed.  Firstly, the correspondent node can be on a multihomed
   site.  Secondly, the correspondent node may be using multiple
   interfaces.  In both cases, the correspondent node would configure
   multiple addresses, and may use more than one address when
   communicating with the mobile node.  Such communications may take the
   form of:

   o  Single Session: with the use of multihoming-capable protocols such
      as Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [13], or Site
      Multihoming by Intermediation (Shim6) [14], the correspondent node
      and mobile node may be having only a single transport session,
      even though multiple addresses are used.

   o  Multiple Sessions: the correspondent node may wish to perform load
      balancing between its multiple addresses such that, for instance,
      audio streams would use one address while video stream uses
      another address when having a video conference session with the
      mobile node.

   In both of the forms, the packet data unit (PDU) received by the IP
   layer of the mobile node from the upper layers will be addressed to
   multiple addresses belonging to the correspondent node.  In the
   Single Session case, the SCTP or SHIM6 protocol layer will split the
   traffic stream into different PDUs to be sent to different addresses
   of the correspondent node.  In the Multiple Sessions case, the
   applications will open different sessions addressed to different
   addresses of the correspondent node.  Either way, the Mobile IP layer
   will not be aware of the fact that all these different addresses
   belong to the same physical node.  When route optimization is
   attempted, the mobile node will initiate return routability procedure
   with each and every of the correspondent node's addresses, oblivious
   to the fact that only one set of return routability procedure is
   needed to bind its care-of address to its home address at the
   correspondent node.

3.2.  Approaches for Optimization

   Approaches to eliminate such redundant signaling would involve making
   the Mobile IP layer of the mobile node aware that the addresses all
   belongs to the same correspondent node.  In one approach, special
   application programming interface (API) is provided to allow upper
   layers to link a set of addresses as belonging to a single entity.
   This will allow SCTP, Shim6 or other multihoming protocols to inform



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


   the Mobile IP layer that route optimization is enabled with all the
   addresses in the linked set as long as return routability procedure
   is successfully conducted with one of the addresses in the linked
   set.  The disadvantage of this approach is that it relies on upper
   layers to utilize the newly provided API.  Old, unmaintained programs
   would not be able to do so, resulting in redundant signaling.

   Another approach is for the correspondent node to inform the mobile
   node of all its addresses upon receiving the first signaling message
   from the mobile node.  This may be any one of the Home Test Init,
   Care-of Test Init or Binding Update messages.  Upon responding with
   the Home Test, Care-of Test or Binding Acknowledgment messages, the
   correspondent node may include the list of addresses it owns, so that
   the mobile node would know that it need not repeat the return
   routability procedure with these addresses.

3.3.  Security Threats

   There are security threats that needs to be analyzed for the second
   approach.  Two aspects of the threat analysis should be covered:

   o  the threats on the mobile node

      This is generally the case where a malicious correspondent node
      sends back a list of fake addresses.  This would cause the mobile
      node to wrongly assume that route optimization with an address is
      established when it is in fact not.

      To illustrate how this can be used as an attack, consider a mobile
      node MN having communications with two correspondent nodes CN1 and
      CN2.  Suppose that CN1 is malicious such that when MN attempts to
      perform route optimization with CN1, it informs MN that it also
      owns the address of CN2.  This would trick MN into thinking that
      it has already established route optimization with CN2.  Packets
      sent to CN2 from MN would thus be using the care-of address of MN
      as source and containing the home address destination option.
      However, since CN2 does not actually have a binding cache entry of
      the care-of address and home address of MN, these packets will be
      discarded, thus causing a denial-of service.

   o  the threats on the correspondent node

      This is generally the case where a malicious node initiate return
      routability procedure with a correspondent node, tricking it to
      revealing the list of addresses it owns.  This does not seems to
      be a serious threat at first glance, since if the correspondent
      node does not wish its list of addresses to be known, it can
      always be configured to not return the list of addresses.



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


   To eliminate the security threat to the mobile node, the mobile node
   would probably need to perform a test on the list of addresses it
   received.  A simple echo and response test on the addresses using the
   route optimized path would suffice.  For instance, consider a mobile
   node MN communicating with a correspondent node CN with three
   addresses, CN.Addr1, CN.Addr2, and CN.Addr3.  Upon initiating route
   optimization with CN.Addr1, MN receives the list of addresses from CN
   that claims to own CN.Addr2 and CN.Addr3 as well.  To test the
   validity of this claim, MN needs to send a, say, ICMP Echo Request
   message to each of CN.Addr2 and CN.Addr3.  Each IMCP Echo Request
   message would assume route optimization is achieved, i.e. each
   message will use the care-of address of MN as the source address, and
   contain the home address of MN in the home address destination
   option.  If the addresses CN.Addr2 and CN.Addr3 are valid, MN will
   receive ICMP Echo response message from each of these addresses.  The
   ICMP Echo Response messages should also contain the care-of address
   of MN as the source address and have a type 2 routing header bearing
   the home address of MN.  Such a test adds one more pair of message
   exchange per correspondent node address, but it is still better than
   the six messages required by return routability if the mobile node
   did not know that the addresses belong to the same node.

   It is possible to further optimize the number of signaling by adding
   an option in the ICMP Echo Request message sent to CN.Addr2, such
   that the ICMP Echo Response message will be sent via CN.Addr3.  This
   way, we eliminate another pair of message exchange.  The figure below
   illustrates this.


       Mobile Node                               Correspondent Node
       -----------                              ---------------------
           |                                    Addr1   Addr2   Addr3
           |----------- HoTI (via HA) ----------->|       |       |
           |<----------- HoT (via HA) ------------|       |       |
           |---------------- CoTI --------------->|       |       |
           |<--------------- CoT -----------------|       |       |
           |----------------- BU ---------------->|       |       |
           |<--- BAck (specify: Addr2, Addr3) ----|       |       |
           |----------- ICMP Echo Req ------------------->|       |
           |<-----------ICMP Echo Resp ---------------------------|

   One could of-course use binding update and binding acknowledgement
   messages to replace the ICMP Echo request and response messages.








Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


4.  Multihomed Anchor Node

4.1.  Scenario

   In this section, multihomed anchor points are considered.  Anchor
   points include home agents in Mobile IPv6 and NEMO Basic Support,
   mobility anchor points (MAP) in Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6)
   [15], and local mobility anchor (LMA) in Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIP)
   [16].  We would largely concentrate on the Mobile IPv6 or NEMO home
   agents at this point, although most of the discussions should be
   equally applicable to mobility anchor points and local mobility
   anchors as well.

   As home agents (and anchor points in generally) are routers by
   definition, they would usually have multiple interfaces (and thus
   multihomed).  In this document, we are only interested in the case
   when a home agent has multiple global addresses configured on its
   egress interface(s) such that a mobile node that is away from the
   home link can contact the home agent via multiple paths.  This
   scenario usually means that the home agent is connected to multiple
   egress routers, and each of the home agent's address would be
   reachable via one egress routers.  Another possible scenario is when
   the home agent is managing separate home links, possibly configuring
   a different home agent address on the each home link.

4.2.  Approaches for Optimization

   In the case where the home agent has different egress routes, one
   possible optimization is to let the mobile node knows the network
   characteristics of each egress path.  This allows the mobile node to
   (1) select which egress path to use when tunneling packets to the
   home agent, and (2) request the home agent to use a particular egress
   route when forwarding packets to the correspondent node or mobile
   node.

   o  Informing mobile node egress characteristics of home agent

      Information on the egress characteristics of the home agent can be
      transmitted to the mobile node by attaching them onto the Binding
      Acknowledgement message as new options, or be sent using existing
      protocol by running it over the bi-directional tunnel between the
      mobile node and the home agent.

   o  Tunneling packets from mobile node to home agent

      With the information on the egress characteristics of the home
      agent, the mobile node can then select the appropriate path to
      reach the home agent when tunneling packets to the home agent for



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


      forwarding.  This assumes that there are multiple globally
      routable unicast addresses of the home agent for the mobile node
      to choose from, and using one such home agent address implies the
      choosing one particular path to reach the home agent.

   o  Forwarding packets to correspondent node

      Once the home agent received a packet to be forwarded to a
      correspondent node, the home agent will need to choose which of
      its available egress path it can use to forward the packet out.
      One way is to simply forward the packet out the same way as it was
      received -- since the mobile node chooses to tunnel this packet
      via a particular egress interface of the home agent, it makes
      sense to assume that the mobile node would want the packet to be
      forwarded to the correspondent node via the same egress interface.
      Another alternative is to allow the mobile node to explicitly
      specify which egress interface to use by using new options in the
      Destination Header of the tunnel packet.

   o  Forwarding packets to mobile node

      When the home agent intercepted a packet to be forwarded to the
      mobile node, the home agent will need to choose which of its
      available egress path it can use to forward the packet out.  The
      obvious approach to allow this is to use similar concept of the
      flow binding mechanism [17] currently being developed by the MExt
      Working Group, and allows each flow binding filter to specify
      which egress interface of the home agent to use for (in addition
      to which care-of address of the mobile node to use) for a given
      flow.

   In the case where the home agent is managing separate home links, a
   possible scenario is for a mobile node to subscribe to multiple home
   links managed by the same home agent.  The mobile node may sees
   different home agent addresses on different home links and think they
   are separate entities.  A small optimization here would be for the
   home agent to inform the mobile node that it owns the different home
   agent addresses.  This way, the mobile node can specify multiple home
   addresses in a single binding update to the home agent (see Section
   Section 2.2.1).

4.3.  Security Threats

   As signaling between the home agent and the mobile node is protected
   by security association, there are no third party security threats.
   A home agent may falsely claim to be multihomed -- but obviously, if
   a home agent has malicious intent or is compromised, it can do much
   more harm to the mobile node then claiming to own addresses it does



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


   not actually own.


5.  Conclusion

   This memo explores the use of multihoming and mobility protocols
   simultaneously, and investigates specifically if there are further
   enhancements that can be done in such situations.  We had analyzed
   the cases where the mobile node, the correspondent node, and the
   anchor point are multihomed, and discussed various possible
   optimizations in each case.



6.  Informative Reference

   [1]   Vogt, C. and J. Arkko, "A Taxonomy and Analysis of Enhancements
         to Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization", RFC 4651, February 2007.

   [2]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [3]   Abley, J., Black, B., and V. Gill, "Goals for IPv6 Site-
         Multihoming Architectures", RFC 3582, August 2003.

   [4]   Bagnulo, M. and J. Abley, "Applicability Statement for the
         Level 3 Multihoming Shim Protocol (Shim6)",
         draft-ietf-shim6-applicability-03 (work in progress),
         July 2007.

   [5]   Ernst, T., Montavont, N., Wakikawa, R., Ng, C., and K.
         Kuladinithi, "Motivations and Scenarios for Using Multiple
         Interfaces and Global  Addresses",
         draft-ietf-monami6-multihoming-motivation-scenario-03 (work in
         progress), May 2008.

   [6]   Narayanan, V., Thaler, D., Bagnulo, M., and H. Soliman, "IP
         Mobility and Multi-homing Interactions and Architectural
         Considerations",
         draft-vidya-ip-mobility-multihoming-interactions-01 (work in
         progress), July 2007.

   [7]   Montavont, N., Wakikawa, R., Ernst, T., Ng, C., and K.
         Kuladinithi, "Analysis of Multihoming in Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-monami6-mipv6-analysis-05 (work in progress),
         May 2008.

   [8]   Wakikawa, R., Devarapalli, V., Ernst, T., and K. Nagami,



Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


         "Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration",
         draft-ietf-monami6-multiplecoa-08 (work in progress), May 2008.

   [9]   Ng, C. and T. Ernst, "Multiple Access Interfaces for Mobile
         Nodes and Networks", 12th IEEE International Conference on
         Networks, Vol 2, Pages 774-779, 2004.

   [10]  Ng, C., Ernst, T., Paik, E., and M. Bagnulo, "Analysis of
         Multihoming in Network Mobility Support", RFC 4980,
         October 2007.

   [11]  Lim, B., Ng, C., and K. Aso, "Verification of Care-of Addresses
         in Multiple Bindings Registration",
         draft-lim-mext-multiple-coa-verify-01 (work in progress),
         February 2008.

   [12]  Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V., and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to
         Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home
         Agents", RFC 3776, June 2004.

   [13]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Sharp, C., Schwarzbauer,
         H., Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M., Zhang, L., and V.
         Paxson, "Stream Control Transmission Protocol", RFC 2960,
         October 2000.

   [14]  Nordmark, E. and M. Bagnulo, "Shim6: Level 3 Multihoming Shim
         Protocol for IPv6", draft-ietf-shim6-proto-10 (work in
         progress), February 2008.

   [15]  Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El Malki, K., and L. Bellier,
         "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)",
         RFC 4140, August 2005.

   [16]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K., and
         B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-netlmm-proxymip6-18
         (work in progress), May 2008.

   [17]  Soliman, H., Montavont, N., Fikouras, N., and K. Kuladinithi,
         "Flow Bindings in Mobile IPv6 and Nemo Basic Support",
         draft-ietf-mext-flow-binding-00 (work in progress), May 2008.


Appendix A.  Change Log

   o  draft-ng-mobopts-multihoming-02:

      *  Added Section for "Multihomed Anchor Points"




Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


   o  draft-ng-mobopts-multihoming-01:

      *  Added Section for "Multihomed MN"

      *  Re-organized "Multihomed CN" and added discussion on mitigating
         the security threats

   o  draft-ng-mobopts-multihoming-00:

      *  Initial version.









































Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Chan-Wah Ng
   Panasonic Singapore Laboratories Pte Ltd
   Blk 1022 Tai Seng Ave #06-3530
   Tai Seng Industrial Estate
   Singapore  534415
   SG

   Phone: +65 65505420
   Email: chanwah.ng@sg.panasonic.com


   Keigo Aso
   Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. (Panasonic)
   5-3 Hikarino-oka
   Yokosuka, Kanagawa  239-0847
   JP

   Phone: +81 46 840 5123
   Email: asou.keigo@jp.panasonic.com






























Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming          July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Ng & Aso                 Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 20]

