
                                                                      S. Van den Bosch 
                  Internet Draft                                             M. Buchli 
                  Document: draft-vandenbosch-nsis-resilience-                 Alcatel 
                  00.txt 
                  Expires: December 2002                                     June 2002 
                   
                   
                                         NSIS resilience analysis 
                   
                   
               Status of this Memo 
                   
                  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
                  with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
                   
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
                  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
                  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
                  Drafts. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
                  months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
                  at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
                  reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
                   
                  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
                  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
                       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                   
                   
               Abstract 
                   
                  The Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS) working group is chartered to 
                  develop requirements, architecture and protocols for the next IETF 
                  steps in signaling Quality-of-Service (QoS). Although the NSIS 
                  protocol may eventually be used for other applications in addition 
                  to QoS, it is expected that these, in much the same way as QoS, will 
                  depend on predictable and high-availability service delivery. This 
                  document attempts to identify, list and classify potential 
                  resilience issues for the NSIS protocol. 
                
               Table of Contents 
                   
                  Status of this Memo................................................1 
                  Abstract...........................................................1 
                  Conventions used in this document..................................2 
                  1. Introduction....................................................2 
                  2. Terminology.....................................................2 
                  3. Assumptions and non-assumptions.................................3 
                  4. Design principles impacting resilience..........................4 
                  5. Failure description.............................................6 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires May 2002          1 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  6. Recovery issues.................................................7 
                  7. Reversion issues................................................9 
                  8. Conclusion.....................................................10 
                  9. Security Considerations........................................10 
                  References........................................................10 
                  Author's Addresses................................................10 
                  Full Copyright Statement..........................................10 
                   
               Conventions used in this document 
                   
                  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
                  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
                  this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
                   
                   
               1. Introduction 
                   
                  The Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS) working group is chartered to 
                  develop requirements, architecture and protocols for the next IETF 
                  steps in signaling Quality-of-Service (QoS). Although the NSIS 
                  protocol may eventually be used for other applications in addition 
                  to QoS, it is expected that these, in much the same way as QoS, will 
                  depend on predictable and high-availability service delivery. This 
                  particularly mandates an investigation into resilience issues. 
                   
                  Resilience typically involves two main cycles: a recovery cycle 
                  following the occurrence of a failure and a reversion cycle 
                  following a repair. The recovery cycle involves three major steps: 
                  failure detection (potentially enhanced with failure correlation and 
                  identification), failure notification and recovery actions. The 
                  reversion cycle involves repair, fault indication clearing and the 
                  reversion actions. This document attempts to identify several issues 
                  related to NSIS signalling following this two-cycle structure. 
                   
                  The remainder of the document is structured as follows. Section 2 
                  summarises important terminology. Section 3 lists assumptions and 
                  non-assumptions made in this document, including a rationale. 
                  Section 4 describes the NSIS design choices and principles that will 
                  impact protocol resilience. Section 5 gives an overview of potential 
                  failure conditions. Section 6 describes potential issues for the 
                  recovery cycle. Section 7 describes potential issues for the 
                  reversion cycle. Section 8 formulates some conclusions. 
                   
               2. Terminology 
                   
                  Rerouting: A recovery mechanism in which the recovery path or path 
                  segments are created dynamically after the detection of a fault on 
                  the working path. In other words, a recovery mechanism in which the 
                  recovery path is not pre-established.  
                       
                  Protection Switching: A recovery mechanism in which the recovery 
                  path or path segments are created prior to the detection of a fault 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     2 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  on the working path. In other words, a recovery mechanism in which 
                  the recovery path is pre-established. 
                   
                  Control plane: Aggregate of network functionalities including 
                  entities such as routing protocols, admission control, and signaling 
                   
                  Data plane: Aggregate of network functionalities where per-packet 
                  activities such as packet forwarding, queuing, conditioning and 
                  header editing occur (Per-flow packet conditioning may require 
                  interaction with control plane). 
                   
                  QoS domain: Subnetwork under a single administrative control and/or 
                  using a single QoS technology 
                   
                  QoS Initiator (QI): NSIS entity responsible for generating the QSCs 
                  for traffic flow(s) based on user or application requirements and 
                  signaling them to the network as well as invoking local QoS 
                  provisioning mechanisms. This can be located in the end system, but 
                  may reside elsewhere in the network. 
                   
                  QoS Controller (QC): NSIS entity responsible for interpreting the 
                  signaling carrying the user QoS parameters, optionally 
                  inserting/modifying the parameters according to local network QoS 
                  management policy, and invoking local QoS provisioning mechanisms. 
                  Note that the QoS controller might have very different functionality 
                  depending on where in the network and in what environment they are 
                  implemented. 
                   
                  QoS Receiver (QR): NSIS entity responsible for terminating the QSCs 
                  for traffic flow(s) based on user or application requirements and 
                  responding to them to the network as well as invoking local QoS 
                  provisioning mechanisms. This can be located in the end system, but 
                  may reside elsewhere in the network. 
                   
                  QoS Service Classes (QSC): Specification of the QoS requirements of 
                  a traffic flow or aggregate.  Can be further sub-divided into user 
                  specific and network related parameters 
                   
               3. Assumptions and non-assumptions 
                   
                  The discussion about several design choices for the NSIS protocol is 
                  still ongoing. The resilience discussion in this document, however, 
                  is intended to cover any useful combination of design choices made 
                  for the eventual protocol or protocols. Therefore, care has been 
                  taken not to presuppose any solution regarding the following 
                  subjects: 
                  - routing of signaling 
                  - reservation state 
                  Instead, these issues are described in section 4 and their impact on 
                  protocol resilience is investigated where appropriate. 
                   
                  However, in order to carry out this analysis, the following minimal 
                  assumptions were needed: 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     3 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  - terminology regarding the entities involved in the NSIS 
                  signalling. We have adopted the terminology used in the requirements 
                  and framework draft. Note that this model does not imply any choice 
                  with respect to routing of signalling. 
                  - indication of the type of messages that are used in the signalling 
                  protocol. From the [2] we assume that at least the following 
                  messages are present 
                     o NEW: Request for the set up of a new reservation  
                     o REFRESH: Refresh of an existing reservation (for soft-state) 
                     o TEAR: (Explicit) teardown of an existing reservation 
                     o ACK: Acknowledgement of an NSIS message 
                     o NACK: Negative acknowledgement of an NSIS message 
                   
               4. Design principles impacting resilience 
                   
               4.1.    In-band versus out-of-band signalling 
                   
                  In case of in-band signaling, the data path is equal to the 
                  signaling path. In this case, two options can be used for routing 
                  the signaling messages between two NSIS entities: 
                  - End-to-end routing (like RSVP), requires QI, QC and QR to be on 
                  the datapath (e.g. in the endhost, router). The source address is 
                  that of the QI, the destination address that of the QR. The routing 
                  of the signalling messages is the same as for data packets. 
                  - Hop-by-hop routing can be used to explicitly send signaling 
                  messages to the next NSIS hop (which may be one or more IP hops 
                  away). This can be done by means of direct addressing, in which case 
                  the destination address for the signalling message is the next NSIS 
                  hop. This means that the source and destination address of the data 
                  flow need to be present in the payload of the signaling message. 
                  Another alternative is the use of (IPSEC) tunnels between adjacent 
                  NSIS entities. In this case, the QC needs to determine the next NSIS 
                  hop which may imply a non-standard L3 routing decision for routing 
                  of signaling. 
                  In-band signaling implies fate sharing between control and data 
                  plane. 
                   
                  With out-of-band, data and signalling path may be different. This 
                  means that the QC needs to ensure route alignment between data plane 
                  and control plane. In this case, only hop-by-hop routing of the 
                  signaling messages is possible. It also requires determination of 
                  the NSIS next hop, which may be more than one domain away. In case 
                  out-of-band signaling is used there is no intrinsic fate sharing 
                  between control and data plane. There may be a failure in the data 
                  plane while the control plane is working properly, or the other way 
                  around. However, a failure in the data plane may cause the control 
                  plane to fail as well in certain cases (the signaling and data 
                  packets use the same network). 
                   
               4.2.    Reservation state 
                   
                  The type of reservation state that is kept in QI, QC and QR will 
                  have critical impact on the resilience of the nsis protocol.  
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     4 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  Essentially, two decisions regarding the reservation state have to 
                  be made. The protocol can keep per-flow or per-class state and hard-
                  state or soft-state. 
                   
                  Hard state requires that reservations will be made at the time of 
                  call setup and will remain in place until they are explicitly 
                  released. This requires route pinning for the data flow in order to 
                  ensure that the reserved resources match with the data plane path. 
                  Keeping hard-state strongly reduces the amount of signalling traffic 
                  in the network but involves the risk of leaving stale state in the 
                  network after failures. Soft state uses periodic refreshes to update 
                  the state of existing reservations in the network. This means that 
                  old state is removed automatically when a reservation is not 
                  refreshed within a certain time interval and that standard L3 
                  routing can be used for the reservation setup. 
                   
                  Per-flow reservation state means that state for each individual 
                  accepted reservation is maintained. Per-class state means that the 
                  admission control entity only maintains the sum of the reservations 
                  of all flows with identical QoS requirements for each of the links 
                  or trunks in the network. It is the minimum amount of state needed 
                  for admission control. It is envisaged that the QI and QR will 
                  always keep per-flow state. For scalability reasons, it may be more 
                  appropriate for the QC to keep only per-class state. If no per-flow 
                  state is kept, the QC cannot relate network events to affected 
                  flows. It is therefore dependent on the frequency of the signaling 
                  messages originated by the QI/QR to provide feedback. 
                   
               4.3.    NSIS hierarchy 
                   
                  In principle, the NSIS protocol or protocols can be used in a nested 
                  hierarchy. A new NSIS signalling session could be triggered by a 
                  higher layer of NSIS signalling. This situation is depicted on the 
                  picture below where (a) indicates global NSIS operation and (b) 
                  refers to local NSIS operation. 
                   
                              +--+ (a) +--+       (a)       +--+ (a) +---+ 
                           +->|QI|---->|QC|---------------->|QC|---->| QR|-+ 
                           |  +--+    /+--+\               /+--+\    +---+ | 
                           |        /        \           /        \        v 
                  +--+(b)+--+  +--+(b)+--+(b)+--+   +--+(b)+--+(b)+--+   +--+(b) +--+ 
                  |QI|-->|QR|  |QI|-->|QC|-->|QR|   |QI|-->|QC|-->|QR|   |QI|----|QR| 
                  +--+   +--+  +--+   +--+   +--+   +--+   +--+   +--+   +--+    +--+ 
                   
                  When a failure happens in such a situation, care must be taken to 
                  avoid a race condition between both protection actions. It is 
                  generally preferable to allow the lower layer to apply protection 
                  first. This means that hold-off timers need to be foreseen in NSIS 
                  indicating the time that needs to elapse before a protection action 
                  may be taken. 
                   
               4.4.    Reliable transport of NSIS messages 
                   
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     5 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  It is a requirement for NSIS signalling to be reliable. Reliability 
                  can be achieved by providing reliable transport of NSIS signalling 
                  messages and/or by including some acknowledgement and retransmission 
                  capabilities within the NSIS protocol itself. 
                   
               4.5.    Peer discovery or backup entities 
                   
                  Peer discovery of NSIS entities is seen as a preliminary phase prior 
                  to NSIS protocol operation. The requirements for the peer discovery 
                  protocol, however, will differ significantly when backup NSIS 
                  entities are foreseen compared to when new peering relations are set 
                  up online after a failure condition. 
                   
               5. Failure description 
                   
               5.1.    Internal data plane failures 
                   
                  Data plane failures can result from the breakdown or 
                  misconfiguration of data path entities such as routers or links. In 
                  case of a router, the failure can be due to a power outage, a 
                  software crash or hardware failure, e.g. interface cards. Link 
                  failures can be due to defective interface cards or to lower layer 
                  failures such as cable cuts. 
                  We make a distinction between data plane failures that are internal 
                  to a QoS domain and failures at the edges of a QoS domain (In case 
                  of a QoS domain consisting of a single router, an internal failure 
                  can occur when a component link in a link bundle attached to the 
                  router fails). Internal data plane failures should be solved locally 
                  and should not involve NSIS signalling when succesful.  
                   
               5.2.    External data plane failures 
                   
                  Edge failures can for instance occur when an Autonomous System 
                  Border Router (ASBR) or the link between two ASBRs goes down. 
                  Recovery from this type of failures requires a coordinated action 
                  between two or more QoS domains and will therefore impact NSIS 
                  signalling. 
                   
               5.3.    Control plane failures 
                   
                  Two main types of control plane failures are distinguished: 
                  - Failure of an NSIS entity, e.g. a QI, QC or QR failure. If the QI 
                  is located at the end host, the end host is also considered to be 
                  part of the control plane of the NSIS signalling. 
                  - Loss of signalling messages between NSIS entities 
                   
               5.4.    QoS degradation 
                   
                  A failure does not necessarily have to equal a loss of connectivity. 
                  In a QoS-enabled environment, a degradation of the perceived 
                  performance on the data path can also be categorised as a failure. 
                  It may be important to distinguish these failures from a 'hard' 
                  failure (involving loss of connectivity) in order to support 
                  hierarchical protection. 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     6 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                   
               6. Recovery issues 
                   
               6.1.    Failure detection 
                   
                  In the data plane, node failures can be detected from the absence of 
                  hello messages from the Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP). Link 
                  failure indications can usually be derived from of lower-layer 
                  failure indications (loss of light, loss of signal). In case of 
                  logical links, failure detection can be more problematic and must 
                  either take place via the hello protocol or via a specific OAM 
                  procedure. 
                   
                  In the control plane, NSIS failure detection involves the following 
                  issues: 
                  - When the QI is different from the end host, QI and end host need 
                  to be aware of each others failures. Two factors can complicate this 
                  problem. First, the QI may keep hard-state related to the end-host 
                  requests because the overhead of refreshes is deemed excessive. In 
                  this case, state refreshes can not be used as a failure detection 
                  mechanism. Second, the end host is not necessarily an NSIS speaker, 
                  which means that the detection mechanism must be supported outside 
                  of NSIS signalling. One potential solution is the use of higher and 
                  or lower layer triggers in the QI. This means that the QI should 
                  have higher/lower layer information available. 
                  - When an NSIS entity is protected by a backup entity, a 
                  synchronisation failure between the two entities needs to be 
                  detected prior to the protection switch. Since both entities will be 
                  NSIS speakers, this functionality could be implemented in the NSIS 
                  protocol. 
                  - In case of hop-by-hop routing of the NSIS signalling messages,  a 
                  failure detection mechanism is required in NSIS, even when the 
                  communication between NSIS entities is done with a reliable 
                  transport mechanism. This is caused by the fact that the transport 
                  signalling is terminated at each NSIS hop. This means that messages 
                  can be lost in an NSIS entity without the transport layer noticing 
                  it. 
                   
               6.2.    Failure notification 
                   
                  Any failure notification needed in the data plane, e.g. from lower 
                  layers, should normally be transparent to NSIS. An issue can arise 
                  for external failures. 
                  - If a failure of an external link or node is detected, a route 
                  change might be required in order to perform the recovery action. In 
                  that case, the failure should be notified to the QI if only per-
                  class state is kept in the QC. 
                  For control plane failures, an issue might arise when only per-class 
                  state is kept. 
                  - When only per-class state is kept, which might for instance occur 
                  in a QC in order to reduce information storage, the QC cannot 
                  reroute the LSP without a message from the QI. This means that this 
                  situation is only feasible in combination with soft-state. In that 
                  case, the QC needs to notify the QI about the failure in response to 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     7 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  the next refresh message, that therefore needs to contain an 
                  identification of the QI. 
                  - The failing reservation may be part of a service consisting of 
                  multiple such flows. An obvious example is a bi-directional service. 
                  It would seem appropriate for each flow to be protected separately 
                  and for the service not to be impacted when the protection action is 
                  successful. However, it would make little sense to keep one 
                  direction up when the other goes down. This would imply notification 
                  of the QI/QR of the flows making up the service in case of 
                  unsuccessful protection. 
                   
               6.3.    Recovery action 
                   
                  The definition of a recovery strategy typically involves a decision 
                  on: 
                  - the scope of the protection action: this can be end-to-end path 
                  protection or local segment protection. We have already seen that 
                  the use of per-class state in the QC will prevent the application of 
                  local segment protection for external failures. 
                  - the timing of the protection action: protection paths can be pre-
                  computed and pre-established in which case only a switch from 
                  primary to protection path is needed when a failure occurs. If the 
                  computation and/or establishment of the protection path is started 
                  after failure detection (rerouting), an additional recovery delay is 
                  introduced. 
                  - resource allocation on the protection paths: resource reservation 
                  on protection paths prior to failure is very inefficient and leads 
                  to excessive usage of network capacity for protection purposes. This 
                  can be avoided by not reserving capacity on the protection path. In 
                  this case, however, the availability of the protection path can not 
                  be guaranteed when a failure occurs. Alternatively, protection 
                  capacity can be shared between protection paths that are unlikely to 
                  fail simultaneously. For this, a limited number of failure scenarios 
                  (e.g. single node or single link failures) is assumed. Sharing 
                  protection capacity is highly complicated by the interdomain scope 
                  of the NSIS signalling because of the lack of detailed information 
                  on the failure states and the primary path. 
                  Recovery on the control plane may involve any of the following 
                  issues: 
                  - If a failure can only be solved by means of a change of the 
                  interdomain path of the flow, the QC might be required to force a 
                  route change from the QI. Note that this can occur without any data 
                  plane failure when the QC of a QoS domain fails and the QCs of 
                  neighbouring domains want to bring up peering relations with QCs 
                  that are not realted to the next hop on the data path. 
                  - When only per-class state is kept in a QC and a setup message is 
                  lost, retransmission of the setup message may cause duplicate 
                  reservations in QoS domains upstream of the point where the loss 
                  occurred. In case of soft-state, this situation will last for 
                  several refresh intervals. Note that the impact of this type of 
                  failure can be restricted by the use of reliable transport between 
                  NSIS entities. 
                  - In case of a QI or QR failure, the QC immediately following or 
                  preceding the failing entity may need to take up some proxy 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     8 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  functionality for the failing entity. This functionality is optional 
                  for sending out teardown messages when soft-state is used, but 
                  mandatory for hard-state. It is also mandatory for replying to 
                  teardown messages, e.g. originating from the QI. 
                  - If the QoS Initiator does not receive a response on a signaling 
                  message within a certain time interval it will consider it as lost. 
                  It may decide to retransmit the signaling message. Therefore, the 
                  QoS Initiator must be able to make sure that the received ACK is not 
                  a delayed ACK from the previous transmitted signaling message. The 
                  signaling messages should therefore include a sequence number in 
                  order to associate a request (NEW, TEAR, REFRESH) with a response 
                  (ACK, NACK). 
                   
               7. Reversion issues 
                   
               7.1.    Repair detection 
                   
                  No issues are identified for the data plane. 
                   
                  For the control plane, repair detection will most likely occur by 
                  means of discovery messages initiated by the repaired NSIS entity. 
                  It is proposed that this discovery process could be a preliminary 
                  phase prior to the NSIS protocol and can therefore remain out of its 
                  scope. It is nevertheless crucial that such a discovery protocol is 
                  standardised in order to allow NSIS entities from different vendors 
                  to discover each other. 
                   
               7.2.    Repair notification 
                   
                  Repair notification will normally take place by means of the IGP in 
                  the data plane. 
                   
                  In the control plane, repair notification may be needed when a QC 
                  has taken up some proxy functionality for the QI or QC. However, no 
                  special action should be needed for this since this information can 
                  be inferred from the repair detection. 
                   
               7.3.    Reversion action 
                   
                  On the data plane, reversion is unavoidable when in-band signaling 
                  is used because the signaling messages will follow the new data 
                  plane route. This might cause issues because resources are typically 
                  not reserved on the new route, which might cause (temporary) QoS 
                  degradation on the new route. In case of out-of-band signaling 
                  reversion may be avoided by means of route pinning. However, it will 
                  usually be advantageous to move to a more favourable route when one 
                  becomes available, both from a performance and resource utilisation 
                  point of view. In that case, the separation of data plane and 
                  control plane might help delaying the route change until sufficient 
                  resources are reserved on the new path. 
                   
                  From a control plane perspective, reversion makes little sense when 
                  backup NSIS entities are used. In that case, the reversion action 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002     9 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  will be limited to a synchronisation with the currently active NSIS 
                  entity. The repaired entity will then become the backup. 
                   
               8. Conclusion 
                   
                  This document identified, listed and classified potential resilience 
                  issues for the NSIS protocol. 
                   
               9. Security Considerations 
                   
                  TBC 
                   
               Reference
                   
                  1  RFC 2119 Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                     Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
                   
                  2  B. Braden, B. Lindell, " A Two-Level Architecture for Internet 
                     Signaling," work in progress, draft-braden-2level-signal-arch-
                     00.txt 
                               
               Author's Addresses 
                   
                  Sven Van den Bosch 
                  Alcatel 
                  Francis Wellesplein 1        Phone:  32-3-240-8103 
                  B-2018 Antwerpen             Email:  sven.van_den_bosch@alcatel.be 
                  Belgium 
                   
                  Maarten Buchli 
                  Alcatel 
                  Francis Wellesplein 1        Phone:  32-3-240-7081 
                  B-2018 Antwerpen             Email:  maarten.buchli@alcatel.be 
                  Belgium 
                   
               Full Copyright Statement 
                
                  "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
                  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
                  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
                  or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
                  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
                  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
                  are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
                  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
                  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
                  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
                  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
                  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
                  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
                  English. 
                   
                  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
                  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This 
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002    10 
                                      NSIS resilience analysis              June 2002 
                   
                  document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
                  IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
                  FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
                  NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
                  WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
                  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                   
                   
                   
                    
                  Van den Bosch, et al.   Informational - Expires December 2002    11 