


Network Working Group                                        S. Krishnan
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                           N. Steinleitner
Expires: May 13, 2008                           University of Goettingen
                                                                  Y. Qiu
                                         Institute for Infocomm Research
                                                       November 10, 2007


        Guidelines for firewall vendors regarding MIPv6 traffic
                 draft-krishnan-mip6-firewall-vendor-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 13, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).











Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


Abstract

   This document presents some recommendations for firewall
   administrators to help them configure their firewalls in a way that
   allows Mobile IPv6 signaling and data messags to pass through.  This
   document assumes that the firewalls in question include some kind of
   stateful packet filtering capability.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Home Agent behind a firewall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Signaling between the MN and the HA  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN through
           HA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  IKEv2 signaling between MN and HA for establishing SAs . .  6
     3.4.  Data traffic from and to MN passing through the HA . . . .  6
   4.  Correspondent Node behind a firewall . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN through
           HA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Binding Update from MN to CN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  Route Optimization data traffic from MN  . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.5.  Bi-directional tunnelled data traffic from the MN to
           the CN through HA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Mobile Node behind a firewall  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Signaling between MN and HA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Signaling between MN and CN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  IKEv2 signaling between MN and HA for establishing SAs . . 11
     5.4.  Data traffic from and to the MN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17













Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


2.  Introduction

   Network elements such as firewalls are an integral aspect of a
   majority of IP networks today, given the state of security in the
   Internet, threats, and vulnerabilities to data networks.  MIPv6
   [RFC3775] defines mobility support for IPv6 nodes.  Since firewalls
   are not aware of MIPv6 protocol details, they will probably interfere
   with the smooth operation of the protocol.  The problems caused by
   firewalls to Mobile IPv6 are documented in [RFC4487].

   This document presents some recommendations for firewall
   administrators to help them configure their firewalls in a way that
   allows Mobile IPv6 signaling and data messags to pass through.  This
   document assumes that the firewalls in question include some kind of
   stateful packet filtering capability.




































Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


3.  Home Agent behind a firewall

   This section presents the recommendations for configuring a firewall
   that is protects a home agent.  For each type of traffic that needs
   to pass through this firewall, recommendations are presented on how
   to identify that traffic.  The following types of traffic are
   considered

   o  Signaling between the MN and the HA

   o  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN through HA

   o  IKEv2 signaling between MN and HA for establishing SAs

   o  Data traffic from and to MN passing through the HA

3.1.  Signaling between the MN and the HA

   The signaling between the MN and HA is protected using IPSec ESP.
   These messages are encrypted and hence are not inspectable by
   firewalls.  So the firewall has to either permit all these messages
   or discard all of them.  But if these messages are discarded, Mobile
   IPv6 as specified today will cease to work.  In order to permit these
   messages through, the firewall has to detect the messages using the
   following pattern.

     Destination Address: Address of HA
     IP payload protocol number: 50 (ESP)

   This pattern will allow the BU messages from MNs to HA and BA
   messages from the HA to the MNs to pass through.  It will also allow
   the HoTI and HoT messages (related to route optimization) between the
   MN and the HA to pass through.

3.2.  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN through HA

   Route Optimization allows direct communication of data packets
   between the MN and a CN without tunneling it back through the HA.  In
   order for route optimization to work, part of the initial signaling
   has to pass through the HA.  The following pattern will allow these
   messages to pass through.

     Destination Address: HoA of MN
     Mobility Header Type: 3

   This pattern allows the HoT message from the CN to the MN's HoA to
   pass through the firewall.  The HoTI message from the MN to the CN
   through the HA usually passes through the firewall without any



Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


   problems.  Hence no specific pattern is recommended.  If the firewall
   does not have the capability to recognize the mobility header type,
   it needs to at least filter on the IP payload protocol type 135
   (Mobility Header) in order to limit the scope of this filter rule.

3.3.  IKEv2 signaling between MN and HA for establishing SAs

   The MN and HA exchange IKEv2 signaling in order to establish the
   security associations.  The security associations so established will
   later be used for securing the mobility signaling messages.  Hence
   these messages need to be permitted to pass through the firewalls.
   The following pattern will detect these messages.

     Destination Address: Address of HA
     Transport Protocol: UDP
     Destination UDP Port: 500


3.4.  Data traffic from and to MN passing through the HA

   If a CN tries to initiate traffic to an MN, a stateful firewall would
   prevent these connection requests to pass through as there is no
   established state on the firewall.  Since MNs do not usually provide
   services, this is not usually a problem.  But if this is necessary to
   do, the pattern to look for is

     Destination Address: MN HoA

   Allowing this traffic might allow any kind of traffic, including
   malicious traffic, to pass through unfiltered to the MN.  This would
   expose the MN to any type of possibly malicious traffic, resulting in
   a denial of service or exploitation of known security
   vulnerabilities.  This practice is NOT RECOMMENDED.


















Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


4.  Correspondent Node behind a firewall

   This section presents the recommendations for configuring a firewall
   if a node behind it should be able to act as Mobile IPv6 CN.  For
   each type of traffic that needs to pass through this firewall,
   recommendations are presented on how to identify that traffic.  The
   following types of traffic are considered

   o  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN through HA

   o  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN

   o  Binding Update from MN to CN

   o  Route Optimization data traffic from MN

   o  Bi-directional tunnelled data traffic from the MN to the CN
      through HA

4.1.  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN through HA

   Parts of the initial route optimization signaling has to pass through
   the HA, namely the HoTI and the HoT messages.  Without assistance,
   the HoTI message from the HA to the CN is not able to traverse the
   firewall.  The following pattern will allow these messages to
   traverse.

      Destination Address: CN Address

      Mobility Header Type: 1

   This pinhole allows the HoTI message from the HA to the CN to
   traverse the firewall.  The HoT message from the CN to the MN through
   the HA can traverse the firewall without any assistance.  Hence no
   pinhole is required.

4.2.  Route optimization signaling between MN and CN

   Route Optimization allows direct communication of data packets
   between the MN and a CN without tunnelling it back through the HA.
   To get route optimization work, the MN has to send a CoTI message
   directly to the CN, which response with a CoT message.  However, a
   stateful firewall would prevent the CoTI message to pass through as
   there is no established state on the firewall.  The following pinhole
   will allow the CoTI message to traverse.






Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


      Destination Address: CN Address

      Mobility Header Type: 2

   The CoT message from the CN to the MN can traverse the firewall
   without any assistance.  Hence no pinhole is required.

4.3.  Binding Update from MN to CN

   After successfully performing the return routability procedure, the
   MN sends the BU to the CN and expects the BA.  Since this BU does not
   match any previous installed pinhole rules, an additional pinhole
   with the following format is required.

      Destination Address: CN Address

      Mobility Header Type: 5

   This allows the BU to traverse the firewall and the BA can pass the
   firewall without any assistance.  Therefore, the Binding Update
   sequence can be performed successfully.

4.4.  Route Optimization data traffic from MN

   Also the Route Optimization data traffic from MN directly to the CN
   can not traverse the firewall without assistance.  But as we have
   configured the firewall to allow the BU message from MN to the CN to
   traverse the firewall, the Route Optimization data traffic is able to
   pass through as it also matches the pinhole installed for the BU.

   Therefore, no additional pinhole rules are required.

4.5.  Bi-directional tunnelled data traffic from the MN to the CN
      through HA

   If a MN tries to initiate traffic to a CN through the HA using bi-
   directional tunnelling, a stateful firewall would prevent these
   connection requests to pass through as there is no established state
   on the firewall.  This is usually a problem as CNs often provide
   services.  A solution is to static configure the firewall to let this
   traffic pass through.  However, this is only an acceptable option if
   it is not necessary to open an all-embracing pinhole, e.g. if the
   destination ports are well-known.  In this case, the pinhole has to
   look like







Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


      Destination Address: CN Address

      Destination Port: Application Ports

   If the ports are unknown, it is necessary to install a pinhole with
   only the Destination Address as pattern.  Allowing this traffic might
   allow any kind of traffic, including malicious traffic, to traverse
   to the CN.  Allowing this traffic might allow any kind of traffic,
   including malicious traffic, to pass through unfiltered to the CN.
   This would expose the CN to any type of possibly malicious traffic,
   resulting in a denial of service or exploitation of known security
   vulnerabilities.  This practice is NOT RECOMMENDED







































Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


5.  Mobile Node behind a firewall

   This section presents the recommendations for configuring a firewall
   that protects the network a mobile node visiting.  For each type of
   traffic that needs to pass through this firewall, recommendations are
   presented on how to identify that traffic.  The following types of
   traffic are considered

   o  Signaling between MN and HA

   o  Route Optimization Signaling between MN and CN

   o  IKEv2 signaling between MN and HA for establishing SAs

   o  Data traffic from and to MN

5.1.  Signaling between MN and HA

   As described in Section 3.1, the signaling between the MN and HA is
   protected using IPSec ESP.  Currently, a lot of firewalls are
   configured to block the incoming ESP packets.  Moreover, from the
   view of the firewall, both source and destination addresses of these
   messages from/to mobile node are variable.  Fortunately, for a
   stateful firewall, if the initial traffic is allowed through the
   firewall, then the return traffic is also allowed.  A mobile node is
   always the initiator for the BU.  Since MN's CoA is not able to be
   known in advance, the firewall can use following pattern to permit
   these messages through.

     Source Address: Visited subnet prefix
     IP payload protocol number: 50 (ESP)

   This pattern will allow the initial packets (e.g.  BU from MNs to HA,
   HoTI, etc.) to pass through the firewall.  Then the return packets
   (BA from HA to MN, HoT) is also able to pass through accordingly.

5.2.  Signaling between MN and CN

   Route Optimization allows direct communication of data packets
   between the MN and a CN without tunneling it back through the HA.  It
   includes 3 pairs of messages: HoTI/HoT, CoTI/CoT and BU/BA.  The
   first pair can pass through the firewall using the pattern described
   in section 5.1.  Here we discuss CoTI/CoT and BU/BA messages.
   Following pattern permits these messages through the firewall.

   Source Address: Visited subnet prefix
   IP payload protocol number: 135 (Mobility Header)




Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


   This pattern allows the initial messages (CoTI and BU) from the MN to
   the CN pass through the firewall.  The return messages (CoT and BA)
   from the CN to the MN can also passes through the firewall
   accordingly.

5.3.  IKEv2 signaling between MN and HA for establishing SAs

   The MN and HA exchange IKEv2 signaling in order to establish the
   security associations.  The security associations so established will
   later be used for securing the mobility signaling messages.  Due to
   variable source/destination IP addresses and MN always as initiator,
   the following pattern will let the negotiation pass.

   Source Address: Visited subnet prefix
   Transport Protocol: UDP
   Destination UDP Port: 500


5.4.  Data traffic from and to the MN

   After sending the home binding update, every traffic packet between
   MN and HA will be encapsulated by ESP.  As described in section 5.1,
   the firewall allows theses packets pass through.  However, if a CN
   tries to initiate traffic to an MN, a stateful firewall would prevent
   these connection requests to pass through as there is no established
   state on the firewall.  We may use following steps to establish a
   channel state between MN and CN:

   1.  When detecting BU message from MN to CN with protocol number 135
       and mobility header type 5, the firewall extracts the home
       address from the destination option.

   2.  Firewall adds a security rule to its table with following
       pattern.

         Destination Address: CoA
         Source Address: CN
         Routing Header Type 2 Address: HoA


   Thereafter any packets to MN will be filtered by above pattern.










Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


6.  Contributors

   This document is one of the deliverables of the MIPv6 firewall
   design.  The following members of the team were involved in the
   creation of this document.

   Hannes Tschofenig Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net

   Gabor Bajko Gabor.Bajko@nokia.com

   Suresh Krishnan suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com

   Hesham Soliman solimanhs@gmail.com

   Yaron Sheffer yaronf@checkpoint.com

   Qiu Ying qiuying@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

   Ram Vishnu vishnu@motorola.com

   Niklas Steinleitner steinleitner@cs.uni-goettingen.de

   Vijay Devarapalli vijay.devarapalli@AzaireNet.com




























Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any IANA action.
















































Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


8.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies recommendations for firewall administrators
   to allow Mobile IPv6 traffic to pass through unhindered.  Since some
   of this traffic is encrypted it is not possible for firewalls to
   discern whether it is safe or not.  This document recommends a
   liberal setting so that all legitimate traffic can pass.  This means
   that some malicious traffic may be permitted by these rules.  These
   rules may allow the initiation of Denial of Service attacks against
   Mobile IPv6 capable nodes (the MNs, CNs and the HAs).  Especially the
   rules specified in Section 3.4 and Section 4.5 are broadly defined
   and hence possess the most potential for abuse.  Hence, if these
   rules are implemented, the firewalls SHOULD be configured to rate-
   limit such traffic on a per-destination basis.  This would allow the
   firewall to mitigate possible denial of service attacks on the
   endpoints.  Please note that such measures would not mitigate other
   potential security issues.


































Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC4487]  Le, F., Faccin, S., Patil, B., and H. Tschofenig, "Mobile
              IPv6 and Firewalls: Problem Statement", RFC 4487,
              May 2006.








































Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900 x42871
   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Niklas Steinleitner
   University of Goettingen
   Lotzestr. 16-18
   Goettingen
   Germany

   Email: steinleitner@cs.uni-goettingen.de


   Ying Qiu
   Institute for Infocomm Research
   21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace
   Singapore

   Phone: +65-6874-6742
   Email: qiuying@i2r.a-star.edu.sg























Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      MIPv6 Firewall Vendor guidelines       November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Krishnan, et al.          Expires May 13, 2008                 [Page 17]

