Internet Draft						Sophia Scoggins
							C. Michael Brown
							Nortel Networks
							Aug. 2, 2000
Document: draft-scoggins-megaco-pktnetpkg-00.txt
Category: Informational

			Packetnetwork Package for Megaco/H.248

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [ ]. 

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also 
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft 
documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or 
obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

This document provides a proposed package for bearer independent packet
networks.


2. Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", 
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to 
be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [ ].


3. Packetnetwork package
The package hierarchy should be

   Network
     |    
     +-----PacketNetwork
              |
              +----- ATM
                     IP

At the PacketNetwork level, we want to be generic so that it does not matter 
what type of bearer service is. This is particular good in terms of separation 
of call processing and bearere connection control. It leaves the MGC only has 
knowledge of the call processing, but not bearer connection control. 

If any MGC needs bearer specific knowledge for call control, it can derive the
bearer specific package from the PacketNetwork, as showned above, to be 'ATM
package' or 'IP package' as an extension to the PacketNetwork.


1. PacketNetwork Package

    PackageID: pkt (0x ????)
    Version: 1
    Extends: Network Package version 1
    This package is used to support packet network connection without knowledge 
    of the underlying bearer type.

    A connection-oriented network and a connectionless network have different
    characteristics. Further refinement of the network characteristics can be
    defined as an extension to this pkt package.
  
    For example, 'eecid' can be used for connection-oriented network, while
    for connectionless network, such as IP, a pair of RTP ports are chosen. In
    that case, 'eecid' can still be used to identify this pair of RTP ports.
    Note that there are many ways to choose the RTP ports. One way is to have
    the originating MG chooses both RTP ports for sending and receiving, and
    the terminating MG uses them. Another way is to have the originating MG
    chooses just a receiving RTP port and the terminating MG chooses another
    RTP port as its receiving port and as the originating MG's sending port.

1.1. Properties
       None.

1.2. Events
 1.2.1   Connection Established
	 This event can be used to indicate that the bearer connection is ready.
	 In the case of connection-less, such as IP network, this event means 
         that the RTP ports have been reserved.  

            Event ID: coav, 0x ????
            Detects the establishment of packet connection
            EventDescriptor parameter: 
                  ParameterName: eecid (optional)
                  ParameterID: eecid, 0x??
                  Type: integer
                  Possible values: Random number
            ObservedEventsDescriptor parameters: None.
              
1.2.2.   Disconnection
	 This event indicates that either the connection has been released, or
         the MG has not been successful to establish a connection. In the case
         the MG not successful to establish a connection, it should not be
         treated as failure.

            EventID: disc, 0x ????
            Detects the termination of packet connection
            EventDescriptor parameter: None.
            ObservedEventsDescriptor parameters: 
                   ParameterName: reason
                   ParameterID: reason, 0x??
                   Type: integer
                   Possible values: disconnection reason 

1.23.   Failure
            EventID: of, 0x ????
            Detects failure of packet connection
            EventDescriptor parameter: None.
            ObservedEventsDescriptor parameters: None
                    ParameterName: reason
                   ParameterID: reason, 0x??
                   Type: integer
                   Possible values: failure reason 


1.3. Signals:      
1.3.1   Establish a Connection
	This signal explicitly requests to establish a connection. In the 
        case of IP network, eecid is not needed.

            Signal ID: conn, 0x ????
            Establish a packet connection
            SignalDescriptor parameter: 
                  ParameterName: eecid (optional)
                  ParameterID: eecid, 0x??
                  Type: a previous generated random number
                  Possible values: Random number
            ObservedEventsDescriptor parameters: None.
              
1.3.2.   Disconnection
            Signal ID: cont, 0x ????
            Terminate the packet connection
            SignaltDescriptor parameter: 
                    ParameterName: eecid
                    ParameterID: eecid, 0x??
                    Type: a previous generated random number
                    Possible values: disconnection reason 

1.4. Statistics
      Packet sent
             StatisticID: pkts
             Type: 64 bit integer
             Possible Value: any integer in the range.
      Packet Received
             StatisticsID: pktr
             Type: 64 bit integer
             Possible Value: any integer in the range.
      Packet Dropped
             StatisticsID: pktd
             Type: 64 bit integer
             Possible Value: any integer in the range.
    

2. Acknowledgments

None


3. Author's Addresses

Sophia Scoggins
Nortel Networks
4008 Chapel Hill Road
Research Triangle Park, NC USA 27709
Phone: (919) 991-2182
Email: scoggins@nortelnetworks.com


4. Full Copyright Statement

"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This document 
and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative 
works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation 
may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, 
without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and 
this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, 
this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the 
copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet 
organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet 
standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet 
Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into 
languages other than English.  The limited permissions granted above are 
perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

5.  Expiration Date

This memo is filed as <draft-scoggins-megaco-pktnetpkg-00.txt>, and expires 
Feburary 3, 2001.





