
Internet Engineering Task Force                       A. S. Maunder
Internet Draft                                        Cisco Systems    
Expires in August, 2001              
draft-ietf-ospf-scalability-00.txt                    G. Choudhury
                                                      AT&T Labs  
                                                      March, 2001 


Explicit Marking and Prioritized Treatment of Specific IGP Packets 
for Faster IGP Convergence and Improved Network Scalability and 
Stability

<draft-ietf-ospf-scalability-00.txt>

Status of this Memo 

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. The list of Internet-Draft 
Shadow
Directories can be accessed at www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
Distribution of
this memo is unlimited. 

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

There has been a lot of interest in the networking community to 
allow for fast failure detection followed by the fast restoration 
and recovery. It may be possible to provide fast recovery using 
special mechanisms; however, there is a strong interest in 
addressing this issue at a more fundamental level i.e. at IGP 
convergence because it addresses the problem at a much broader 
scale.  Faster IGP convergence inevitably requires faster detection 
by using smaller hello interval timers (unless one relies on link 
level detection which is not always possible), fast flooding and 
more frequent SPF calculations. However, we provide analytic and 
simulation results*  to show that this compromises the scalability 
and stability of the network, mainly because Hello packets received 
at a router are indistinguishable from other packets and may 
experience long queueing delays during a sudden burst of many LSA 
updates. In this draft we suggest a need for Hello and potentially 
some other IGP packets to be marked explicitly so that efficient 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  1] 








implementations can detect and act upon these messages in a priority 
fashion thus allowing significant reduction in convergence time for 
IGP while maintaining network stability. 

The figures and graphs are missing from the ASCII version of the 
draft. The pdf versions of this draft can be found in the Internet-
Drafts repository.

1 Motivation

The motivation of this draft is to address two key issues:
(1) Fast restoration under failure conditions
(2) Increased network scalability and stability

The motivation for allowing fast restoration under failure 
conditions is similar to the one provided in [1]draft-alaettinoglu-
isis-convergence-00.txt. The theoretical limit for link-state 
routing protocols to re-route is in link propagation time scales, 
i.e., in tens of milliseconds.  However, in practice it takes 
seconds to tens of seconds to detect the link failure and 
disseminate this information to the network followed by the 
convergence on the new set of paths. This is an inordinately long 
period of transient time for mission critical traffic destined to 
the non-reachable nodes of the network. One component of the long 
re-route time is the link failure detection time of between 20 and 
30 seconds through three missed Hello packets with the typical hello 
interval of 10 seconds (between 30 and 40 seconds if missed hello 
threshold is 4).  This component would be much shorter in the 
presence of link level detection, but as pointed out in [1]draft-
alaettinoglu-isis-convergence-00.txt it does not work in some cases.  
For example, a device driver may detect the link level failure but 
fail to notify it to the IGP level.  Also, if a router fails behind 
a switch in a switched environment then even though the switch gets 
the link level notification it cannot communicate that to other 
routers. Therefore for faster reliable detection at the IGP level, 
one has to reduce the hello interval.  Reference [1]draft-
alaettinoglu-isis-convergence-00.txt suggests that this be reduced 
to below a second, perhaps even to tens of milliseconds.  A second 
component of the long re-route time is delayed SPF (shortest-path-
first) computation.  The typical delay value is 5 seconds but needs 
to be reduced significantly to have sub-second rerouting. 

The second issue we address is the ability of a network to withstand 
the simultaneous or near-simultaneous update of a large number of 
link-state- advertisement messages, or LSAs.  We call this event, an 
LSA storm.  An LSA storm may be generated due to many reasons.  Here 
are some examples:  (a) one or more link failures due to fiber cuts, 
(b) one or more node failures for some reason, e.g., failed power 
supply in an office, (c) requirement of taking down and later 
bringing back many nodes during a software/hardware upgrade, (d) 
near-synchronization of the once-in-30-minutes refresh instants of 
some types of LSAs, (e) refresh of all LSAs in the system during a 
change in software version. The LSA storm tends to drive the node 
CPU utilization to 100% for a period of time and the duration of 
this period increases with the size of the storm and the node 
adjacency, i.e., the number of trunks connected to it. During this 
period the Hello packets received at the node would see high delays 
and if this delay exceeds typically three or four hello intervals 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  2] 






(typically 30 or 40 seconds) then the associated trunk would be 
declared down.  Depending on the implementation, there may be other 
impacts of a long CPU busy period as well.  For example, in a 
reliable node architecture with an active and a standby processor, a 
processor-switch may result during an extended CPU-busy period which 
may mean that all the adjacencies would be lost and need to be re-
established.  Both of the above events would cause more database 
synchronization with neighbors and network-wide LSA flooding which 
in turn might cause extended CPU-busy periods at other nodes.  This 
may cause unstable behavior in the network for an extended period of 
time and potentially a meltdown in the extreme case.  Due to world-
wide increased traffic demand, data networks are ever increasing in 
size. As the network size grows, a bigger LSA storm and a higher 
adjacency at certain nodes would be more likely and so would 
increase the probability of unstable behavior.  One way to address 
the scalability issue is to divide the network hierarchically into 
different areas so that flooding of LSAs remains localized within 
areas.  However, this approach increases the network management and 
design complexity and less optimal routing between areas. Also area 
0 may see the flooding of a large number of summary LSAs and some of 
the new protocols may not work well under the hierarchical system. 
Thus it is important to allow the network to grow towards as large a 
size as possible under a single area. The undesirable impact of 
large LSA storms is understood in the networking community and it is 
well known that large scale flooding of control messages (either 
naturally or due to a bug) has been responsible for several network 
events in the past causing a meltdown or a near-meltdown.  Recently, 
proposals have been submitted to avoid synchronization of LSA 
refreshes [2]draft-ietf-ospf-refresh-guide-01.txt and reduce 
flooding overhead in case more than one interface goes to the same 
neighbor [3] draft-ietf-ospf-isis-flood-opt-00.txt, and [4]draft-
ietf-ospf-ppp-flood-00.txt.

In this proposal we would like to make the point that reducing hello 
intervals and more frequent SPF computation would in fact reduce 
network scalability and stability. We will use a simple and 
approximate but easy-to-understand analytic model for this purpose.  
We will also use a more involved simulation model.  Next, we would 
like to make the point that many of the underlying causes of network 
scalability could be avoided if certain IGP messages could be 
specially marked and provided prioritized treatment.  

2 Analytic Model for Delay seen By a Received Hello Packet During a 
LSA Storm

For every trunk interface, a node has to send and receive a Hello 
packet once every hello interval.  Sending of a Hello packet can be 
triggered by a timer and it is possible to give higher priority to 
timer-driven jobs and thereby ensure that it is not excessively 
delayed even during extended CPU-busy periods.  However, a received 
Hello packet cannot be easily distinguished from other IGP or IP 
packets and therefore is typically served in a first-come-first-
served fashion.  We do a simple and approximate analysis of the 
delay experienced by this packet during an LSA storm at a node with 
highest adjacency.  LetÆs assume:
? S = Size of LSA storm (i.e., number of LSAs in it).  Also, it 
is assumed that each LSA is carried in one LSU packet.
? L = Link adjacency of the node under consideration.  This is 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  3] 







assumed to be the maximum in the network.
? t1 = Time to send or receive one IGP packet over an interface 
(the same time is assumed for Hello, LSA, duplicate LSA and LSA 
acknowledgement even though in general there may be some 
differences.  However, this would be a good approximation if 
majority of the time is in the act of receiving or sending and a 
relatively small part for packet-type-specific work.  In the 
numerical examples we assume t1 = 1 ms.
? t2 = Time to do one SPF calculation. For large network, this 
time is usually in hundreds of ms and in the numerical examples 
we assume t2 = 200 ms.
? Hi = Hello interval.
? Si = minimum interval between successive SPF calculations.
? ro = Rate at which non-IGP work comes to the node (e.g., 
forwarding of data packets).  For the numerical examples we 
assume ro = 0.2.
? T = Total work brought in to the node during the LSA storm.  
For each LSA update generated elsewhere, the node will receive 
one new LSA packet over one interface, send an acknowledgement 
packet over that interface, and send copies of the LSA packet 
over the remaining L-1 interfaces. Also, assuming that the 
implicit acknowledgement mechanism is in use, the node will 
subsequently receive either an acknowledgement or a duplicate LSA 
over the remaining L-1 interfaces.  So over each interface one 
packet is sent and one is received.  It can be seen that the same 
would be true for self-generated LSAs.   So the total work per 
LSA update is 2*L*t1.  Since there are S LSAs in the storm, we 
get

T = 2*S*L*t1      (1)

In Equation (1) we ignore retransmissions of LSAs in case 
acknowledgements are not received or processed within 5 seconds.  
This impact and other details are taken into account in the 
simulation model to be presented later.
? T2 = Time period over which the work comes. Due to differences 
in propagation times and congestion at other nodes, it is 
possible for the work arrival time to be spread out over a long 
interval.  However, since we are considering the node with 
highest adjacency, i.e., one with highest congestion, (this is 
assuming that all nodes have the same processing power and about 
the same non-IGP workload) most of the work will come in one 
chunk.  We verified this to be usually true using simulations.  
One part of T2 will be of the order of link propagation delay and 
we assume that there is a second part which is proportional to T. 
Therefore we get,

T2 = A + B*T    (2)

   Where A and B are constants.  For the numerical examples we 
assume 
   A = 10 ms and B = 0.1.

? D = Maximum delay experienced by a Hello packet during the LSA 
storm.  We assume first-come-first-served service and hence the 
delay seen by the Hello packet would be the total outstanding 
work at the node at the arrival instant plus its own processing 
time.  We assume that outstanding work steadily increases over 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  4] 







the interval T2 and so the maximum delay is seen by a Hello 
packet that comes near the end of this interval.  We write down 
an approximate expression for D and then explain the various 
terms on the right hand side:

D = T û T2 + max(1,2*T2/Hi)*t1 + max(1,T2/Si)*t2 + ro*T2 (3)
   
The first term is the total work brought in due to the LSA storm.  
The second term is the work the node was able to finish since we are 
assuming that it was continuously busy during the period T2.  The 
third term is the total work due to the sending and receiving of 
Hello packets during the period T2.  Note that it is assumed that at 
least one Hello packet is processed, i.e., itself.  The fourth term 
is due to SPF processing during the period T2 and we assume that at 
least one SPF processing is done.  The last term is the total non-
IGP work coming to the node over the interval T2

? Dmax = maximum allowed value of D, i.e., if D exceeds this 
value then the associated link would be declared down. In the 
numerical examples below we assume 

Dmax = 3*Hi     (4)

   If we assume that the previous Hello packet was minimally 
delayed then exceeding Dmax really means four missed hellos since 
the Hello packet under study itself came after a period Hi.  In 
the numerical examples below, both D and Dmax change with choice 
of system parameters and we are mainly interested in identifying 
if D exceeds Dmax.  For this purpose we define the following 
ratio variable

Delay Ratio = D/Dmax      (5)

and identify if Delay Ratio exceeds 1.

In Figures 1-3 we plot the Delay Ratio as a function of LSA Storm 
size with node adjacencies 10, 20 and 50 respectively.  All 
parameters except for the ones noted explicitly on the figures are 
as stated earlier.  Figure 1 assumes Hello packets every 10 seconds 
and SPF calculation every 5 seconds which are typical default values 
today.  With a node adjacency of 10, the Delay Ratio is below 1 even 
with an LSA storm of size 1000.  However, with a node adjacency of 
20, the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at around a storm of size 800 and with 
a node adjacency of 50, the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at around a storm 
of size 325. 
 
Figure 1: Delay Ratio with Hello Every 10 Seconds, SPF Every 5 
Seconds, Dmax = 30 seconds

In a large network it is not unusual to have LSA storms of size 
several hundreds since the LSA database size may be several 
thousands. This is particularly true if there are many type 5 LSAs 
and there are special LSAs for carrying information about available 
bandwidth at trunks as is common in ATM networks and might be used 
in MPLS-based networks as well. 
Figure 2 decreases the hello interval to 2 seconds and SPF 
calculation is done once a second.  LSA storm thresholds are 
significantly reduced.  Specifically, with a node adjacency of 10, 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  5] 






the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at around a storm of size 310; with a node 
adjacency of 20, the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at around a storm of size 
160; and with a node adjacency of 50, the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at 
around a storm of size only 65. 
 
Figure 2: Delay Ratio with Hello Every 2 Seconds, SPF Every 1 
Second, Dmax = 6 seconds

Figure 3 decreases the hello interval even further to 300 ms and SPF 
calculation is done once every 500 ms. LSA storm thresholds are 
really small now.  Specifically, with a node adjacency of 10, the 
Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at around a storm of size 40, with a node 
adjacency of 20, the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 at around a storm of size 
20, and with a node adjacency of 50, the Delay Ratio is already over 
1 even with a storm of size 10.
 
Figure 3: Delay Ratio with Hello Every 300 ms, SPF Every 500 ms, 
Dmax = 900 ms

Whenever Delay Ratio exceeds 1, the associated link is declared down 
even if it is actually up and eventually other undesirable events 
start (e.g., trunk flapping and cascading of extended CPU overload 
periods to other nodes).  Therefore, the LSA storm threshold at 
which the Delay Ratio exceeds 1 may also roughly be considered as 
the network stability threshold.  Figures 1-3 show that the 
stability threshold rapidly decreases as the hello interval and SPF 
computation interval decreases.  One reason for this is the 
increased CPU work due to more frequent hello and SPF computations, 
but the dominant reason is that Dmax itself decreases and so a 
smaller CPU busy interval is needed to exceed it.  Specifically, 
Dmax is 30 seconds in Figure 1, 6 Seconds in Figure 2 and only 900 
ms in Figure 3. It is clear from the above examples that in order to 
maintain network stability as the hello interval decreases, it is 
necessary to provide faster prioritized treatment to received Hello 
packets which can of course be only done if those packets can be 
distinguished from other IGP or IP packets.    
 

3 Simulation Study

We have also developed a simulation model to capture more accurately 
the impact of an LSA storm on all the nodes of the network.  It 
captures the actual congestion seen at various nodes, propagation 
delay between nodes and retransmissions in case an LSA is not 
acknowledged. It also tries to approximate a real network 
implementation and uses processing times that are roughly in the 
same order of magnitude as measured in the real network (of the 
order of milliseconds).  There are two categories of IGP messages.  
Category one messages are triggered by a timer and include the Hello 
refresh, LSA refresh and retransmission packets. Category 2 messages 
are not triggered by a timer and include received Hello, received 
LSA and received acknowledgements. Timer-triggered messages are 
given non-preemptive priority over the other type. A beneficial 
effect of this strategy is that Hello packets are sent out with 
little delay even under intense CPU overload.  However, the received 
Hello packets and the received acknowledgement packets may see long 
queueing delays under intense CPU overload. Figures 4 and 5 below 
show sample results of the simulation study when applied to a 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  6] 






network with about 300 nodes and 800 trunks.  The hello interval is 
assumed to be 5 seconds, the minimum interval between successive SPF 
calculations is 1 second, and a trunk is declared down if no Hello 
packet is received for three successive hello intervals, i.e., 15 
seconds.   During the study, an LSA storm of size 300 and 600 
(Figures 4 and 5 respectively) are created at instant of time 100 
seconds.  Three LSAs are packed within one LSU packet and it is 
assumed that they remain packed the same way during the flooding 
process.  Besides the storm, there are also the normal once-in-
thirty-minutes LSA refreshes and those LSAs are packed one per LSU 
packet. We define a quantity ôdispersionö which is the number of LSU 
packets generated in the network but not received and processed in 
at least one node.  Figures 4 and 5 plot dispersion as a function of 
time.  Before the LSA storm, the dispersion due to normal LSA 
refreshes remains small.  As expected, right after the storm the 
dispersion jumps and then comes down again to the pre-storm level 
after some period of time.  In Figure 4 with an LSA storm size 300, 
the ôheavy dispersion periodö lasted about 11 seconds and no trunk 
losses were observed.  In Figure 5 with an LSA storm of size 600, 
the ôheavy dispersion periodö lasted about 40 seconds.  Some trunk 
losses were observed a little after 15 seconds within the ôheavy 
dispersion periodö but eventually all trunks recovered and the 
dispersion came down to the pre-storm level.

 
Figure 4: Dispersion Versus Time (LSA Storm Size = 300)


 
Figure 5: Dispersion Versus Time (LSA Storm Size = 600)


4 Need for Special Marking and Prioritized Treatment of Specific IGP 
packets

The analytic and simulation models show that a major cause for 
unstable behavior in networks is received Hello packets at a node 
getting queued behind other work brought in to the node during an 
LSA storm and missing the deadline of typically three or four hello 
intervals.  This need not happen to outgoing Hello packets that are 
triggered by a timer since the node CPU can give it prioritized 
treatment.  Clearly, if the received Hello packet can be specially 
marked to distinguish it from other IGP and IP packets then they can 
also be given prioritized treatment and they would not miss the 
deadline even during a large LSA storm.  Some specific field of IP 
packets may be used for this purpose.  Besides the Hello packets 
there may be other IGP packets that could also benefit from special 
marking and prioritized marking. We give two examples but clearly 
others are possible.  
? One example is the LSA acknowledgement packet.  This packet 
disables retransmission and if a large queueing delay to this 
packet expires the retransmission timer (typical default value is 
5 seconds) then a needless retransmission will happen causing 
extra traffic load.  Retransmission event is usually rare due to 
the reliable nature of transmission links, but during the 600 LSA 
storm simulation in Figure 5 many retransmission events were 
noted.  Usually, retransmission events happen more with a longer 
CPU busy period.  Clearly, a special marking and prioritization 

Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  7] 







of the LSA acknowledgement packet would eliminate many needless 
retransmissions. 
? A second example is an LSA carrying a bad news, i.e., a failure 
of a trunk or a node. It is preferable to transmit this 
information faster than other LSAs in the network that either 
carry good news or are just once-in-30-minutes refreshes. The 
explicit identification can also be used to trigger the SPF 
calculation after processing LSAes carrying bad information. This 
will obviate the need of lowering the SPF calculation interval 
under all circumstances and thus reducing the processing 
overhead.

The example in this draft focussed explicitly on the control domain. 
However, it can easily be seen that having an explicit 
identification for certain æchosenÆ packets will help minimize their 
drop probability in the traffic plane also. The explicit 
identification allows these control packets to be easily 
distinguished from the data packets in the line card and hence their 
processing (forwarding) can be expedited even under large traffic 
conditions. 

5 Summary

In this proposal we point out that if a large LSA storm is generated 
as a result of some type of failure/recovery of nodes/trunks or 
synchronization among refreshes then the Hello packets received at a 
node may see large queueing delays and miss the deadline of 
typically three or four hello intervals.  This causes the trunk to 
be down and is potentially the beginning of unstable behavior in the 
network.  This is already a concern in todayÆs network but would be 
a much bigger concern if the hello interval and minimum interval 
between SPF calculations are substantially reduced (below or perhaps 
well below a second) in order to allow faster rerouting, as proposed 
in [1]draft-alaettinoglu-isis-convergence-00.txt.  To avoid the 
above, we propose the use of a special marking for Hello packets 
(perhaps using a special field in IP packets) so that they may be 
distinguished from other IGP and IP packets and provided a 
prioritized treatment during intense CPU overload periods caused by 
LSA storms.  We also point out that other IGP packets could benefit 
from special markings as well.  Two examples are LSA acknowledgement 
packets and LSA packets carrying bad news.  


5 Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank members of the High-Speed Packet 
Switching division of AT&T for their help during the study. 

6 References

[1] draft-alaettinoglu-isis-convergence-00.txt   November, 2000

[2] draft-ietf-ospf-refresh-guide-01.txt     July, 2000

[3] draft-ietf-ospf-isis-flood-opt-00.txt    October, 2000

[4] draft-ietf-ospf-ppp-flood-00.txt         November, 2000


Maunder, et. al.         Expires: August, 2001           [page  8] 








8 Authors' Addresses

Anurag S. Maunder           
Cisco Systems                 
email: amaunder@cisco.com
                              
Gagan Choudhury                  
AT&T Labs, Middletown, NJ, USA                
email: gchoudhury@att.com   
                              
                              



*The study was done when Anurag S. Maunder was a Sr. Member of 
Techical Staff at AT&T.

