

IPTEL WG                                                    R. Mahy, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Expires: December 21, 2003                                 June 22, 2003


             The Calling Party's Category tel URI Parameter
                        draft-mahy-iptel-cpc-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document specifies a new parameter for the tel URI that
   represents the Calling Party's Category, a parameter used in SS7 ISUP
   signaling.

1. Introduction

   SS7 ISUP [3] defines a Calling Party's Category (CPC) parameter that
   characterizes the station used to originate a call and carries other
   important state that can describe the originating party. When
   telephone numbers are contained in URIs, such as the tel URI [1], it
   may be desirable to communicate any CPC associated with that
   telephone number or, in the context of a call, the party calling from
   it.



Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                CPC tel URI                      June 2003


   Note that in some networks (including North America), the Originating
   Line Information (OLI) parameter is used to carry this information in
   ISUP rather than the CPC parameter. Legacy multifrequency (MF)
   signaling networks carry this information in the ANI II Digits [7].
   The tel URI parameter specified in this document is designed to carry
   data from these sources as well.

2. Parameter Definition

   The Calling Party's Category is represented as a tel URI parameter.
   The ABNF [2] syntax is as follows:

      cpc                   = cpc-tag "=" cpc-value
      cpc-tag               = "cpc"
      cpc-value             = string

   CPC values ("cpc-value" strings) must be registered with IANA. The
   following values are pre-registered by this document:

      ordinary: The caller has been identified, and has no special
      features.

      priority: This call has priority/emergency status.

      data: This call will contain voice-band data.

      test: This is a test call that has been originated as part of a
      maintenance procedure.

      operator: The call was generated by an operator position.

      payphone: The calling station is a payphone.

      prison: The calling station is in a prison.

      hotel: The calling station is in a hotel or motel.  (This value is
      currently used in ANI II.)

      unknown: The CPC could not be ascertained.

   In addition to the list above, the authors may consider inclusion of
   the following additional values if a stable reference which describes
   their use can be provided.

      hospital: The calling station is in a medical facility.






Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                CPC tel URI                      June 2003


      police: The calling station is associated with a branch of law
      enforcement.

      cellular: The calling station is a radio-telephone operating in
      its home network.

      cellular-roaming: The calling station is a radio-telephone roaming
      in another network

   An example of the syntax of the CPC parameter (in a small fragment of
   a SIP [5] message) is given below:

           INVITE sip:bob@biloxi.example.com SIP/2.0
           To: "Bob" <sip:bob@biloxi.example.com>
           From: <tel:+17005554141;cpc=payphone>;tag=1928301774


3. Usage

   The CPC is generally useful only when describing the originator of a
   telephone call. Therefore, when this parameter is used in an
   application such as SIP, it is recommended that the parameter be
   applied to URIs that characterize the originator of a call (such as a
   SIP URI or tel URI in the From header field of a SIP message). Note
   that many Calling Party Category values from the PSTN were
   intentionally excluded from the cpc parameter as they are either
   meaningless outside of the PSTN or can be represented using another
   existing concept. For example, the language of an operator can be
   expressed more richly using the Accept-Language header in SIP than in
   the cpc parameter.

   It is anticipated that this URI will be used primarily by gateways
   that interwork ISUP networks with SIP networks. Various SIP network
   intermediaries might consult the CPC as they make routing decisions,
   although no specific behavior is prescribed in this document. While
   no specific mapping of the various ISUP parameters that contain CPC
   data is offered in this document, creating such a mapping would be
   trivial.

   If the CPC parameter is not present, consumers of the CPC should
   treat the URI as if it specified a CPC of "unknown".

   Generally, only one instance of the CPC will be associated with a
   particular URI.

4. Security Considerations

   The information contained in the CPC parameter may be of a private



Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                CPC tel URI                      June 2003


   nature, and it may not be appropriate for this value to be revealed
   to the destination user (typically it would not be so revealed in the
   PSTN).  For more information about Privacy issues in SIP see RFC3323
   [6].

   Otherwise, this mechanism adds no new security considerations to
   those discussed in [1].

5. IANA Considerations

   This document requests the creation of an IANA registry for Calling
   Party's Category values. The values of the CPC parameter in use in
   ISUP are unfortunately quite specific to national networks, and thus
   it is very difficult to uncover all the usages that may be in place
   in various networks. Note that in North American networks, the
   Originating Line Information parameter contains information common
   found in the Calling Party's Category elsewhere; it is therefore
   legitimate to register values associated with the Originating Line
   Information in this registry.

   In order to file a registration, interested parties must contact IANA
   and supply them with both a new "cpc-value" and a short reason phrase
   describing the usage of the new CPC. Some values are given in Section
   2; we ask that these values be pre-registered upon publication of
   this document as an RFC. It is not expected that this registry will
   require any expert supervision.

6. Contributors

   The original version of this document was written by Jon Peterson.

Normative References

   [1]  Schulzrinne, H. and A. Vaha-Sipila, "The tel URI for Telephone
        Calls", draft-antti-2806bis-08.txt (work in progress), Feb 2003.

   [2]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [3]  International Telecommunications Union, "Recommendation Q.763:
        Signalling System No. 7: ISDN user part formats and codes",
        September 1997, <http://www.itu.int>.

Informational References

   [4]  Vaha-Sipila, A., "URLs for Telephone Calls", RFC 2806, April
        2000.




Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                CPC tel URI                      June 2003


   [5]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [6]  Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session Initiation
        Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.

URIs

   [7]  <http://www.nanpa.com/number_resource_info/
        ani_ii_assignments.html>


Author's Address

   Rohan Mahy (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   101 Cooper St
   Santa Cruz, CA  95060
   USA

   EMail: rohan@cisco.com





























Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                CPC tel URI                      June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                CPC tel URI                      June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Mahy                   Expires December 21, 2003                [Page 7]

