Internet Draft	                                     Lark-Kwon Choi
Document: draft-lkchoi-mmusic-iptvdbs-req-00.txt          Dae-Gun Kim  
Expiration Date: December 2005	                     Sang-soo Lee
	                                                 Jin-Han Kim
	                                                          KT
	                                                   July 2005                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Internet DraftDae-Gun KimDocument: draft-kim-mmusic-iptv-req-000.txt Lark-Kwon ChoiExpiration Date: DecemberApril 2005Sang-soo LeeJin-Han KimKTJulyOctober 20052

Requirement of service provider for the Data Broadcasting Service 
            over the internet protocol television

Status of this Memo

  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents
  that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he
  or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
  which he or she becomes aware will be disclosed, in
  accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
  other groups may also distribute working documents as 
  Internet-Drafts. 

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
  months and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other 
  documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
  as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
  progress." 

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.html.

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice  
        
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). All Rights Reserved. 
   
Abstract

  This document specifies requirements of service provider for the 
  Data Broadcasting Service (DBS) framework about multicasting with 
  unicasting transmission method over the internet protocol 
  television (IPTV). Also, network and DBS receiver requirements are 
  presented. These requirements are designed to guide development of 
  DBS transport protocol for efficient interactive multimedia 
  applications in Moving Picture Expert Group 2 Transmission Stream 
  (MPEG2-TS) over internet protocol (IP) with the Session 
  Description Protocol (SDP).

Table of Contents

  1.    Introduction ...............................................2
  1.1   Background and Motivation ..................................2
  1.2   Scope of This Document......................................3
  2.    Conventions.................................................4
  3.    Terminology.................................................4
  4.    Use Cases Requiring DBS in IPTV.............................5
  4.1   Program Linked Use Cases....................................5
  4.2   Program Supplementary Use Cases.............................5
  4.3   Program Independent Use Cases...............................6
  5.    Requirements................................................6
  5.1   General Requirements........................................6
  5.1.1 Independence of DBS Data Transmission.......................6
  5.1.2 DBS Interactivity of Multiple Accesses......................6
  5.2   Multicasting with Unicasting Transmission Requirements......7
  5.3   Network Requirements........................................8
  5.3.1 Bandwidth...................................................9
  5.3.2 Reliability.................................................9
  5.3.3 Congestion Control..........................................9
  5.4   Receiver Requirements.......................................9
  5.5   Media Format Requirements..................................10
  6.    Security Considerations....................................10
  7.    IANA Considerations........................................11
  8.    Normative References.......................................11
  9.    Informative References.....................................11
  10.   Authors's Address..........................................12
  11.   Full Copyright Statement...................................12

1. Introduction

1.1 Background and Motivation

  As explodes the high-speed IP networks and as progresses convergence 
  between IP-based communication and broadcasting area, demands for the 
  bidirectional interactive high quality services are increase. With 
  this requests, TPS (Triple Play Service) appears to satisfy the 
  customer expectation. Recently IP based broadcasting service such as 
  Internet Protocol television (IPTV) becomes an important key service 
  with interactive data broadcasting services (DBS).

  DBS is originated from the text titles with program guide in the 
  analog broadcasting environments. Nowadays, with combination of 
  digital technology, DBS includes multi-channel multimedia data 
  service relating to the Video/ Audio program, multiparty real time 
  communication, e-commerce providing specific information, and on 
  demand service appropriate to the personal taste.

  Especially, with the equipment of the return path for the 
  interconnection network service, user wants not only high-quality 
  multi-channel service but also new ways to interact with content 
  providers and other customers. Now, there are several DBS providers 
  such as satellite, cable, and IPTV service provider using satellite, 
  cable, and IP network respectively. Unfortunately, due to the limit 
  of the bandwidth of uplink as return path in satellite and cable 
  network, there are some difficulties for the dynamic and seamless DBS. 
  Meanwhile, thanks to the broadband convergence network such as FTTH 
  supporting enough bandwidth, IPTV is able to provide bidirectional 
  interactive DBS vividly.

  Standard for the interactive DBS is in progress actively in many 
  organizations. For example, there is DVB-MHP for the satellite data 
  service, OCAP for the cable network which is nominated by CableLabs 
  and ACAP for the terrestrial data service which is proposed by ATSC. 
  However, because there is no explicit standard for the DBS over IPTV, 
  a lot of Telco prepare its interactive DBS with different format and 
  standard. This causes incompatible service model and platform. 
  Therefore, it is necessary to establish IP-based optimal DBS standard
  including efficient transmission standard to support various powerful 
  interactive service in IPTV.

  IPTV has affinity to adopt multicasting transmission of satellite and 
  cable data broadcasting system and furthermore integrate it with 
  unicasting transmission to provide bi-directional interactive 
  services. IP multicasting with unicasting transmission requirements 
  must be presented to reduce current waste of bandwidth and to magnify 
  incomplete data service for the perfect service. Also for the 
  reliable delivery of the Video, Audio and data contents, it is 
  essential to establish service requirements of bandwidth and 
  congestion control in network view. 

  Finally, DBS receiver supports a lot of program supplementary 
  services in one channel without channel change by joining several 
  multicasting channels including supplementary data channel 
  simultaneously. Besides, DBS receiver have to recognize the data 
  renewal to synchronize with the DBS database server. DBS data should 
  be supported in various media format for the delivery of substantial 
  contents.

1.2 Scope of this document

  This document defines requirements of DBS must satisfy in order to 
  transmit interactive multimedia data to customers in IPTV without 
  seamless. Since IP network can support the enough bandwidth to adapt 
  the multicast and unicast simultaneously, DBS is efficiently usable 
  to practical service applications according to the service provider's 
  scenario.

  In considering various service scenarios in DBS over IPTV, this 
  document points several use cases requiring DBS in IPTV. Then 
  including some advantages of previous multicasting or unicasting 
  transmission mechanism, this paper explained how the combination of 
  multicasting and unicasting transmission method contributes to DBS 
  applications diversely in IPTV. Following this, this document 
  proposes general requirements of DBS and multicasting with unicasting 
  transmission requirements. Next, MPEG2 over IP requirements will be 
  provided with points of bandwidth, network reliability and congestion 
  control. Finally, receiver requirements to be supported in STB, 
  compatibility of media format are discussed with security 
  considerations.

2. Convention

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.

3. Terminology

  Internet Protocol Television (IPTV): Digital TV service is provided 
           over IP networks such as DSL and fiber broadband access 
           networks to television set. IPTV includes the use of the 
           IGMP signaling protocol to switch channels, and the use of 
           multicasting to improve efficiency by ensuring that only 
           the channels that watched are transmitted to the subscriber.
           IPTV services also can include Video on demand (VOD), Voice 
           of IP (VoIP), data broadcasting service (DBS), Internet, 
           and so forth.

  Triple Play Services (TPS): Integrated services of telephone (voice), 
           Internet (data), digital TV (video) are provided to 
           customers by simple and single networks. These services are
           combined close to each other.

  Data Broadcasting Service (DBS): DBS is a generic term to describe 
           the data broadcasting service to transmit information and
           interactive data including multimedia.

  DBS data: A set of data to provide DBS. DBS data describes the
           feature of multimedia content used in DBS.

  DBS System: A set of system consisting of several data entities such 
           as data generation, data delivery, data transmission and
           data return server.

  DBS Provider (sender): A DBS provider is a logical entity that
           provides (sends) DBS to one or more DBS receivers.

  DBS Receiver (subscriber): A DBS receiver is a logical entity that 
           receives (subscribes) DBS from a DBS provider.

  DBS interactivity: interactive connection for bi-directional 
           communication between DBS data or entities.
 
  DBS Transport Protocol: A Protocol that transports DBS data from a 
           DBS provider (sender) to DBS receiver.

  DBS network: A network that DBS data is transmitted from DBS provider 
           to the DBS receiver.

  DBS database server: A database server that has DBS data in DBS
           provider system.

4. Use Cases requiring DBS in IPTV

  DBS in IPTV is able to support very wide range of uses cases for 
  enabling exciting and informative contents and multimedia delivery. 
  The following few sections define three types of use cases and 
  describe each application to provide an understanding of the scope 
  and type in DBS over IP network

4.1 Program linked use cases

  Program linked service in DBS is the delivery of specific data 
  related to the Video/Audio contents over multicasting or unicasting 
  IP network. Object Carouselled metadata transfer method is a base 
  level of carrying data service. A sender of program linked service 
  synchronizes the link data for the specific information with some 
  part of video streaming according to the time schedule or certain 
  region of image before the service. 

  There are lots of uses cases in program linked data services. For 
  example, in drama or sports program, the receiver gets the last or 
  present synopsis of the program and character's feature. In addition, 
  live event such as music concert or sport ticket service is possible 
  with a special TV program. Also, in economic or political contents, 
  user can join the program with poll, ARS, and quiz on the spot via 
  the screen. Sometimes, customer may buy same necklace of heroine 
  viewing the movie in linked commerce service. These use cases screen 
  skin can be organized in accordance with the service scenario of the 
  provider.

4.2 Program supplementary use cases

  Program supplementary data service is on the spot information 
  transmission when the customer requires certain information such as 
  news, weather, stock and situation of the traffic viewing the 
  Video/Audio channel in IPTV. Although supplementary data is not 
  related to the Video/Audio channel contents directly, it is useful 
  and convenient to catch out the quick and summary data with enjoying 
  other program simultaneously.

  Generally, in cable or satellite, supplementary service cannot 
  support various supplementary data in one channel (as usual, 1 or 2 
  kinds services are possible) because of the narrow bandwidth. So, 
  when the user wants to receive other information in one channel, he 
  or she must change the channel to get other information. While, in IP 
  network, due to the enough bandwidth such as FTTH using optical 
  communication system, many kinds of supplementary data can be 
  provided in one channel. So far, there are not obvious standard in 
  DBS over IP, a lot of service provider use different methods or 
  protocols to develop DBS in IPTV. In this point, the standardization 
  of DBS in IPTV is necessary.

4.3 Program independent use cases

  DBS in IPTV supports not only Video/Audio channel connected service 
  but also program independent service. In different with channel 
  connected service, program independent service is oriented from the 
  data communication for the delivery of wide range of information 
  likewise internet. Service provider re-organizes and refines the 
  source material of the internet to adapt it into the TV screen with 
  convenience. 

  Program independent use cases basically include informative contents 
  delivery such as news, weather, stock, horoscope, travel guide and 
  traffic according to the user's region or situation. Besides, there 
  are many use cases supporting real time multiparty communication 
  session. For example, distance learning participants can receive the 
  lecture and interact with the tutor using messenger or video 
  communication in IPTV. Also, network multiplayer game and karaoke can 
  be provided using the unicasting and multicasting protocol for the 
  multiparty players. Finally, T-banking and T-commerce service is 
  possible with relation to the on-line bank or credit card.

5. Requirements

5.1 General Requirements 
    
5.1.1 Independence of DBS data transmission

  REQ GEN-1: Various delivery mechanisms of DBS data in the IPTV 
  MUST be allowed.

  This leads to flexibility in selecting DBS transmission method of 
  multicasting and unicasting according to the situation of service 
  provider.

  REQ GEN-2: DBS SHOULD support many different data transmission 
  formats according to the service scenario of service provider.

  This provides adaptability in designing DBS transport protocol 
  suited to various service scenarios. 

5.1.2 DBS interactivity of multiple accesses

  REQ GEN-3: DBS providers MUST be allowed to communicate with any 
  number of DBS receivers interactively and simultaneously.

  REQ GEN-4: DBS subscriber MAY be permitted to access with any 
  other DBS subscriber in multiparty communication sessions.

  This might guide the flexibility and stability for the DBS 
  transport protocol as increase the number of the subscriber and 
  service in multiple interactivity communication sessions. This 
  also provides expansion of new DBS for the connection with 
  existing data service applications.

5.2 Multicasting with Unicasting Transmission Requirements
	
  This section describes multicasting with unicasting transmission 
  requirements based on the assumption that data transmission 
  method of DBS can be modified a little according to the service 
  scenario and network situation. Also, in the point of data 
  delivery properties, it is assumed that large number of data and 
  subscriber are scalable.

  Generally, previous data broadcasting services are transmitted in 
  a terrestrial, cable or satellite broadcasting TV with 
  unidirectional delivery being able to provide various media 
  services to many receivers. Recently, although bidirectional DBS 
  delivery is possible, due to the limited bandwidth of uplink, 
  many service providers prefer multicasting transmission method.  

  In IPTV, DBS can be delivered with IP interconnection for 
  efficient bidirectional data communication using multicasting and 
  unicasting transmission together due to its enough bandwidth. 

  REQ-MUL-1: IPTV DBS transmission method SHOULD be able to support 
  multicasting and unicasting together according to its service 
  planning.

  This might lead to the transport protocol flexibility to develop 
  transmission method efficiency in considering of IP network 
  characteristics. When high simultaneity is expected with or 
  without random user request, multicasting method is more 
  effective. On the other hand, when the user requests service 
  randomly with interactive connection or the chance of 
  simultaneity between user requests is low, unicasting method can 
  reduce the traffic congestion and provide more diverse DBS.

  Figure-1 helps the understanding of multicasting with unicasting 
  transmission.

<Contens>        < IP media platform >            < Service >
 ----      -----------------------------       -----------------
| PP | --> |  Multicast Video/ Audio    | --> | Channel service |
 ----      |  Broadcasting System       |      -----------------
           -----------------------------      
 ----      -----------------------------      --------------------
|    | --> |  Data Broadcasting System  | --> |                  |
|    |     -----------------------------      |                  |
| DP |                                        | Program linked,  |
|    |     -----------------------------      | supplementary,   |
|    |<--> |     Data Return Server     |<--> | independent DBS  |
 ----      -----------------------------      |                  |
 ----      -----------------------------      |                  |
| CP |<--> |Unicast Broadcasting Server |<--> |                  |
 ----      -----------------------------      --------------------
        Figure 1. example of DBS flow diagram 

  PP, DP and CP is program provider, data provider and contents 
  provider respectively. As represented in the figure-1, 
  unidirectional arrows represent multicasting and bidirectional 
  arrow means unicasting transmission between <IP media platform> 
  and <Service>. According to the service scenario, as describe in 
  the DBS use cases, multicast and unicasting can be adjusted each 
  DBS. Data Return Server receives user's service request and find 
  proper data in database server. Then Unicast Broadcasting Server 
  sends the requested data to the receiver.

  REQ-MUL-2: DBS system is RECOMMENDed to classify two multicast 
  group with In-Band Group for the Video/ Audio program including 
  program linked data application and Out-of-Band Group for SI 
  Service Information) data.

  Because the SI data in DBS of IPTV contains metadata of every 
  content including the information of transport stream and service 
  with events, if these are placed in the In-Band, it is very 
  redundant to waste bandwidth of every connection. Therefore, 
  separated multicast group to transmit SI data is more efficacious.

  REQ-MUL-3: DBS system is REQUIRED to control and monitor IGMP 
  (Internet Group Management Protocol) Multicast group join with IP 
  network specific parameter such as IP address and port. 

  In different with the terrestrial, satellite and cable operation, 
  IP network needs IP-specific network parameter to distinguish and 
  join diverse multicast group. Also, DBS system should recognize 
  the state of IGMP join to receive MPEG2 TS or change to another 
  connection.

5.3 Network Requirements 

5.3.1 Bandwidth

  REQ-NET-1: DBS network MUST recognize prerequisite bandwidth of 
  each DBS data application to ensure total necessary bandwidth of 
  DBS including Video/ Audio streaming contents in IPTV.

  This points the indispensable total bandwidth of DBS in IPTV to 
  support seamless data transmission.

  REQ-NET-2: DBS network is RECOMMENDed to use of priority 
  regeneration of DBS data stream to allocate enough bandwidth 
  about requested service for the quick reflection of user's 
  service order.

5.3.2 Reliability

  REQ-NET-3: DBS transport protocol MUST support reliable data 
  transmission in IP interconnection.

  REQ-NET-4: DBS network is RECOMMENDed to use of QoS(Quality of 
  Service) and FEC(Forward Error Correction) for low packet loss 
  and low delay with packet correction.

  REQ-Net-5: DBS network is RECOMMENDed to monitor packet loss to 
  ensure the error rate is within acceptable limit.

5.3.3 Congestion control

  REQ-NET-6: DBS using internet protocol network MUST provide 
  internet-friendly congestion control for adaptation of service to 
  the IPTV.

  REQ-NET-7: DBS system SHOULD control the lifetime of application 
  data when its lifetime is over or changed according to the 
  service user request.

  This might lessen the congestion of network because the service 
  providers don't have to send update information periodically and 
  invalidate unnecessary data without additional notifications.

5.4 Receiver Requirements 

  REQ-REC-1: DBS receiver MUST interact with the DBS sender bi-
  directionally to support multicasting and unicasting transmission.

  REQ-REC-2: DBS receiver is RECOMMENDed to join several 
  multicasting channels simultaneously to support various program 
  supplementary data services in one channel without channel change.

  In receiver, by linking up one channel out of many selective 
  Video/ Audio program channels and joining continuously metadata 
  multicasting channel at the same time, the service provider 
  organize both various program supplementary data broadcasting 
  services and Video/Audio program in one screen concurrently. 

  REQ-REC-3: DBS receiver is RECOMMENDed to use multicasting 
  transmission to get metadata for the DBS with Video/ Audio 
  contents streaming including linked data and to take advantage of 
  unicasting transmission to acquire more specific information.

  This enhances the service quality by offering plentiful 
  information and quick access for the updated data. Also, it can 
  decrease the congestion of the network by allocating appropriate 
  bandwidth to each data application and utilizing multicasting and 
  unicasting selectively according to the DBS use cases.

  REQ-REC-4: DBS receiver SHOULD be informed of DBS data change to 
  keep synchronization with the data of DBS database server and 
  update DBS data.

  Since new DBS data can be added as time elapses, the DBS database 
  server change unavailable data to new one and update its service 
  by renewing former data to vivid one. Also, DBS provider and 
  receiver interact with each other to check present 
  synchronization of data and to maintain up-to-date data in DBS.

5.5 Media format Requirements 

  REQ-MED-1: DBS data MUST be supported in any media format to 
  enable the DBS system provide many kinds of multimedia contents 
  without media format conversion.

  This might lead basic environments for the flexibility to design 
  wide and rich service scenario according to the service provider.

6. Security Considerations

  Data broadcasting service observes the DBS transport protocol to 
  deliver DBS data from the DBS provider to one or more DBS 
  receivers. The DBS data need to be protected against unauthorized 
  altering or deletion in its delivery. 

  REQ-SEC-1: DBS data MUST be possible to authenticate to protect 
  its information on the way.

  REQ-SEC-2: DBS data SHOULD be possible to deliver confidentially 
  to the individual users or group with data encryption.

  Security of DBS data can be obtained by using security solution 
  such as Digital Right Management (DRM) or CAS (Conditional Access 
  System). The originator can authenticate the DBS data before 
  sending or reinforce the security of network. 

  REQ-SEC-3: It MUST be possible to authorize user access to DBS 
  data differently according to the authorization level.

  REQ-SEC-4: It MAY be possible for DBS provider to request certain 
  authorization to the DBS receiver to check the access level or 
  right.

  DBS data may be protected at different levels according to the 
  importance. Some DBS data freely accessible while crucial data 
  may require authorization.   
 
7. IANA Considerations

  There are no IANA considerations within this document.

8. Normative References

  [1] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement  
      levels," RFC 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1997.

9. Informative References

  [2]  M. Handley and V. Jacobson, "SDP: session description 
       protocol," RFC 2327, Internet Engineering Task Force, Apr.
       1998.

  [3]  M. Handley, C. E. Perkins, and E. Whelan, "Session 
       announcement   protocol," RFC 2974, Internet Engineering Task 
       Force, Oct. 2000.

  [4]  Session Directory, ftp://ftp.ee.lbl.gov/conferencing/sd/

  [5]  Y. Nomura, R. Walsh, J-P. Luoma, H. Asaeda, and H. Schulzrinne,
       "A framework for the usage of Internet media guides," Internet 
       Draft draft-ietf-mmusic-img-framework-07, Internet Engineering 
       Task Force, June 2004. Work in progress.

  [6]  Thaler, D., Handley, M. and D. Estrin, "The Internet Multicast
       Address Allocation Architecture", RFC 2908, September 2000.

  [7]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I. and A. Thyagarajan,
       "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3.", RFC 3376,
       October 2002.

  [8]  Deering, S., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting", STD 5, RFC
       1112, August 1989.

  [9]  Chunglae Cho; Intak Han; Yongil Jun; Hyeongho Lee "Improvement of 
       channel zapping time in IPTV services using the adjacent groups join-
       leave method", Advanced Communication Technology, 2004. The 6th 
       International Conference on Volume 2, 2004 Page(s):971-975

  [10] Fenner, W., "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2", 
       RFC 2236, November 1997.

  [11] M. Westerlund, "A Transport Independent Bandwidth Modifier
       for the Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3890, September 2004.

  [12] A. B. Roach, "Session initiation protocol (sip)-specific 
       event notification," RFC 3265, Internet Engineering Task 
       Force, June 2002

10.  Authors's Address

   Lark-Kwon Choi
   KT.
   17, Woomyeon-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, 137-792 Korea
   Email: biorock@kt.co.kr

   Dae-Gun Kim
   KT.
   17, Woomyeon-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, 137-792 Korea
   Email: dkim@kt.co.kr

   Sang-soo Lee 
   KT.
   17, Woomyeon-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, 137-792 Korea
   Email: ssllee@kt.co.kr

   Jin-Han Kim
   KT.
   17, Woomyeon-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, 137-792 Korea
   Email: jinhan@kt.co.kr

11. Full Copyright Statement

Disclaimer of Validity 
    
  This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
  an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
  REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
  INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
  IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
  THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
  Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
  to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
  in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
  rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
  it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
  Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
  documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
  Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
  of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
  specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
  at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
  rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
  this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at 
  ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Copyright Statement 
    
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject 
  to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
  except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
   
Document: draft-lkchoi-mmusic-iptvdbs-req-00.txt

Expiration Date: December 2005