
 
 
 
 
 
Internet Draft                                       John B. Morris, Jr. 
Document: draft-morris-geopriv-core-00.txt          Center for Democracy 
Expires April 28, 2003                                    and Technology 
 
                                                             D. Mulligan 
                                              Samuelson Law, Technology, 
                                                and Public Policy Clinic 
 
                                                              J. Cuellar 
                                                              Siemens AG 
 
                                                            October 2002 
                      Core Privacy Protections for 
                        Geopriv Location Object 
                                     
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   In designing the requirements for the Geopriv Location Object (LO), a 
   key question for the working group is whether to include privacy-
   protecting rules inside the LO itself, and if so, how many and what 
   rules should be contained in the LO.  The Internet-Draft first 
   suggests that the LO should contain at least a limited set of privacy 
   rule fields, and second proposes a set of rules for inclusion in the 
   Location Object. 
    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         1 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
    
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction and Overview....................................... 2 
   2. Conventions used in this document............................... 4 
   3. Core Privacy Elements for the "Limited Internal" Approach....... 4 
   4. Specific Articulation of Core Privacy Elements.................. 5 
   5. Possible Alternate Implementation of Proposed Rule 3............ 6 
   6. Additional Discussion of Proposed Privacy Elements and Rules.... 6 
   7. Draft Requirements Language for "Limited Internal" Approach..... 7 
   8. Security Considerations......................................... 8 
   9. Acknowledgements................................................ 9 
   10. References..................................................... 9 
   11. Author's Addresses............................................. 9 
   12. Full Copyright Statement....................................... 9 
    
    
    
    
1. Introduction and Overview 
    
   A critical question facing the Geopriv working group is whether the 
   Location Object (LO) to be designed should include fields for 
   particular privacy-protecting rules, or instead should simply refer 
   to an external set of privacy rules. 
    
   There are at least four plausible answers to this question, labeled 
   somewhat arbitrarily as follows: 
    
        * "Entirely External" -- the LO should only contain a URI 
           reference to an external set of privacy rules that must be 
           followed by any recipient of the LO. 
         
        * "Bare Bones Internal" -- the LO should contain at most one or 
           two rules that specify, for example, that the Location 
           Information (LI) shall not be retained past xyz date (or 
           longer than xyz duration), along with a URI reference to an 
           external set of privacy rules that must be followed by any 
           recipient of the LO. 
         
        * "Limited Internal" -- the LO should contain a limited set of 
           rules (say, 4 to 7 rules) that cover the great bulk of likely 
           privacy situations (as well as the ability to include a URI 
           reference to an external set of privacy rules if more robust 
           rules are needed, or external rule storage is preferred). 
         
        * "Full Internal" -- the LO should be defined to be able to 
           contain a full, robust, and potentially complex set of 
           privacy rules. 
    


    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         2 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
   The "Full Internal" option would yield the most complex LO, would be 
   the most complex to define and implement, and may not be consistent 
   with the goal of enabling the use of the Geopriv LO on constrained 
   devices or with limited bandwidth. 
    
   Some working group participants have expressed the view that the 
   "Entirely External" approach would be the quickest for the working 
   group to accomplish, and that if fully implemented in the marketplace 
   the approach could give end users a great deal of control and 
   flexibility in the protection of Location Information. 
    
   Other WG participants (including at least some of the authors here) 
   have argued that the most effective way to ensure that users have 
   some privacy control is for the LO to be able to carry a limited 
   number of privacy rules. 
    
   It is not the purpose of this Internet-Draft to attempt to advance 
   and defend a definitive answer to this critical question.  Instead, 
   this I-D articulates one approach to the "Limited Internal" set of 
   privacy rules.  By specifying one view of how the Limited Internal 
   set of rules might be expressed, the Internet-Draft hopes to allow 
   the WG to assess some detailed specifics of that option. 
    
   Note that the "Limited Internal" approach is effectively a superset 
   of the "Entirely External" and "Bare Bones Internal" approaches, so 
   that both of those models could be implemented in appropriate 
   situations even if the LO can carry a larger set of rules.  Thus, 
   where a particular location service application in fact offers users 
   robust and effective means to create and maintain an external set of 
   privacy rules, that application could simply transmit the URI/URL of 
   those external rules in the Location Object.  But where an 
   application lacks robust and effective external rule servers, the 
   "Limited Internal" approach would allow a core set of rules to be 
   carried with the LO. 
    
   Five separate things follow below.  First, there is a brief and 
   broad-brush statement of the core privacy elements that we think 
   should be contained in a "Limited Internal" design of the Location 
   Object.  Second, there is a more precise proposal on exactly how to 
   articulate and express these elements; significantly, this proposal 
   combines three of the elements into one "permissions table."  Third, 
   there is an alternate proposal that adds a few additional elements to 
   the proposed permissions table, and thereby significantly enhances 
   the power of the LO privacy protections.  Fourth, there are a few 
   additional comments about the proposals.  Fifth and last is language 
   in the form of a Requirement that could be inserted into a 
   requirements document if the WG chooses the "Limited Internal" 
   approach. 
    
    
    


    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         3 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [1]. 
    
    
    
3. Core Privacy Elements for the "Limited Internal" Approach 
    
   The following are seven elements suggested to be included in a 
   "Limited Internal" approach to the Location Object.  The first five 
   elements (A - E) describe specific possible privacy rules.  The sixth 
   element (F) allows a reference to an external set of privacy rules if 
   the first five rules are insufficient in scope or complexity, or if 
   external rule storage is preferred in a given application.  The final 
   element (G) would facilitate the development of third party location 
   and privacy-protecting services, and would permit a constrained 
   Device to direct a Location Sighter to send Location Information to a 
   specific destination with a specific instruction.  
    
   Note that most of the elements and rules discussed below are phrased 
   in terms of prohibitions ("do not disclose except to . . ."), but 
   could probably as effectively be phrased in terms of permissions 
   ("permitted to disclosed only to . . . "). 
    
        A.  Limitation on length of data retention 
         
        B.  Limitation on any retransmission or further disclosure 
 
        C.  Permission to disclose only to specified individual/entity 
 
        D.  Permission to disclose only to someone presenting a 
            specified key (for instance, a shared key or the private 
            key corresponding to a particular public key), or a special 
            type of credential (an e-token to be defined). 
 
        E.  Requirement that location granularity/precision of location 
            information be reduced 
 
        F.  Requirement that external privacy rules be followed 
 
        G.  Instruction that location be transmitted to specified 
            external privacy or location service with specified 
            instruction. 
    
   Section 6 below contains some discussion of these elements (such as, 
   for example, a reason to articulate elements C and D separately). 
 
 
    


    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         4 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
4. Specific Articulation of Core Privacy Elements 
    
   The following attempts to express the above broad principles in more 
   precise language, combining three elements into a single "permissions 
   table": 
    
        Rule 1:  (Element A) Do not retain my location information [past 
                 xyz time+date OR longer than xyz duration]. 
         
        Rule 2:  (Element B) Do not retransmit or further disclose my 
                 location information. 
         
        Rule 3:  (Elements C, D, E) Do not retransmit or further 
                 disclose my location information EXCEPT to [abc] if he 
                 presents [xyz] credential or key, and only at [uvw] 
                 accuracy, where 
    
          [abc] allows for wildcards including "any" or "any@some-
                specific-domain" 
          [xyz] allows for wildcards and "no additional credential 
                required beyond the [abc] identity" 
          [uvw] has one of the following values: 
    
                A = no granularity change required 
                B = 10 kilometer radius (or within lat/long quadrant) 
                C = 100 kilometer radius (or within larger quadrant) 
                D = local or municipal civil designation (e.g., city) 
                E = state or regional civil designation (e.g., state) 
                F = national designation (e.g., country) 
                G = time zone 
    
          These elements would appear in a permissions table: 
    
                | Location seeker | Credential | Accuracy |   
                |                 |            |          |   
                |  [abc1]         |  [xyz1]    |  [uvw1]  |   
                |  [abc2]         |  [xyz2]    |  [uvw2]  |   
                |  [abc3]         |  [xyz3]    |  [uvw3]  |   
                |  [abc4]         |  [xyz4]    |  [uvw4]  |     
         
        Rule 4:  (Element F) Do not retransmit or further disclose my 
                 location information except in full compliance with the 
                 privacy rules located at [url/uri]. 
         
        Rule 5:  (Element G) Promptly transmit my location to [abc] 
                 individual or entity, along with [xyz] instruction 
                 (where the contents of [xyz] are NOT defined by Geopriv 
                 except for technical parameters such as maximum size). 
    
    
    


    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         5 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
5. Possible Alternate Implementation of Proposed Rule 3 
    
   The permissions table suggested in Rule 3 above could have some 
   additional values that would greatly increase the flexibility of the 
   LO rules, along the following lines: 
    
   |LocSeek|Credent|LocRes|TimeRes|Notif |Consent|Accuracy| Val |Policy 
   |[abc1] |[xyz1] |  r1  |   t1  |  n1  |  c1   | [uvw1] | tt1 | p1 
   |[abc2] |[xyz2] |  r2  |   t2  |  n2  |  c2   | [uvw2] | tt2 | p2 
   |[abc3] |[xyz3] |  r3  |   t3  |  n3  |  c3   | [uvw3] | tt3 | p3 
   |[abc4] |[xyz4] |  r4  |   t4  |  n4  |  c4   | [uvw4] | tt4 | p4 
    
        where 
    
        r is a Location Restriction:  r represents a region where this 
             policy applies (for instance, if I am in Munich, then it is 
             OK to pass this information) 
         
        t is a Time Restriction (only during working hours may my boss 
             obtain my location) 
         
        n is a "notification bit": send me a notification if you send 
             this Location Information to Location Seeker abc 
         
        c is a "consent bit": ask me for permission in real time (and 
             let the Location Seeker abc wait until I tell you) 
         
        tt is a "valid-until" field: this permission is valid until time 
             tt 
         
        p is the pointer to the privacy rules/policy that the Location 
             Seeker has to obey for this specific [abc] Location Seeker 
    
    
    
6. Additional Discussion of Proposed Privacy Elements and Rules 
    
   The following are additional comments and explanations of the above 
   privacy elements and rules: 
    
        a.  At least Rules 1 and 2 should be expressible in both 
   machine-readable form as well as an optional human-readable form.  
   Rules 3 - 5 are primarily intended to be read by Location Servers 
   that have sufficient intelligence to process the rules.  But when 
   sending Location Information to an Ultimate Location Recipient, it is 
   possible that the Geopriv Location Object (LO) itself would need to 
   contain some human-readable information (for example, if the LO is 
   sent to a ULR using SMTP or HTTP).  This approach is analogous to the 
   full and compact versions of privacy policies under P3P. 
    



    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         6 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
        b.  Element B and Rule 2 could possibly be omitted as a separate 
   flag or field, because a "do not distribute" instruction should be a 
   fundamental default for the Geopriv Location Object.  Nevertheless, 
   there is value in having an express "do not redistribute" indicator, 
   especially to emphasize that instruction to Ultimate Location 
   Recipients (who, as discussed above, may well be humans receiving the 
   LO essentially directly). 
    
        c.  Elements C (disclose only to specified individual) and D 
   (disclose only to someone presenting a key or credential) could 
   theoretically be consolidated, because establishing the identity in C 
   would effectively be using some form of credential.  The elements, 
   however, are expressed separately to emphasize that a Rule Maker 
   should be able to allow access to defined individuals or groups of 
   individuals, and ALSO to anonymous requestors who present a specified 
   key or credential.  In the proposed Rules, those two elements are 
   consolidated into Rule 3, but the possibility of an anonymous-but-
   credentialed Location Seeker is preserved. 
    
        d.  Obviously, the alternate proposal for Rule 3 (suggested in 
   Section 5) is more complex, but it also would enable the Location 
   Object to be more robust.  It would also be possible to include parts 
   of the alternate proposal without including all of the additional 
   fields suggested. 
    
        e.  Element G and Rule 5 do not themselves directly advance a 
   privacy objective, but they would greatly facilitate the future 
   development of privacy protecting (and other) business models.  They 
   would also promote the ability of a Target to bypass the location 
   services offered by an Location Sighter (such as a wireless carrier) 
   in favor of location services offered by a competitive third party. 
    
        f.  To be clear, the proposal of a "Limited Internal" approach 
   does NOT mean that all of the proposed privacy rules would be 
   transmitted in every Location Object within a given location 
   transaction.  It is quite possible that a LO at an early stage of a 
   location transaction (say, from a Location Sighter to a Location 
   Server) might carry full specifics on Rules 1 - 5.  But a later stage 
   of the same location transaction (say, from the Location Server to an 
   Ultimate Location Recipient) might only carry Rules 1 and 2 (which 
   would be the only rules directly applicable to the ULR). 
    
    
    
7. Draft Requirements Language for "Limited Internal" Approach 
    
   If the working group were to adopt the "Limited Internal" approach, 
   the following is a draft requirement that could be included in the 
   Geopriv Requirements document.  The proposed elements are drawn 
   directly from those listed in Section 3 above: 
    
    

    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         7 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
      Req. 1.  (Limited Policy language) Geopriv MUST specify a limited 
            policy language capable of expressing a limited set of 
            privacy rules concerning location information.  This policy 
            language MAY be an existing one, an adaptation of an 
            existing one or a new policy language.  The Location Object 
            MUST include sufficient fields and data to express the 
            limited set of privacy rules.  The limited set of rules MUST 
            include, at a minimum, the following elements: 
    
                A.  Limitation on length of data retention 
         
                B.  Limitation on any retransmission or further 
                    disclosure 
 
                C.  Permission to disclose only to specified 
                    individual/entity 
 
                D.  Permission to disclose only to someone presenting a 
                    specified key (for instance, a shared key or the 
                    private key corresponding to a particular public 
                    key), or a special type of credential (an e-token 
                    to be defined). 
 
                E.  Requirement that location granularity/precision of 
                    location information be reduced 
 
                F.  Requirement that external privacy rules be followed 
 
                G.  Instruction that location be transmitted to 
                    specified external privacy or location service with 
                    specified instruction. 
      
      
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   Security is, of course, is a core goal of the Geopriv working group.  
   The questions addressed in this Internet-Draft -- where privacy rules 
   should be stored and whether some or all of those rules should be 
   transmitted with the Location Object -- have significant security 
   implications, most directly on the security of the privacy rules 
   themselves.  The inappropriate disclosure of some privacy rules could 
   itself harm privacy, and thus a decision to include some privacy 
   rules in the Location Object could expose those rules to a higher 
   chance of security (and thus privacy) violation.  On the other hand, 
   if including rules in the Location Object increases the likelihood 
   that those privacy rules would in fact be known and followed, then 
   the added security risk of transmitting those rules may be outweighed 
   by the added privacy protection afforded. 
    
    


    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         8 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
9. Acknowledgements 
    
   We wish to thank Jon Peterson for his constructive criticism of the 
   proposals advanced in the document. 
    
    
10. References 
    
   [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
          Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
 
11. Author's Addresses 
    
   John B. Morris, Jr. 
   Director, Internet Standards, Technology & Policy Project 
   Center for Democracy and Technology 
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100 
   Washington, DC 20006                         Email:  jmorris@cdt.org 
   USA                                               http://www.cdt.org 
    
   Deirdre K. Mulligan 
   Samuelson Law, Technology and Public Policy Clinic 
   Boalt Hall School of Law 
   University of California 
   Berkeley, CA 94720-7              Email:  dmulligan@law.berkeley.edu 
    
   Jorge R Cuellar 
   Siemens AG 
   Corporate Technology 
   CT IC 3 
   81730 Munich                   Email:  Jorge.Cuellar@mchp.siemens.de 
   Germany 
    
    
12. Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 

    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                         9 
                       Core Privacy Protections           October 2002 
    
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    










































    
   Morris, Mulligan, Cuellar                                        10 
