   Internet Engineering Task Force                 Marie-Jose Montpetit
   Internet Draft                                  MJMontpetit.com, USA 
   Document: draft-montpetit-ipdvb-config-00.txt         
   October 2004                                    

                                                                                                                                                 
   Category: Standards Track                         Expires March 2005                                                                       
                                                                                
   Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration
      
   Status of this Memo
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, we certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which we am aware have been
   disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which we become aware
   will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, we accept the provisions of
   Section 3 of RFC 3667 (BCP 78).

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. The list of Internet-
   Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004), All Rights Reserved



















   Expires March 2005                                          [page 1]


   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004 


         
     Abstract 
         
     This document describes novel protocols to bind IPv4/IPv6
     addresses and flows to MPEG-2 Transport Streams (TS). For MPEG-2
     systems to become true subnetworks of the general Internet,
     methods are required to signal IPv4/v6 addresses to the link 
     receivers and transmitters; this is known as Address Resolution 
     (AR), or Neighbour Discovery (ND). In MPEG-2 networks, an IP
     address must be associated with a Packet ID (PID) and specific
     transmission multiplex. In this documents 2 mechanisms based on 
     standard XML semantics and multimedia signalling are introduced
     to comply to established IP over DVB AR established. These 
     protocols are seen to complement the current approaches based on
     SI table with a more IP centric approach.

   Table of Contents 
         
        Document History
        1. Introduction
        2. Convention used in the document
        3. Configuration table
        4. Protocols
           4.1 Simple Autoconfiguration
	     4.2 Subscriber Service
           4.3 Query/response
        5. Transport Issues
        6. Conclusions and Recommendations
        7. Security Considerations
        8. Acknowledgements
        9. References
        10. Author's Addresses
        11. IPR Notices
        12. Copyright Statements
        13. IANA Considerations
         
         
   Document History 
         
     -00 This draft is intended as a study item for proposed future
         work by the IETF in this area.  

         






   Expires March 2005                                          [page 2]



 
   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004     
      
   1. Introduction 

    The MPEG-2 stream is defined in the specification ISO/IEC 138181.
    It provides a time-division multiplexed (TDM) stream that may 
    contain audio, video and other information. Each frame, known as
    an MPEG-2 TS Packet, contains 4 bytes of header and 188 bytes of
    data. The standard also defines the PES packet (Packetized
    Elementary Stream) and the Section or Transport Stream (TS)
    packet. The PES packet can carry video, audio, private data and
    was originally used for some data streaming applications; this
    usage is now historical. Each MPEG-2 TS Packet is associated with
    one Transport Stream (TS) logical channel, which is identified by
    a 13 bit Packet ID (PID) carried in the MPEG-2 TS Packet header.  
         
    The standard also defines a MPEG-2 control plane that may be used 
    to transmit control information. For example, using System 
    Information (SI) Tables (ETSI-SI, ETSI-SI1], or Program Specific 
    Information (PSI) Tables. The Tables can be used to carry PID 
    information about the transported stream. MPEG-2 address 
    resolution assigns IP addresses to particular transmission 
    multiplexes, and within a multiplex to a specific PID.  
    The protocol signals this mapping to the other communicating
    devices (Gateways and Receivers). In some address resolution 
    schemes, this address space is sub-divided into logical contexts
    known as Platforms or Sections. One use of this sub-division is 
    to associate a separate context with each IP service provider that 
    shares a common MPEG-2 TS (uses the same PID). 
         
    MPEG-2 Receivers may optionally be assigned a Network Point of 
    Attachment (NPA) to uniquely identify the L2 node within the 
    MPEG-2 transmission network. An example of an NPA is the IEEE
    Medium Access Control (MAC) address. Where such addresses are 
    used, these must also be signalled by the address resolution
    procedure. Finally, address resolution may need to signal the
    format of the data being transmitted.  For example, the
    encapsulation used or any compression scheme that was used at
    the sender [ID-IPDVB-ARCH]. 

    The development of IP_layer address resolution would have 
    merit, particularly for IP-only services and two-way MPEG-2 
    transmission networks.  Not only would may release a Receiver from 
    performing MPEG-2 table processing, it would also allow much more 
    dynamic association of PIDs to traffic. Examples of dynamic 
    associations include: association/freeing of PIDs in response to 
    join or prune actions taken by multicast routing protocols, or on 
    assignment of new IP addresses using DHCP/DHCPv6.  Implementing 
    such protocols above the IP layer (e.g. using multicast IP 
    transport, as used by ND), would allow this protocol to be 
    implemented in a portable way not dependent on specific receiver 
    hardware/drivers and would allow future integration of the 
    functions within IP routers. 


   Expires March 2005                                         [page 3]
   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004     


    The nature of an MPEG-2 transport network and the need to maintain 
    flexibility for the operator, means that a protocol would need to 
    use operator specifics for address resolution. Adding to this 
    complexity, 2-way MPEG-2 services (e.g. DVB-RCS) employ a pair of 
    logically separate unidirectional TS, requiring separate return
    and forward resolution. No address resolution protocol has yet
    been defined for MPEG-2 transmission networks.  
    
    Another possible approach is to design a query/response protocol 
    (similar to, or based on the neighbour advertisements of the IPv6 
    ND protocol), which operates over an MPEG-2 TS Logical Channel 
    using a previously agreed PID (e.g. configured, or communicated

    using a SI table). While the Neighbour Advertisement Protocol 
    [RFC2461] could be used as a basis for such a design for IPv6
    addresses, the extensive use of broadcast messages to request and
    transmit layer 2 addresses would prove inefficient for systems
    using a wireless physical layer.  
         
    Both ARP and ND allow unsolicited advertisements of bindings by a 
    sender that are broadcast/multicast to the network, without 
    requiring the overhead of a client request.  However, both ND and 
    ARP are currently restricted to advertising a single association
    per message. To achieve efficient transmission and receiver 
    processing over broadcast physical layer, a method needs to be 
    found that advertises several associations in a single message 
    (e.g., following the method used in MPEG-2 Tables). 
         
    This document presents 3 IP-oriented protocols to allow link
    configuration of a ULE/MPE link above the IP layer. The 
    specification and definition of address resolution mechanisms 
    relating to MPEG-2 PID to/from IP address mapping function, QoS 
    association and other mapping functions (e.g. parameters 
    associated with a PID/Multiplex) will be supported using a table-
    based protocol to be extensible to ensure a wide applicability 
    to different types of MPEG-2 networks and intended applications.
 
    The mechanisms introduced here extensively re-use existing
    protocol machinery. XML schemas are be defined and used to
    present the required information from the tables. Because XML 
    implements standard grammar and syntax this address resolution
    information would be common to all MPEG-2 networks. SOAP 
    protocol exchanges may be a suitable method to transfer the 
    table information and SIP could provide the signalling mechanism
    in between hosts.  


    






    Expires March 2005                                         [page 4]
   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004 
           
   2. Conventions used in this document 
                 
    AIT: Application Information Table specified by the Multimedia
    Home Platform (MHP) specifications [ETSI-MHP]. This table may
    carry IPv4/IPv6 to MPEG-2 TS address resolution information. 
         
    ATSC: Advanced Television Systems Committee [ATSC]. A set of 
    framework and associated standards for the transmission of video, 
    audio, and data, using the ISO MPEG-2 standard. 
         
    DVB: Digital Video Broadcast [ETSI-DVB]. A set of framework and 
    associated standards for the transmission of video, audio, and 
    data, using the ISO MPEG-2 standard. 
         
    DVB-RCS: Digital Video Broadcast Return Channel via Satellite. 
    A bi-directional IPv4/IPv6 service employing low-cost Receivers.
       
    MPE: Multiprotocol Encapsulation [ETSI-DAT, ETSI-DAT1]. A scheme 
    that encapsulates Ethernet frames or IP Packets, creating a  
    DSM-CC Section. The Section will be sent in a series of TS Packets  
    over a TS Logical Channel. 
         
    MPEG-2: A set of standards specified by the Motion Picture Experts 
    Group (MPEG), and standardized by the International Standards 
    Organisation (ISO) [ISO-MPEG]. 

    NPA: Network Point of Attachment. Addresses primarily used for
    station (receiver) identification within a local network (e.g. 
    IEEE MAC address). 

    PES: Packetized Elementary Stream. A format of MPEG-2 TS packet 
    payload usually used for video or audio information in MPEG-2
    [ISO-MPEG]. 

    PID: Packet Identifier. A 13-bit field carried in the header of
    all MPEG-2 Transport Stream packets [ISO-MPEG]. This is used to
    identify the TS Logical Channel to which it belongs. 
               
             
    SI TABLE: Service Information Table. In this document, the term is 
    used to describe any table used to convey information about the 
    service carried in a TS Multiplex (e.g. [ISO-MPEG]). SI tables are 
    carried in MPEG-2 private sections.    
             
    TS: Transport Stream [ISO-MPEG], a method of transmission at the 
    MPEG-2 level using TS Packets; it represents level 2 of the 
    ISO/OSI reference model. See also TS Logical Channel and TS 
    Multiplex. 
      
    TS LOGICAL CHANNEL: A channel identified at the MPEG-2 level; it 
    represents level 2 of the ISO/OSI reference model. All packets 
    sent over a channel carry the same PID value. 
         
   Expires March 2005                                          [page 5] 
   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration
   October 2004

    TS MULTIPLEX: A set of MPEG-2 TS Logical Channels sent over a 
    single common physical bearer (i.e. a link transmitting at a 
    specified symbol rate, FEC setting, and transmission frequency). 
            
    
    TS PACKET: A fixed-length 188B unit of data sent over an MPEG-2 
    multiplex [ISO-MPEG]; it corresponds to the cells, of e.g. ATM 
    networks, and is frequently also referred to as a TS_cell.  
    Each TS Packet carries a 4B header, plus optional overhead. Each
    TS packet carries a PID value to associate it with a single TS 
    Logical Channel. 


   3. Configuration table
    


   4. Protocols

   4.1 Simple Autoconfiguration

   4.2 Subscriber Service

   4.3 Query/response

   5. Transport Issues

   6. Conclusions and Recommendations

   7. Security Considerations 




















       
   Expires March 2005                                      [page 6]  

         
    
   8. Acknowledgments 
         
    The author wishes to thank Gorry Fairhurst, Michael Mercurio 
    and the ipdvb WG members for their inputs. The author would also 
    like to acknowledge the support of the European Space Agency.













 

   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004 
            
   9. References
       
    9.1 Normative References

    

   Expires March 2005                                         [page 7]


  
   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004 

    [ID-IPDVB-ARCH] Montpetit, M.J., Fairhurst, G., Clausen, H.D., 
     Collini-Nocker, B., and H. Linder, "Architecture for IP transport 
     over MPEG-2 Networks", Internet Draft, draft-ipdvb-arch-00.txt,
     October 2004, Work in Progress, IPDVB WG. 
       
    [RFC826] Plummer, D. "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol", 
     RFC 826, IETF, November 1982. 

    [RFC1122] B. Braden, ed., "Requirements for Internet Hosts  -
     Communication Layers", RFC 1122.
    
    [RFC1112] Deering, S.E., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting",  
     RFC1112, (STD05), IETF. August 1989. 
         
    [RFC2461] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor 
     Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6), RFC 2461, December 1998. 
         
    [RFC2464] Crawford. M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over 
     Ethernet Networks", RFC2464, IETF December 1998. 
  
    8.2 Informative References
    
    [ETSI-DAT] EN 301 192 Specifications for Data Broadcasting, 
     European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).
        
    [ETSI-DVBC] EN 300 800 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB
     interaction channel for Cable TV distribution systems (CATV),
     European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).
              
    [ISO-MPEG] ISO/IEC DIS 13818-1:2000 "Information technology ? 
     Generic coding of moving pictures and associated audio
     information: Systems", International Standards Organisation (ISO).
        
    [ETSI-DAT] EN 301 192 Specifications for Data Broadcasting, 
     European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).
                   
     http://www.atsc.org/standards/Code_Point_Registry.pdf


   Expires March 2005                                          [page 8]


   INTERNET DRAFT Protocols for MPEG-2 network configuration 
   October 2004 
      
   9. Author's Address 
         
      Marie-Jose Montpetit 
      MJMontpetit.com
      Email: marie@mjmontpetit.com 

    10. IPR Notices

    Intellectual Property Statement

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
    to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
    in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
    rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
    it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
    Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
    documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
    of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
    at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
    ipr@ietf.org.

    Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

   11. Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in
   BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all
   their rights.

   12. IANA Considerations 
          
   NOT KNOWN AT THIS TIME.  

   Expires March 2005                                         [page 9] 

