



CoRE Working Group                                            C. Bormann
Internet-Draft                                   Universitaet Bremen TZI
Intended status: Informational                                A. Betzler
Expires: January 4, 2015                                        C. Gomez
                                                             I. Demirkol
                     Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya/Fundacio i2CAT
                                                           July 03, 2014


                CoAP Simple Congestion Control/Advanced
                      draft-bormann-core-cocoa-02

Abstract

   The CoAP protocol needs to be implemented in such a way that it does
   not cause persistent congestion on the network it uses.  The CoRE
   CoAP specification defines basic behavior that exhibits low risk of
   congestion with minimal implementation requirements.  It also leaves
   room for combining the base specification with advanced congestion
   control mechanisms with higher performance.

   This specification defines some simple advanced CoRE Congestion
   Control mechanisms, Simple CoCoA.  In the present version -02, it is
   making use of input from simulations and experiments in real
   networks.  The specification might still benefit from simplifying it
   further.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2015.








Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Advanced CoAP Congestion Control: RTO Estimation  . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Blind RTO Estimate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Measured RTO Estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.1.  Modifications to the algorithm of RFC 6298  . . . . .   5
       3.2.2.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Lifetime, Aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Advanced CoAP Congestion Control: Non-Confirmables  . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   (See Abstract.)

   Extended rationale for this specification can be found in
   [I-D.bormann-core-congestion-control] and
   [I-D.eggert-core-congestion-control], as well as in the minutes of
   the IETF 84 CoRE WG meetings.







Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


1.1.  Terminology

   This specification uses terms from [RFC7252].  In addition, it
   defines the following terminology:

   Initiator:  The endpoint that sends the message that initiates an
      exchange.  E.g., the party that sends a confirmable message, or a
      non-confirmable message conveying a request.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] when they
   appear in ALL CAPS.  These words may also appear in this document in
   lower case as plain English words, absent their normative meanings.

   (Note that this document is itself informational, but it is
   discussing normative statements.)

   The term "byte", abbreviated by "B", is used in its now customary
   sense as a synonym for "octet".

2.  Context

   In the Vancouver IETF 84 CoRE meeting, a path forward was defined
   that includes a very simple basic scheme (lock-step with a number of
   parallel exchanges of 1) in the base specification together with
   performance-enhancing advanced mechanisms.

   The present specification is based on the approved text in the
   [RFC7252] base specification.  It is making use of the text that
   permits advanced congestion control mechanisms and allows them to
   change protocol parameters, including NSTART and the binary
   exponential backoff mechanism.  Note that Section 4.8 of [RFC7252]
   limits the leeway that implementations have in changing the CoRE
   protocol parameters.

   The present specification also assumes that, outside of exchanges,
   non-confirmable messages can only be used at a limited rate without
   an advanced congestion control mechanism (this is mainly relevant for
   -observe).  It is also intended to address the [RFC5405] guideline
   about combining congestion control state for a destination; and to
   clarify its meaning for CoAP using the definition of an endpoint.

   The present specification does not address multicast or dithering
   beyond basic retransmission dithering.






Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


3.  Advanced CoAP Congestion Control: RTO Estimation

   For an initiator that plans to make multiple requests to one
   destination endpoint, it may be worthwhile to make RTT measurements
   in order to obtain a better RTO estimation than that implied by the
   default initial timeout of 2 to 3 s.  This is based on the usual
   algorithms for RTO estimation [RFC6298], with appropriately extended
   default/base values, as proposed in Section 3.2.1.  Note that such a
   mechanism must, during idle periods, decay RTO estimates that are
   shorter or longer than the basic RTO estimate back to the basic RTO
   estimate, until fresh measurements become available again, as
   proposed in Section 3.3.

   One important consideration not relevant for TCP is the fact that a
   CoAP round-trip may include application processing time, which may be
   hard to predict, and may differ between different resources available
   at the same endpoint.  Also, for communications with networks of
   constrained devices that apply radio duty cycling, large and variable
   round-trip times are likely to be observed.  Servers will only
   trigger their early ACKs (with a non-piggybacked response to be sent
   later) based on the default timers, e.g. after 1 s.  A client that
   has arrived at a RTO estimate shorter than 1 s SHOULD therefore use a
   larger backoff factor for retransmissions to avoid expending all of
   its retransmissions in the default interval of 2 to 3 s.  A proposal
   for a mechanism with variable backoff factors is presented in
   Section 3.2.1.

   It may also be worthwhile to do RTT estimates not just based on
   information measured from a single destination endpoint, but also
   based on entire hosts (IP addresses) and/or complete prefixes (e.g.,
   maintain an RTT estimate for a whole /64).  The exact way this can be
   used to reduce the amount of state in an initiator is for further
   study.

3.1.  Blind RTO Estimate

   The initial RTO estimate for an endpoint is set to 2 seconds.

   If only the initial RTO estimate is available, the RTO estimate for
   each of up to NSTART exchanges started in parallel is set to 2 s
   times the number of parallel exchanges, e.g. if two exchanges are
   already running, the initial RTO estimate for an additional exchange
   is 6 seconds.








Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


3.2.  Measured RTO Estimate

   The RTO estimator runs two copies of the algorithm defined in
   [RFC6298], as modified in Section 3.2.1: One copy for exchanges that
   complete on initial transmissions (the "strong estimator"), and one
   copy for exchanges that have run into retransmissions, where only the
   first two retransmissions are considered (the "weak estimator").  For
   the latter, there is some ambiguity whether a response is based on
   the initial transmission or the retransmissions.  For the purposes of
   the weak estimator, the time from the initial transmission counts.
   Responses obtained after the third retransmission are not used to
   update an estimator.

   The overall RTO estimate is an exponentially weighted moving average
   (alpha = 0.5) computed of the strong and the weak estimator, which is
   evolved after each contribution to the weak estimator (1) or to the
   strong estimator (2), from the estimator that made the most recent
   contribution:

      RTO_overall_ := 0.25 * RTO_weak_ + 0.75 * RTO_overall_ (1)

      RTO_overall_ := 0.5 * RTO_strong_ + 0.5 * RTO_overall_ (2)

   (Splitting this update into the two cases avoids making the
   contribution of the weak estimator too big in naturally lossy
   networks.)

3.2.1.  Modifications to the algorithm of RFC 6298

   This subsection presents three modifications that must be applied to
   the algorithm of [RFC6298] as per this document.  The first two
   recommend new parameter settings.  The third one is the variable
   backoff factor mechanism.

   The initial value for each of the two RTO estimators is 2 s.

   For the weak estimator, the factor K (the RTT variance multiplier) is
   set to 1 instead of 4.  This is necessary to avoid a strong increase
   of the RTO in the case that the RTTVAR value is very large, which may
   be the case if a weak RTT measurement is obtained after one or more
   retransmissions.

   If an RTO estimation is lower than 1 s or higher than 3 s, instead of
   applying a binary backoff factor in both cases, a variable backoff
   factor is used.  For RTO estimations below 1 s, the RTO for a
   retransmission is multiplied by 3, while for estimations above 3 s,
   the RTO is multiplied only by 1.5 (this updated choice of numbers to
   be verified by more simulations).  This helps to avoid that exchanges



Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


   with small initial RTOs use up all retransmissions in a short
   interval of time and exchanges with large initial RTOs may not be
   able to carry out all retransmissions within MAX_TRANSMIT_WAIT
   (93 s).

   The binary exponential backoff is truncated at 32 seconds.  Similar
   to the way retransmissions are handled in the base specification,
   they are dithered between 1 x RTO and ACK_RANDOM_FACTOR x RTO.

3.2.2.  Discussion

   In contrast to [RFC6298], this algorithm attempts to make use of
   ambiguous information from retransmissions.  This is motivated by the
   high non-congestion loss rates expected in constrained node networks,
   and the need to update the RTO estimators even in the presence of
   loss.  Additional investigation is required to determine whether this
   is indeed justified.

3.3.  Lifetime, Aging

   The state of the RTO estimators for an endpoint SHOULD be kept as
   long as possible.  If other state is kept for the endpoint (such as a
   DTLS connection), it is very strongly RECOMMENDED to keep the RTO
   state alive at least as long as this other state.  It MUST be kept
   for at least 255 s.

   If an estimator has a value that is lower than 1 s, and it is left
   without further update for 16 times its current value, the RTO
   estimate is doubled.  If an estimator has a value that is higher than
   3 s, and it is left without further update for 4 times its current
   value, the RTO estimate is set to be

      RTO_overall_ := 1 s + (0.5 * RTO_overall_)

   (Note that, instead of running a timer, it is possible to implement
   these RTO aging calculations cumulatively at the time the estimator
   is used next.)

4.  Advanced CoAP Congestion Control: Non-Confirmables

   (TO DO: Align this with final consensus on -observe!)

   A CoAP endpoint MUST NOT send non-confirmables to another CoAP
   endpoint at a rate higher than defined by this document.  Independent
   of any congestion control mechanisms, a CoAP endpoint can always send
   non-confirmables if their rate does not exceed 1 B/s.





Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


   Non-confirmables that form part of exchanges are governed by the
   rules for exchanges.

   Non-confirmables outside exchanges (e.g., [I-D.ietf-core-observe]
   notifications sent as non-confirmables) are governed by the following
   rules:

   1.  Of any 16 consecutive messages towards this endpoint that aren't
       responses or acknowledgments, at least 2 of the messages must be
       confirmable.

   2.  The confirmable messages must be sent under an RTO estimator, as
       specified in Section 3.

   3.  The packet rate of non-confirmable messages cannot exceed 1/RTO,
       where RTO is the overall RTO estimator value at the time the non-
       confirmable packet is sent.

4.1.  Discussion

   This is relatively conservative.  More advanced versions of this
   algorithm could run a TFRC-style Loss Event Rate calculator [RFC5348]
   and apply the TCP equation to achieve a higher rate than 1/RTO.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requirements on IANA.  (This section to be
   removed by RFC editor.)

6.  Security Considerations

   (TBD.  The security considerations of, e.g., [RFC5681], [RFC2914],
   and [RFC5405] apply.  Some issues are already discussed in the
   security considerations of [RFC7252].)

7.  Acknowledgements

   The first document to examine CoAP congestion control issues in
   detail was [I-D.eggert-core-congestion-control], to which this draft
   owes a lot.

   Michael Scharf did a review of CoAP congestion control issues that
   asked a lot of good questions.  Several Transport Area
   representatives made further significant inputs this discussion
   during IETF84, including Lars Eggert, Michael Scharf, and David
   Black.  Andrew McGregor, Eric Rescorla, Richard Kelsey, Ed Beroset,
   Jari Arkko, Zach Shelby, Matthias Kovatsch and many others provided
   very useful additions.



Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


   Authors from Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya have been supported
   in part by the Spanish Government's Ministerio de Economia y
   Competitividad through projects TEC2009-11453 and TEC2012-32531, and
   FEDER.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2914]  Floyd, S., "Congestion Control Principles", BCP 41, RFC
              2914, September 2000.

   [RFC5405]  Eggert, L. and G. Fairhurst, "Unicast UDP Usage Guidelines
              for Application Designers", BCP 145, RFC 5405, November
              2008.

   [RFC6298]  Paxson, V., Allman, M., Chu, J., and M. Sargent,
              "Computing TCP's Retransmission Timer", RFC 6298, June
              2011.

   [RFC7252]  Shelby, Z., Hartke, K., and C. Bormann, "The Constrained
              Application Protocol (CoAP)", RFC 7252, June 2014.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bormann-core-congestion-control]
              Bormann, C. and K. Hartke, "Congestion Control Principles
              for CoAP", draft-bormann-core-congestion-control-02 (work
              in progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.eggert-core-congestion-control]
              Eggert, L., "Congestion Control for the Constrained
              Application Protocol (CoAP)", draft-eggert-core-
              congestion-control-01 (work in progress), January 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-core-observe]
              Hartke, K., "Observing Resources in CoAP", draft-ietf-
              core-observe-14 (work in progress), June 2014.

   [RFC5348]  Floyd, S., Handley, M., Padhye, J., and J. Widmer, "TCP
              Friendly Rate Control (TFRC): Protocol Specification", RFC
              5348, September 2008.

   [RFC5681]  Allman, M., Paxson, V., and E. Blanton, "TCP Congestion
              Control", RFC 5681, September 2009.



Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              CoAP Simple CoCoA                  July 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Carsten Bormann
   Universitaet Bremen TZI
   Postfach 330440
   Bremen  D-28359
   Germany

   Phone: +49-421-218-63921
   Email: cabo@tzi.org


   August Betzler
   Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya/Fundacio i2CAT
   Departament d'Enginyeria Telematica
   C/Jordi Girona, 1-3
   Barcelona  08034
   Spain

   Email: august.betzler@entel.upc.edu


   Carles Gomez
   Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya/Fundacio i2CAT
   Escola d'Enginyeria de Telecomunicacio i Aeroespacial
   de Castelldefels
   C/Esteve Terradas, 7
   Castelldefels  08860
   Spain

   Phone: +34-93-413-7206
   Email: carlesgo@entel.upc.edu


   Ilker Demirkol
   Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya/Fundacio i2CAT
   Departament d'Enginyeria Telematica
   C/Jordi Girona, 1-3
   Barcelona  08034
   Spain

   Email: ilker.demirkol@entel.upc.edu









Bormann, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 9]
