


MIP6                                                            R. Jaksa
Internet-Draft                                               C. Williams
Intended status: Informational                               B. Sarikaya
Expires: April 25, 2007                                       S. Dawkins
                                                              Huawei USA
                                                        October 22, 2006


 A mechanism defined for requesting a mobile nodes binding information
                     draft-jaksa-mn-busolict-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This draft documents an idea whereby a Mobile IPv6 supported
   correspondent node (CN) may request or solicit binding information
   about a Mobile IPv6 node (MN) either directly or by way of its
   respective Home Agent.  Such a solicitation may be used for peer-to-
   peer applications and services.  A new Mobile IPv6 Group management
   system is also defined in this revision.



Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Usage Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Mobility Message Solicitation Request option . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Background on Binding Refresh Request (BRR) Message  . . .  5
     4.2.  Binding Solicitation Request (BSR) Message . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Specification of solicitation of binding updates for nodes
       within some predefined group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.1.  Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10



































Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


1.  Introduction

   The world of mobile communications is changing rapidly.  Not only new
   technologies evolve, but new communication paradigms and new ways of
   combining the existing solutions is created.  These developments will
   increasingly affect the users as they will use new services through
   some new device using some new communication technology.  In the
   following document we propose new changes and a new model for mapping
   Mobile IPv6 model to current modes of Internet communications.
   Without taking into consideration the services and application
   trends, there exist a danger of creating a protocol that is isolated
   from the types of services it will enable and help.  In this regard
   new services that are molded on top of Mobile IPv6 will have specific
   requirements from the mobility management layer.  Up to this point
   MObile IPv6 work has been defined without regard to the type of new
   services that are now possible.

   The tunneling of packets between the correspondent node and the
   mobile node via the home agent is known as bidirectional tunneling.
   Bidirectional tunneling ensures that the mobile node is always
   reachable when it is away from home, even if the correspondent node
   is not Mobile IPv6-capable.  The sending of packets directly between
   a mobile node and a Mobile IPv6-capable correspondent node is known
   as route optimization. [1]

   There may be usage scenarios whereby a correspondent node may wish to
   maintain the binding information for other Mobile IPv6 nodes without
   first exchanging data packets or requiring a mobile node to send
   binding updates to the correspondent node.  This draft documents a
   proposal whereby a correspondent node may query a home agent for
   binding information about another mobile node or that a correspondent
   node may solicit binding information from the MN directly.  Again,
   with such solicitation there is no requirement that a session is in
   progress or will ever happen.  The distant node simply may wish to
   have the binding information of the respective MN or wishes to have
   this information prior to beginning a session.  In particular this
   draft seeks to document a couple of usage cases.  It is assumed
   throughout this draft that the requesting correspondent node is also
   a Mobile IPv6 supported node that is requesting binding information
   from its respective Home Agent about another Mobile IPv6 node that is
   also being serviced by the same Home Agent.

   Finally the draft specifies a new model that provides for Mobile IPv6
   group management that will require additional signaling at the
   mobility management layer.  This involves the specification of a
   binding solicitation message and a binding solicitation response
   message.




Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


2.  Terminology

   See [2] for mobility terminology used in this document.


3.  Usage Cases

   Mobile IPv6 [1] defines a process during which a mobile node sends a
   Binding Update to its home agent or a correspondent node, causing a
   binding for the mobile node to be registered.  Usage scenarios exist
   whereby a correspondent node may wish to request the mobile node's
   binding from its home agent.

   Mobile aware applications or services may need to know if another
   mobile node is connected or active.  For example, the absence of a
   binding association for a homeless mobile node may mean that the node
   is not active or connected.  Perhaps the mobile node is in nomadic
   mode and is currently inactive.  A correspondent node can make a
   request to the home agent for the binding information.  Applications
   may then use the binding cache to obtain information about on-line or
   active status for the respective mobile node.  Examples may include
   end-to-end gaming applications that may need to know if nodes within
   some predefined communication group is active (i.e., on-line).  Here
   the Home agent is providing information to a node about the current
   reachability status of another node.

   Location based service support for mobile nodes is another usage
   case.  For example, a server may wish to periodically track the
   movement and/or location of mobile nodes that are subscribing to its
   services even though there is not an active on-going session.  The
   correspondent node providing the services may periodically check the
   location of the mobile node by requesting its binding information
   from the home agent.  Services may then retrieve the binding cache
   and push location-based information to the mobile node.

   Other usage examples deal with multi-homed MN (MONAMI6 supported MNs)
   [3] [4] [5] .  Some of those are enumerated in section 4 below.  One
   example is that CN may wish to beware of flow state bindings (that
   are being discussed in MONAMI6) prior to initiating communication.
   This will allow the flows to happen that are preferred by the MN when
   the CN is the entity that is initiating communications.

   New services are not only a reason for the development of new
   communications paradigms but they may also be consequences of the
   development.  As IPv6 mobility advances evolve it will enable new
   service scenarios and new business models.  Positioning and
   personalization is seen as examples of the current trends.  Also,
   peer-to-peer applications is the future the content of a service will



Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


   depend increasingly on the terminal being mobile as well as the
   preferences of the user (i.e., MONAMI6 based applications).


4.  Mobility Message Solicitation Request option

   This section defines a mobility message solicitation option that may
   be used by a node to request through a solicit type message a Binding
   Update or mobility binding type information such as the type of flow
   information that is being discussed in MONAMI6.  Since the MONAMI6
   work is still in progress, the actual format or additional extensions
   may be modified or added to this draft at some later point in time.

4.1.  Background on Binding Refresh Request (BRR) Message

   Mobile IPv6 [1] defines the Binding Refresh Request (BRR) message
   requests a mobile node to update its already existing mobility
   binding.  As is stated in [1] the BRR message is sent by
   correspondent nodes according to the rules in the base specification.
   When a mobile node receives a packet containing a Binding Refresh
   Request message it processes the message according to the rules in
   the base specification (see Section 11.7.4) of [1].

4.2.  Binding Solicitation Request (BSR) Message

   Deployment of Mobile IPv6 will require that the distant peer node
   (correspondent node) to know information about the Mobile IPv6
   supported node prior to initiating communications.  This becomes even
   more important when the Mobile IPv6 node is multi-homed (or MONAMI6
   supported).  Even if the Mobile Node is not multi-homed a CN may wish
   to simply know the bindings of a peer.  This information may be
   initially solicited by the CN.

   Mobility aware applications may also make use of this information in
   many different ways.  Such information may include but is not limited
   to such things as

   1.  MN is on-line or off-line;
   2.  if the MN is at home or not at home;
   3.  if the MN is multi-homed or not.
   4.  if the MN is behind a NAT or not
   5.  MN is multi-homed and if so multi-homed information as well as
       other yet to be specified MONAMI6 specific information (i.e.,
       flows, etc).







Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


   The BSR message will have similar message format as the BRR [1] ,
   e.g.,

                                   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
                                   |    Reserved                   |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                                                               |
   .                                                               .
   .                         Mobility Options                      .
   .                                                               .
   |                                                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

                                 Figure 1

   Additional Mobility Options to be determined in later revisions of
   this document.  Such additional options must be defined to obtain the
   specific kinds of data (such as enumerated in the above list) that a
   CN may wish to solicit.  Once MONAMI6 flow bindings are specified
   such mobility options will be defined so that a CN may solicit these
   bindings either for a MN via a direct solicitation or through a
   request to the respective HA.


5.  Specification of solicitation of binding updates for nodes within
    some predefined group

   The BU Solicitation approach may be used for peer-to-peer
   communication in a mobile environment.  This approach is based on the
   concept of that the Home Agent represents a trusted entity that
   constantly monitors the mobile nodes that it services and collects
   this information for the use of different applications.  The peer-to-
   peer applications reside on the mobile nodes.  The mobile nodes may
   then solicit binding information of members of some predefined
   abstract group that is layered above the mobility layer.

   A mapping may be defined between the mobility management layer and
   the group management system.  In such a model the creation of binding
   cache entries for nodes happens during group formation rather than
   when an active session is initiated or ongoing.  If at the group
   management layer there exist a security relationship between the
   nodes in the group, no return routability signaling is required.  In
   this case an optimized security model at the mobility management
   layer results.  In the case that the group is open and no pre-defined
   security among group members exists, then normal Mobile IPv6
   signaling is used (i.e., RTT, etc) when the initial binding
   solicitation message is made.




Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


              +-------------------------------+
              |        Group management       |
              |For Peer-to-Peer Applications  |
              |                               |
              |                               |
              |-------------------------------|
              |            IPv6               |
              |                               |
              |     Mobile IPv6 Subsystem     |
              +-------------------------------+




             Figure 2: Mobile IPv6 and Group management Model

   The Mobile IPv6 Group management model the use of a solicitation
   message to obtain binding update information for nodes in some pre-
   defined group that a node may at anytime initiate communication with
   will be required.  A binding solicitation response message will
   provide the request information to the querying node.  An interface
   between the mobility management layer will enable nodes to determine
   if another node is a member of its group and if so the type of group.
   Peers may form a secure channel of communication regardless of the
   location of where the node moves to.  Security methods such as IPsec
   or other security mechanisms maybe used to secure this communication
   channels.  In this scenario mobile host to mobile host VPN service is
   created.

   The use of peer-to-peer approach will become more popular.  Currently
   peer-to-peer approach is limited by the mobile ipv6 signaling but
   this will change when this approach is applied into mobile IPv6 based
   networks.  Peer-to-peer communication is seen as one of the most
   promising communication paradigms of the future as it allows resource
   sharing in a flexible manner.  It allows truly dynamic networking and
   offers possibilities for the service scenarios of the future.  Mobile
   IPv6 may define new extensions to enable better peer-to-peer services
   that may be based on this protocol and provide optimizations for such
   services.


6.  Security Considerations

   It is assumed throughout this draft that the requesting correspondent
   node is also a Mobile IPv6 supported node that is requesting binding
   information from its respective Home Agent about another Mobile IPv6
   node that is also being serviced by the same Home Agent.  As such
   there is already a security association between the nodes requesting



Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


   binding information and the home agent.  Instead of sending a binding
   update to the home agent, a request for another mobile nodes binding
   information is being made.

   What needs to be fretted out is a way to keep private home agent
   binding cache entries for mobile nodes that don't want to disclose
   this information.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative references

   [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [2]  Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
        RFC 3753, June 2004.

7.2.  Informative References

   [3]  Montavont, N., Wakikawa, R., and T. Ernst, "Analysis of
        Multihoming in Mobile IPv6", Work In
        Progress draft-ietf-monami6-mipv6-analysis-00.txt,
        February 2006.

   [4]  Huitema, C. and R. Draves, "Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming", Work
        In Progress draft-huitema-multi6-hosts-00.txt, July 2001.

   [5]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet Protocol
        version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484 Year 2003, February 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Robert Jaksa
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr., Suite 102
   Plano, Tx 75075
   USA

   Phone: 1 972 509 5599
   Email: rjaksa@futurewei.com








Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


   Carl Williams
   Huawei USA
   Consultant, Palo Alto, CA 94306
   USA

   Phone: +1.650.279.5903
   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org


   Bechet Sarikaya
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr., Suite 102
   Plano, Tx 75075
   USA

   Phone: 1 972 509 5599
   Email: bsarikaya@huawei.com


   Spencer Dawkins
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr., Suite 102
   Plano, Tx 75075
   USA

   Phone: 1 972 509 5599
   Email: sdawkins@huawei.com
























Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Requesting MN binding info           October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Jaksa, et al.            Expires April 25, 2007                [Page 10]

