


GEOPRIV                                                       M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                        Andrew Corporation
Intended status: Informational                         February 12, 2009
Expires: August 16, 2009


  Location Information Server (LIS) Discovery From Behind Residential
                                Gateways
             draft-thomson-geopriv-res-gw-lis-discovery-00

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 16, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Abstract

   The residential gateway is an ubiquitous device that has become an



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   integral part of home networking equipment.  Discovering a Location
   Information Server (LIS) is a necessary part of aquiring location
   information for location-based services.  However, discovering a LIS
   when a residential gateway is present poses a configuration
   challenge, requiring a method that is able to work around the
   obstacle presented by the gateway.

   This document describes the problem of discovering a LIS in the
   presence of a residential gateway.  The current version includes two
   proposed solutions to this problem, which will be evaluated.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Residential Gateway  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Use of Discovery for Third Party Queries . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Additional and Optional Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.4.  Solution Descriptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  IP-based DNS Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Identification of IP Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  DDDS Lookup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  When To Use This Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Necessary Assumptions and Restrictions . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.5.  Failure Modes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.6.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Anycast DNS Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Overview of Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.1.1.  Choice of Domain Name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  When To Use This Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.3.  Necessary Assumptions and Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.4.  Failure Modes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.5.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.6.  Speculation On This Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.7.  Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15









Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


1.  Introduction

   A Location Information Server (LIS) is a service provided by an
   access network.  The LIS uses knowledge of the access network
   topology and other information to generate location for Devices.
   Devices within an access network are able to acquire location
   information from a LIS.

   The relationship between a Device and an access network might be
   transient.  Configuration of the correct LIS at the Device ensures
   that accurate location information is available.  Without location
   information, some network services are not available.

   The configuration of a LIS address on a Device requires some
   automated configuration process.  This is particularly relevant when
   it is considered that Devices might move between different access
   networks.  LIS Discovery [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lis-discovery] describes a
   method that employs the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4
   [RFC2131], DHCPv6 [RFC3315]) for Device configuration.

   The drawback with DHCP is that universal deployment of a relatively
   new option takes a considerable amount of time.  Often, networking
   equipment needs to be updated in order to support the new option.  Of
   particular concern are the millions of residential gateway devices
   used to provide Internet access to homes and businesses.

   A residential gateway, or home router, provides a range of networking
   functions for Devices within the network it serves.  In most cases,
   these functions effectively prevent the successful use of DHCP for
   LIS discovery.

   This document explores the problem of configuring Devices with a LIS
   address when a residential gateway is interposed between the Device
   and access network.  Section 3 defines the problem and subsequent
   sections explore alternative solutions to this problem.

2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses terminology established in [RFC3693] and
   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-requirements].







Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


3.  Problem Statement

   Figure 1 shows a simplified network topology for fixed wireline
   Internet access.  This arrangement is typical when wired Internet
   access is provided.  The diagram shows two network segments: the
   access network provided by an internet service provider (ISP), and
   the residential network served by the residential gateway.

   There are a number of variations on this arrangement, as documented
   in Section 3.1 of [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps].  Irrespective of any
   variations, the goal of LIS discovery in this scenario is to identify
   the LIS in the access network.

                    ________
                  (/        \)
                 (( Internet ))
                  (\________/)
                       |
                       |
                 .- - -|- - - - - - - - - - - -.
                (      |                        )
               (   +--------+       +-------+    )
     Access    (   | Access |. . . .|  LIS  |    )
     Network   (   |  Node  |       |       |    )
      (ISP)    (   +--------+       +-------+    )
                (       \               \       )
                 `- - - -\- - - - - - - -\- - -'
                          \               \
                           \               |
                  .- - - - -\- - - - - - - + -.
                 (           \             |   )
                (      +-------------+     :    )
                (      | Residential |     |    )
    Residential (      |   Gateway   |     :    )
      Network   (      +-------------+     |    )
                (         /        \      /     )
                (        /          \    /      )
                (   +--------+    +--------+    )
                (   | Device |    | Device |    )
                (   +--------+    +--------+    )
                 (                             )
                  `- - - - - - - - - - - - - -'

                   Figure 1: Simplified Network Topology

   A particularly important characteristic of this arrangement is the
   relatively small area served by the residential gateway.  Given a
   small enough area, it is reasonable to delegate the responsibility



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   for providing location information to Devices in the residential
   network to the ISP.  The ISP is able to provide location information
   that identifies the residence, which is currently considered adequate
   for a range of purposes.  A network that covered a larger area might
   require a dedicated LIS, a case that is outside the scope of this
   document.

   In the network topology described, the goal of LIS discovery at a
   Device is to successfully identify the LIS in the access network.
   The residential gateway is a major obstacle in achieving this goal.

   R1.  An alternative method for LIS discovery MUST be provided such
        that a Device is able to successfully discover a LIS when a
        residential gateway exists between the Device and the access
        network providing the LIS.

3.1.  Residential Gateway

   A residential gateway can encompass several different functions
   including: modem, Ethernet switch, wireless access point, router,
   network address translation (NAT), DHCP server, DNS relay and
   firewall.  Of the common functions provided, the NAT function of a
   residential gateway has the greatest impact on LIS discovery.

   An ISP is typically parsimonious about their IP address allocations;
   each customer is allocated a limited number of IP addresses.
   Therefore, NAT is an extremely common function of gateways.  NAT
   enables the use of multiple Devices within the residential network
   and it could be argued that such widespread use of NAT has delayed
   the inevitable exhaustion of the IPv4 address pool.  However, NAT
   also means that Devices within the residence are not configured by
   the ISP directly.

   When it comes to discovering a LIS, the fact that Devices are not
   configured by the ISP causes a significant problem.  Configuration is
   the ideal method of conveying the information necessary for
   discovery.  Devices attached to residential gateways are usually
   given a generic configuration that includes no information about the
   ISP network.  For instance, DNS configuration typically points to a
   DNS relay on the gateway device.  This approach ensures that the
   local network served by the gateway is able to operate without a
   connectionto the ISP, but it also means that Devices are effectively
   ignorant of the ISP network.

   A residential gateway could forward LIS address information to hosts
   within the network it serves.  If the residential gateway were able
   to acquire LIS address configuration from the access network, it
   could distribute this information using DHCP to hosts within that



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   network.  Alternatively, a similar approach to that taken for DNS
   could be used--a relay would ensure that Devices configured before
   the gateway is able to acquire configuration from the ISP network.
   This approach is recommended for new residential gateway devices.

   Where residential gateways already exist, direct involvement of the
   gateway in LIS discovery requires that the residential gateway be
   updated or replaced.  The cost of replacement is difficult to justify
   to the owner of the gateway, especially when it is considered that
   the gateway still fills its intended function.

   Existing residential gateways have proven to be quite reliable
   devices, some operating continuously for many years without failure.
   As a result, there are many operational gateways that are a
   considerable age, some well outside the period of manufacturer
   support.  Updating the software in such devices is not feasible in
   many cases.  Even if software updates were made available, many
   residential gateways cannot be updated remotely, inevitably leading
   to some proportion that is not updated.

   R2.  The alternative LIS discovery method MUST be able to
        successfully discover a LIS without any assistance from a
        residential gateway.

3.2.  Use of Discovery for Third Party Queries

   It is desirable that any discovery mechanism is able to be used by
   hosts outside of the access network.  This facilitates third party
   queries (see [I-D.winterbottom-geopriv-held-identity-extensions]) by
   enabling identification of the correct LIS to ask.

   In some jurisdictions, interim solutions for emergency services
   require that a voice service provider (VSP) or public safety
   answering point (PSAP) be able to request location information from
   the access network provider.  These architectures mandate third party
   queries to accomodate calling devices that are unable to acquire
   location information and convey ([I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance])
   that information with call signalling.  In these circumstances

   Additional methods for third parties to determine the correct LIS to
   query are possible.  Within the confines of a particular
   jurisdiction, it is more feasible to coordinate such things as
   national ISP databases, which are one potential solution to this
   problem.  However, if a discovery solution also enabled third party
   discovery, that would be a distinct advantage of that solution.






Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   R3.  The alternative LIS discovery method MAY provide a means for a
        third party to discover a LIS.

   A network that is able to guarantee availability of DHCP does not
   need to provide a secondary discovery capability for the benefit of
   the Devices within the network.  However, if third party requests are
   desired, the supplementary discovery method could still be provided
   for the benefit of those third parties.

3.3.  Additional and Optional Constraints

   Certain other properties of residential gateways constrain the
   potential solutions to this problem.

   Operation of a network firewall function is often provided by
   residential gateways as a security measure.  Security features like
   intrusion detection systems help protect users from attacks.
   Amoungst these protections is a port filter that prevents both
   inbound and outbound traffic on certain TCP and UDP ports.
   Therefore, any solution needs to consider the likelihood of traffic
   being blocked.

3.4.  Solution Descriptions

   Any solution that addresses the problem of LIS discovery from a
   residential network SHOULD provide:

   o  A thorough description of the procedure that a Device follows to
      discover a LIS.

   o  A set of criteria used in selecting the procedure.  E.g., are
      there any indications to a Device that this procedure should or
      should not be attempted?

   o  An exploration of the necessary assumptions associated with the
      procedure.

   o  Any applicability restrictions.  E.g., does this only apply to
      networks that employ a particular access technology?

   o  A discussion of the failure modes and the consequences of
      particular failures.  E.g., how can each step in the process fail?
      What happens?  Be certain to consider use of the method in
      scenarios that do not involve residential gateways, such as within
      an corporate Ethernet network, or on a cellular network.

   An appraisal of the benefits and shortcomings of the solution is not
   necessary, but unobvious advantages or disadvantages can be



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   highlighted.

4.  IP-based DNS Solution

   In this option, the Device first identifies its IP address or
   addresses.  For each address, it attempts up to three Dynamic
   Delegation Discovery Service (DDDS) queries against the
   ".in-addr.arpa." or ".ip6.arpa." tree.  The first resulting URI is
   used as the address of the LIS.

4.1.  Identification of IP Addresses

   A Device identifies a set of potential IP addresses that currently
   result in packets being routed to it.  These are ordered by
   proximity, with those addresses that are used in adjacent network
   segments being favoured over those used in public or remote networks.
   The first addresses in the set are those that are assigned to local
   network interfaces.

   A Device can use the Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)
   [I-D.ietf-behave-rfc3489bis] to determine its public reflexive
   transport address.  The host uses the "Binding Request" message and
   the resulting "XOR-MAPPED-ADDRESS" parameter that is returned in the
   response.

   Alternative methods for determining other IP addresses MAY be used by
   the host.  Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) [UPnP-IGD-WANIPConnection1]
   and NAT Port Mapping Protocol (NAT-PMP) [I-D.cheshire-nat-pmp] are
   both able to provide the external address of a routing device.
   Proprietary methods for determining other addresses might also be
   available.  Because there is no assurance that these methods will be
   supported by any access network these methods are not mandated.

4.2.  DDDS Lookup

   The U-NAPTR [RFC4848] application defined in
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lis-discovery] is used based on an input domain
   name derived from each IP address.  The input domain name is the
   exact same as would be used for a reverse DNS lookup.  The domain
   name derived from an IP version 4 address is in the ".in-addr.arpa."
   tree and follows the construction rules in Section 3.5 of [RFC1035].
   The domain name derived from an IP version 6 address is in the
   ".ip6.arpa." tree and follows the construction rules in Section 2.5
   of [RFC3596].

   If the search on the domain derived from the full IP address does not
   produce a NAPTR record with the desired service tag (e.g.,
   "LIS:HELD"), a similar search is repeated based on a part of the IP



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   address.

   o  For IP version 4, the resulting domain name SHOULD be shortened by
      one or two labels and the query repeated.  This corresponds to a
      search on a /24 or /16 network prefix.  This allows for fewer DNS
      records in the case where a single ISP controls an entire /24 or
      /16 network.

   o  For IP version 6, the resulting domain SHOULD be shortened by
      either 16 or 20 labels and the query repeated.  This corresponds
      to a search on a /64 or /48 network prefix.

   DNS queries on other prefixes than those listed above SHOULD NOT be
   performed to limit the number of DNS queries performed by Devices.
   If no LIS is discovered by this method, three U-NAPTR resolutions are
   invoked for each IP address.

4.3.  When To Use This Method

   The DHCP method described in [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lis-discovery] SHOULD
   be attempted on all local network interfaces before attempting this
   method.  This method is employed either because DHCP is unavailable,
   when the DHCP server does not provide a value for the LIS address
   option, or if a request the address identified results in a HELD
   "notLocatable" error or equivalent.

   This method can also be used to facilitate third party queries, as
   described in Section 3.2.  Based on a known IP address, the LIS that
   serves that address can be identified.

4.4.  Necessary Assumptions and Restrictions

   Addresses for private address ranges (10.0.0.0/8, 192.168.0.0/16 or
   similar) MAY be used as input to this method.  However, if private
   addresses are used, only a DNS server within that network is able to
   provide the DNS mappings for the private address used; the public DNS
   does not contain useful records for private address ranges.

   Private addresses are never the final option for this method.  Public
   reflexive transport addresses acquired from a STUN server ensure that
   the entity providing access to the public Internet is identified.
   This solution assumes access to a STUN server that is able to view
   addresses from the public Internet.

   This solution assumes that the public reflexive transport address
   used by a Device is in some way controlled by their ISP, or some
   other related party.  This imples that the corresponding
   ".in-addr.arpa." or ".ip6.arpa." record can be updated by that entity



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   to include a useful value for the LIS address.

4.5.  Failure Modes

   Configuration of STUN server is vital to the success of this method.
   Alternative methods for discovering external IP addresses are
   possible, including UPnP and NAT-PMP.  These methods might not be
   enabled on the residential gateway.

   In cases where a virtual private network (VPN) or other tunnel is
   used, the entity providing a public IP address might not be able to
   provide the Device with location information.  It is assumed that
   this entity is able to identify this problem and indicate this to the
   Device (using the "notLocatable" HELD error, or similar).

4.6.  Deployment Considerations

   An access network provider SHOULD provide NAPTR records for each
   public IP address that is used for Devices within the access network.
   If the access network provider uses NAT, any DNS internal to that NAT
   SHOULD also include records for the private address range.

   NAPTR records can be provided for individual IP addresses.  To limit
   the proliferation of identical records, a single record can be placed
   at a the higher nodes of the tree (corresponding to /24 and /16 for
   IPv4, /64 abnd /48 for IPv6).  A record at a higher point in the tree
   applies to all addresses lower in the tree, records at the lower
   point are only necessary in the case of exceptions.

5.  Anycast DNS Method

   Anycast is practice of making a particular Service Address available
   in multiple, discrete, autonomous locations, such that datagrams sent
   are routed to one of several available network locations [RFC4786].

   One potential advantage of anycast is that datagrams can be routed to
   the node that is nearest according to the network topology.  This
   discovery method relies on network routing configuration that directs
   requests to a server within the access network.

   This solution uses a specially allocated IP address for anycast to
   contact the nearest host.  Any access network MAY use this IP address
   for the purpose described here.  The advantage is that this avoids
   any need for Device configuration; successful operation relies on
   routing configuration alone.  This solutions is unaffected by use of
   network address translation (NAT) by intermediate network segmentss;
   the first network segment that provides the anycast address is the
   one that is contacted.



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   The special IP address is constrained to an access network, and
   routes to this address MUST NOT be advertised globally over Border
   Gateway Protocol (BGP) [RFC4271].  This ensures that only Devices
   within the access network are able to access the host using this
   address.

   Stateless transport is preferred for use with anycast unless routing
   is known to be stable on the duration of a typical session.
   Therefore, relying on anycast for use with HELD or any other protocol
   that relies on stateful protocols would be inadvisable.  The
   discovery process need only rely on anycast for initial stages.

   Use of anycast for DNS deployment is well established.  This method
   relies upon use of a specific IP address that is directed to the
   nearest DNS server.

5.1.  Overview of Operation

   A Device sends a DNS request to the allocated IP address.  The
   request retrieves NAPTR records for the ".access." top level domain.
   The U-NAPTR [RFC4848] DDDS application defined in
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lis-discovery] is used to determine a LIS URI.

   [Open question: From RFC 2181 and the anti-forgery work, it appears
   that the source IP in the response datagram should be the anycast
   address.  However, other discussion on anycast seems to indicate that
   an alternative (unicast) address could be used.  If a unicast address
   is provided in the response, then when truncation is indicated, the
   Device could establish a TCP connection to the unicast address
   directly.  This has none of the negative ramifications normally
   associated with use of TCP and anycast.  Need to confirm, more for
   completeness than anything else.]

5.1.1.  Choice of Domain Name

   The choice of a DNS name to use in the request is an important
   consideration, perhaps the most important.  It is unlikely that a
   Device is able to select a name that has equal significance to the
   access network unless that name is fixed by specification.

   Several potential options for the domain name have been presented.
   One option is to use the ".local." suffix established in
   [I-D.cheshire-dnsext-multicastdns].  However, the semantics
   associated with that method appear not to be consistent with this
   usage.  A new subdomain under the ".arpa." root is also possible,
   although this implies allocation by the IANA, which is a small
   misrepresentation.




Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   This document proposes that a new ".access." root suffix be
   established for the purpose of identifying services associated with
   the network access.  Any server can claim to be authoritative for
   this domain.  All records associated with this domain and all sub-
   domains are MUST NOT be propagated and recursing resolvers MUST NOT
   recurse on queries to this domain.  The root servers do not provide
   NS records for this domain.  Servers SHOULD NOT propagate this
   information in zone transfers.

   Because any server can be considered authoritative for ".access.",
   DNSSEC [RFC4033] cannot be used to authenticate the RRs provided.
   What surety this method provides lies solely in the use of anycast to
   contact the DNS server.

5.2.  When To Use This Method

   The DHCP method described in [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lis-discovery] SHOULD
   be attempted on all local network interfaces before attempting this
   method.  This method is employed either because DHCP is unavailable,
   when the DHCP server does not provide a value for the LIS address
   option, or if a request the address identified results in a HELD
   "notLocatable" error or equivalent.

5.3.  Necessary Assumptions and Restrictions

   This solution requires specific network configuration where the
   allocated IP address is advertised within an access network.  The
   allocated IP address MUST NOT be advertised globally on BGP.  This
   method also assumes relative stability of the route between Device
   and DNS server.

5.4.  Failure Modes

   This method is subject to any redirections that might happen to all
   Internet traffic.  For instance, some residential gateways redirect
   all traffic through a virtual private network or other type of
   tunnel.  If such a blanket redirection is used, the DNS request will
   traverse that tunnel and potentially reach the wrong server at the
   other end.  Successful recognition of this situation relies on that
   LIS that is discovered using the HELD "notLocatable" error correctly.

5.5.  Deployment Considerations

   An access network provider MAY use split-view DNS to ensure that the
   ".access." tree doesn't appear to requesters outside the access
   network.  This ensures that this information does not result in
   misleading information being accidentally propagated.




Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


5.6.  Speculation On This Method

   The use of a newly minted TLD and the special semantics associated
   with that label is likely to be the biggest problem with this
   solution.  As happened with "Multicast DNS"
   [I-D.cheshire-dnsext-multicastdns] this might be regarded as
   heretical and it could be resisted with a vigour usually reserved for
   protecting a favourite kind of text editor.

5.7.  Alternatives

   There is no strong reason for use of DNS (or what might try to pass
   for DNS) with this anycast option.  Adaptation of any number of a
   range of discovery protocols is possible.  Typically, these protocols
   rely upon link-local multicast as an initial step.  Altering this
   phase to use an assigned anycast address instead of multicast is a
   possibility.

6.  IANA Considerations

   [RFC Editor: please remove this section prior to publication.]

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Security Considerations

   To be completed.

8.  Acknowledgements

   The solution in Section 4 can be attributed to Ray Bellis, who
   probably should be listed as an author, except that I haven't asked
   him yet.  The solution in Section 5 comes via Dean Willis, but the
   details are entirely concocted by the author and any shortcomings
   should be attributed accordingly.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]                                            Mockapetris, P.,
                                                        "Domain names -
                                                        implementation
                                                        and
                                                        specification",
                                                        STD 13,
                                                        RFC 1035,
                                                        November 1987.



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   [RFC2119]                                            Bradner, S.,
                                                        "Key words for
                                                        use in RFCs to
                                                        Indicate
                                                        Requirement
                                                        Levels", BCP 14,
                                                        RFC 2119,
                                                        March 1997.

   [RFC3596]                                            Thomson, S.,
                                                        Huitema, C.,
                                                        Ksinant, V., and
                                                        M. Souissi, "DNS
                                                        Extensions to
                                                        Support IP
                                                        Version 6",
                                                        RFC 3596,
                                                        October 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]            Barnes, M.,
                                                        Winterbottom,
                                                        J., Thomson, M.,
                                                        and B. Stark,
                                                        "HTTP Enabled
                                                        Location
                                                        Delivery
                                                        (HELD)", draft-
                                                        ietf-geopriv-
                                                        http-location-
                                                        delivery-12
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        January 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lis-discovery]                     Thomson, M. and
                                                        J. Winterbottom,
                                                        "Discovering the
                                                        Local Location
                                                        Information
                                                        Server (LIS)", d
                                                        raft-ietf-
                                                        geopriv-lis-
                                                        discovery-07
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        February 2009.





Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2131]                                            Droms, R.,
                                                        "Dynamic Host
                                                        Configuration
                                                        Protocol",
                                                        RFC 2131,
                                                        March 1997.

   [RFC3315]                                            Droms, R.,
                                                        Bound, J., Volz,
                                                        B., Lemon, T.,
                                                        Perkins, C., and
                                                        M. Carney,
                                                        "Dynamic Host
                                                        Configuration
                                                        Protocol for
                                                        IPv6 (DHCPv6)",
                                                        RFC 3315,
                                                        July 2003.

   [RFC3693]                                            Cuellar, J.,
                                                        Morris, J.,
                                                        Mulligan, D.,
                                                        Peterson, J.,
                                                        and J. Polk,
                                                        "Geopriv
                                                        Requirements",
                                                        RFC 3693,
                                                        February 2004.

   [RFC4033]                                            Arends, R.,
                                                        Austein, R.,
                                                        Larson, M.,
                                                        Massey, D., and
                                                        S. Rose, "DNS
                                                        Security
                                                        Introduction and
                                                        Requirements",
                                                        RFC 4033,
                                                        March 2005.

   [RFC4271]                                            Rekhter, Y., Li,
                                                        T., and S.
                                                        Hares, "A Border
                                                        Gateway Protocol
                                                        4 (BGP-4)",
                                                        RFC 4271,



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


                                                        January 2006.

   [RFC4848]                                            Daigle, L.,
                                                        "Domain-Based
                                                        Application
                                                        Service Location
                                                        Using URIs and
                                                        the Dynamic
                                                        Delegation
                                                        Discovery
                                                        Service (DDDS)",
                                                        RFC 4848,
                                                        April 2007.

   [RFC4786]                                            Abley, J. and K.
                                                        Lindqvist,
                                                        "Operation of
                                                        Anycast
                                                        Services",
                                                        BCP 126,
                                                        RFC 4786,
                                                        December 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-rfc3489bis]                         Rosenberg, J.,
                                                        Mahy, R.,
                                                        Matthews, P.,
                                                        and D. Wing,
                                                        "Session
                                                        Traversal
                                                        Utilities for
                                                        (NAT) (STUN)", d
                                                        raft-ietf-
                                                        behave-
                                                        rfc3489bis-18
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        July 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps]                         Tschofenig, H.
                                                        and H.
                                                        Schulzrinne,
                                                        "GEOPRIV Layer 7
                                                        Location
                                                        Configuration
                                                        Protocol;
                                                        Problem
                                                        Statement and
                                                        Requirements", d



Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


                                                        raft-ietf-
                                                        geopriv-l7-lcp-
                                                        ps-08 (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        June 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-requirements]                        Schulzrinne, H.
                                                        and R. Marshall,
                                                        "Requirements
                                                        for Emergency
                                                        Context
                                                        Resolution with
                                                        Internet
                                                        Technologies", d
                                                        raft-ietf-ecrit-
                                                        requirements-13
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        March 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance]                   Polk, J. and B.
                                                        Rosen, "Location
                                                        Conveyance for
                                                        the Session
                                                        Initiation
                                                        Protocol", draft
                                                        -ietf-sip-
                                                        location-
                                                        conveyance-12
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        November 2008.

   [UPnP-IGD-WANIPConnection1]                          UPnP Forum,
                                                        "Internet
                                                        Gateway Device
                                                        (IGD)
                                                        Standardized
                                                        Device Control
                                                        Protocol V 1.0:
                                                        WANIPConnection:
                                                        1 Service
                                                        Template Version
                                                        1.01 For UPnP
                                                        Version 1.0",
                                                        DCP 05-001,
                                                        Nov 2001.




Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       LIS Discovery w/ Res. Gateways        February 2009


   [I-D.cheshire-nat-pmp]                               Cheshire, S.,
                                                        "NAT Port
                                                        Mapping Protocol
                                                        (NAT-PMP)", draf
                                                        t-cheshire-nat-
                                                        pmp-03 (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        April 2008.

   [I-D.cheshire-dnsext-multicastdns]                   Cheshire, S. and
                                                        M. Krochmal,
                                                        "Multicast DNS",
                                                        draft-cheshire-
                                                        dnsext-
                                                        multicastdns-07
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        September 2008.

   [I-D.winterbottom-geopriv-held-identity-extensions]  Thomson, M.,
                                                        Tschofenig, H.,
                                                        Barnes, R., and
                                                        J. Winterbottom,
                                                        "HELD Identity
                                                        Extensions", dra
                                                        ft-winterbottom-
                                                        geopriv-held-
                                                        identity-
                                                        extensions-08
                                                        (work in
                                                        progress),
                                                        January 2009.

Author's Address

   Martin Thomson
   Andrew Corporation
   PO Box U40
   Wollongong University Campus, NSW  2500
   AU

   Phone: +61 2 4221 2915
   EMail: martin.thomson@andrew.com
   URI:   http://www.andrew.com/







Thomson                  Expires August 16, 2009               [Page 18]


