


IPR Working Group                                              M. Riegel
Internet-Draft                                             June 24, 2002
Expires: December 23, 2002


   Considerations for Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Standards
                   draft-riegel-ipr-practices-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 23, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   IPRs in standards have been in discussion for many years.  The legal
   aspects of patents and benefits and drawbacks for standards
   development organizations do not allow simple solutions.  Most SDOs
   dealing with communication standards are following the concept of
   Open Standards.  Among its principles are the issues of 'Open IPR'
   and 'Open Use'.

   This memo focuses on the methods the IETF is achieving 'Open IPR' and
   'Open Use' and expresses some possible extensions to the procedures
   of the IETF to enable consideration of IPR covered proposals for
   restricted areas in a well structured way.




Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


Table of Contents

   1.  Personal Disclaimer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Intellectual Property Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.1 Copyright  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.2 Patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Implications of IPRs on standardization  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Value of Patents in Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.1 Compulsory Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.2 Voluntary Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Current IPR practices in the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Refined IPR procedures for the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12



































Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


1. Personal Disclaimer

   This memo expresses purely the personal opinion of the author and
   does not describe in any part a company's position concerning IPRs in
   standards.  Furthermore, being an engineer and not a patent attorney
   the statements concerning legal details shouldn't be taken as proved.
   The ideas expressed in this memo are stemming from many years'
   involvement in standardization and in particular from the experiences
   with IPR discussions in the ROHC working group.










































Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


2. Introduction

   IPRs in standards have been in discussion for many years.  There are
   many publications covering the legal aspects of patents and benefits
   and drawbacks for standards development organizations.  Several
   special issues have been published by the IEEE recently [1][2].
   Most SDOs dealing with communication standards are following the
   concept of Open Standards.  A good explanation about the principles
   of Open Standards is given by [3].  Among the principles are the
   issues of 'Open IPR' and 'Open Use'.

   The issue 'Open IPR' is requesting the declaration of any known IPR
   during the standardization process by the participants.  To fulfill
   this issue all SDOs dealing with Open Standards have according rules
   in their charters.

   'Open Use' means that Open Standards should be implementable and
   useable without the need to strive for licenses from patent holders.
   Because there is no way to prove that a particular technology is not
   covered by IPRs this principle is barely to achieve.  Nevertheless
   some standardization organizations are staying with this principle,
   with remarkable success.

   This memo focuses on the methods the IETF is achieving 'Open IPR' and
   'Open Use' and expresses some possible extensions to the procedures
   of the IETF to allow consideration of IPR covered proposals for
   restricted areas.
























Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


3. Intellectual Property Rights

   The Intellectual Property Law knows about several different kinds of
   IPRs.  While Trade Secrets, Trademarks or Semiconductor Chip
   Protection Act normally do not have relevance in standardization, the
   Copyright and the Patent are quite important.

3.1 Copyright

   The US Code defines, that "Copyright protection subsists in original
   works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression from
   which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated,
   either directly or with the aid of a machine or device".
   Copyright protects the expression of an idea, not the idea itself.
   In standardization Copyright protects the expression of the standard
   means the text, the drawings, the perceivable form.  Copyright grants
   the owner exclusive rights for reproducing, preparing derivative work
   and distributing copies of the work.  As standards are normally a
   derivative work put together out of many particular contributions,
   SDOs require from all contributors to a standard, that the Copyright
   for standards contributions is handed over to the SDO.

3.2 Patent

   Patents were originally introduced to promote the progress of science
   and technology by granting to inventors exclusive rights for a
   limited time, when the inventions are made known to the public.
   In extension of the rights provided by Copyright, Patents are
   covering the idea itself, which must be a new and useful process,
   machine, manufacture of matters or new and useful improvement of
   these.

   Patents provide the patent owner a complete monopoly on the invention
   and the use of it.  Even if the same invention is made fully
   independently by somebody else, the patent owner can prevent the use
   of the invention, that means, prohibit that the (re)inventor is
   taking use of the idea.














Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


4. Implications of IPRs on standardization

   While Copyright does not cause major concerns in standardization -
   appropriate rules have been set up by all SDOs and are well
   understood and accepted by the contributors to standardization - the
   monopoly, a Patent grant to the owner, might cause serious trouble in
   standardization.

   It might happen that a SDO develops with considerable effort a new
   standard and this standard couldn't be used by anybody due to a
   Patent, which covers part of such standard and is not allowed to be
   used.

   More seriously, it is nearly impossible to make sure, that a standard
   is not covered by any Patent, as invention filings are not accessible
   by the public for some time.

   To cope with these matters SDOs are trying to get knowledge about
   related invention filings and Patents as early as possible.  It is
   common in Open Standardization that all participants in a particular
   standardization process have to declare the existence of all their
   related Patents.
   If anything gets known, the SDO is trying to get a disclaimer of the
   Patent owner that the patent can be used in such standard and all the
   implementers of such standard get licenses under fair and reasonable
   terms.

   What is meant by 'fair and reasonable' is normally left open by the
   disclaimer, and might be subject of business contracts between the
   Patent owner and the manufacturer later.





















Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


5. Value of Patents in Standards

   The conditions of a license for a Patent covered in a standard will
   be closely related to the importance of the standard for a business.
   Main differentiation might be compulsory standards, which are
   unconditionally necessary for a particular application, and voluntary
   standards, which are open to acceptance by the market and can be
   replaced by something equivalent, if the conditions are too
   expensive.

5.1 Compulsory Standards

   With the deregulation of telecommunication worldwide the number of
   compulsory standards for telecommunication diminishes steadily, but
   especially for telephony and public mobile communication systems like
   2G and 3G there still exist many standards a operator has to
   implement when getting a license for telecommunication or spectrum
   usage.

   Patents being covered by compulsory standards have to be licensed in
   any case, and this might contribute to the conditions of the license.

5.2 Voluntary Standards

   Open standards are aimed to be voluntary standards.  They often
   provide particular functions, not a complete network architecture,
   but building blocks, which can be used to set up a network
   architecture.
   It is quite feasible with voluntary standards, that the same function
   can be realized by another voluntary standard, based on different
   procedures, potentially avoiding known patents.

   Furthermore acceptance of a particular standard by the market might
   closely depend on the conditions to get all the licenses necessary
   for implementing the standard.  The market will go most likely for
   the standard not needing a license at all, and the organizational
   effort to set up licensing agreements is an important issue
   especially for smaller companies.
   The fast success of the Internet and the World-Wide-Web may have been
   highly driven by the fact, that the relevant standards are license
   free.

   Getting profits out of a patent used in a voluntary standard might be
   a difficult task.  If alternatives to an incumbent procedure are
   available, the implementers will most likely go with solutions not
   covered by patents to avoid expensive business negotiations as well
   as license fees.  And if an alternative is established in the market,
   nobody will have any interest in the patent and all the effort put



Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


   into the patent will be lost.

   Being in such an open and competitive environment, patents can be
   treated like selling goods in an open market.  The market will decide
   whether it is worth to go with an incumbent proposal.














































Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


6. Current IPR practices in the IETF

   The IETF is developing voluntary standards for the Internet and has
   established well thought procedures to deal with IPRs in standards
   discussions.

   Chapter 10 of RFC2026 [4] specifies the rules of the IETF on
   Intellectual Property Rights in standards discussion.  It defines the
   provisions related to copyrights, authors of submissions to the
   standards process have to grant to the IETF, as well as the procedure
   to declare knowledge of incumbent proposals as far as known to the
   author.

   IETF working groups have the goal to develop unincumbent solutions.
   To reach this goal the IETF has the intention to get known of
   incumbent proposals as early as possible in the standardization
   process to be able to look for alternative, not incumbent solutions.

   The IETF requires that contributors have to disclaim their knowledge
   about IPRs in their proposals together with submission of the
   proposal.  It is likely in an experts' world that the authors of
   contributions have good knowledge about the eventual IPRs of their
   own proposals in general.  With many experts contributing their IPR
   knowledge into the standards discussion it becomes quite likely, that
   all IPRs related to the result of the standards discussion gets
   known.
   In this sense a long list of coauthors on Internet Drafts is very
   supportive for developing unincumbent standards.

   It is common fear of contributors that their costly established
   rights on inventions will loose the value when their incumbent
   solution will become known to the IETF.  An IETF working group will
   likely develop a standard not comprising the incumbent solutions
   contributed to the IETF.

   Unfortunately this leaves not much space for incumbent functions in
   standards providing superior performance.














Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


7. Refined IPR procedures for the IETF

   Open, license-free standards have shown incredible benefits for the
   global economy.

   A huge community inside and outside the IETF is supporting the idea
   of open source systems and open source software.  They are all
   needing license-free standards to be able to implement them in the
   open source environment.

   IETF standards specifying protocols aimed for general use in the
   Internet should be kept license-free to support the fast and broad
   adoption in the market

   The IETF should stay with the goal to develop unincumbent standards.
   It might be helpful to provide a more accessible database of IPR
   declarations than the current list on the IETF web-site to support
   implementers as well as working groups.

   In cases where an incumbent solution might provide additional
   benefits for particular applications, the standard should be split up
   in the license-free mandatory part and optional enhancements probably
   covered by IPRs.

   o  Keeping license-free parts and incumbent parts separate would
      provide a well defined way for the IETF to include incumbent
      solutions as optional enhancements.

   o  Incumbent solutions should never become part of the base
      specification or mandatory part of the standard to enable at least
      interoperability of basic functions between all implementations.
      The IETF has long experience with protocols allowing optional
      enhancements.  PPP [5] might be one of the best examples.

   o  Optional enhancements might be, but do not have to be covered by
      IPRs providing additional functionality to the standard.  This
      allows the use of the best technology available for enhancements
      of IP protocols.

   o  Optional enhancements should always allow several different
      solutions for the same requirement enabling a competitive
      environment not only for the best technical solution but also for
      the most appropriate license condition.








Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


References

   [1]  Kipnis, J., "Beating the System: Abuses of the Standards
        Adoption Process", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 38, No. 7,
        pp. 102 - 105, July 2000.

   [2]  Egyedi, T., "IPR paralysis in standardization: Is regulatory
        symmetry desirable?", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 39, No.
        4, pp. 108 - 114, April 2001.

   [3]  Krechmer, K., "The Principles of Open Standards", Standards
        Engineering Society, World Standards Day http://www.csrstds.com/
        openstds.html, 1998.

   [4]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [5]  Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51, RFC
        1661, July 1994.


Author's Address

   Maximilian Riegel
   Maxfeldstr. 24a
   Nuremberg  90409
   Germany

   Phone: +49-911-538747
   EMail: riegel@max.franken.de





















Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IPRs in IETF standards                June 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Riegel                  Expires December 23, 2002              [Page 12]


