


Network Working Group                                     Kanoj Sarcar
INTERNET-DRAFT                                  Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Expires April 2004                                        October 2003


                    Additional Snoop Datalink Types
                 <draft-sarcar-snoop-new-types-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Abstract

   The snoop file format provides a way to store and exchange
   datalink layer packet traces. The format includes a Datalink Type
   field to indicate the datalink layer technology. This document
   describes extensions to this field.

1. Introduction

   This document defines new values for the Datalink Type field
   described in section 3 of [RFC1761], as well as an IANA registry
   for future types.









Sarcar                                                          [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Additional Snoop Datalink Types        November 2003


2. New Datalink Types

   In addition to the Datalink Type codes listed in [RFC1761], this
   document advertises the following type codes for the corresponding
   media:

                Datalink Type           Code
                -------------           ----

                Fibre Channel           16
                ATM                     17
                ATM Classical IP        18
                IP over Infiniband      26

   The IP over Infiniband packet format is described in [IPoIB].

3. IANA Considerations

   This document proposes the creation of a new IANA registry
   [IANA_snoop] to hold the various possible 32-bit (4 octet)
   Datalink Types. This new registry will hold the values described
   above in section 2 of this document.

   All new allocations and assignments to the [IANA_snoop] registry
   starting from code 27 will follow the First Come First Served
   policy outlined in [BCP0026]. Type codes upto 26 not listed above
   in section 2 (10-15 and 19-25) are considered reserved.

4. Security Considerations

   The addition of new datalink type codes to the existing file format
   poses no known security risks.

5. Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Jim Carlson, Brent Callaghan and
   Bill Strahm for meticulously reviewing this draft.














Sarcar                                                          [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Additional Snoop Datalink Types        November 2003


6. References

6.1. Normative References

   [RFC1761] B. Callaghan, R. Gilligan, "Snoop Version 2 Packet Capture
             File Format", RFC 1761, February 1995.

   [IPoIB] V. Kashyap, H.K.Jerry Chu, "IP encapsulation and address
           resolution over InfiniBand networks",
           draft-ietf-ipoib-ip-over-infiniband-04.txt, April, 2003.

6.2. Informative References

   [BCP0026] T. Narten, H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
             Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434, October 1998.

   [IANA_snoop] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, www.iana.org

7. Author's Address

   Kanoj Sarcar
   Sun Microsystems, Inc.
   14 Network Circle
   Bldg 14, MPK14-333
   Menlo Park, CA  94025

   Phone: 1-650-786-4785
   Email: kanoj.sarcar@sun.com

8. Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice



Sarcar                                                          [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Additional Snoop Datalink Types        November 2003


   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

9. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and
   furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
   otherwise explain it or assist in its implmentation may be
   prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
   part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
   copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such
   copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself may
   not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright
   notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
   organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of developing
   Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
   as required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
   not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
   assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE
   OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



















Sarcar                                                          [Page 4]
