


Network Working Group                                         Y(J) Stein
Internet-Draft                                   RAD Data Communications
Expires: August 30, 2006                                    Feb 26, 2006


                      Requirements for PW Security
                    draft-stein-pwe3-sec-req-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document addresses security requirements for MPLS pseudowires.
   We investigate security threats arising from the PWE3 architecture,
   considering confidentiality, data integrity and authentication.

1.  Introduction

   The PWE3 architecture defines a pseudowire (PW) connecting customer
   networks over a provider network.  The customer networks run a native
   service, which may be Ethernet, ATM, frame relay, TDM, etc.  On both



Stein                    Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                pwe3-sec-req                      Feb 2006


   sides of the PW a customer edge (CE) connects to a provider edge (PE)
   via an attachment circuit (AC).  The PW itself is a tunnel that
   transports the native service data across the provider network, here
   assumed to be based on MPLS.  PW tunnels are set up using the PWE
   control protocol based on LDP.

   For the purpose of the present discussion, the customer networks will
   be considered walled gardens, under the control of the customer.  The
   provider network is under the control of the provider, but accessible
   to multiple customers.  The customer expects the provider to ensure
   that its data traversing the provider's network be afforded security
   similar to that of a (virtual) connection of the native service.

   The following will be considered explicitly out-of-scope of the
   present treatment:
      security considerations of the customer networks,
      security considerations of the attachment networks,
      any security considerations that would exist were the customer
      networks connected via native service links
      security considerations common to all MPLS networks.

   The following is a nonexhaustive list of threats to be considered:
      accidental connection to untrusted network compromising user
      traffic
      maliciously setting up a PW to gain access to a customer network
      forking of a PW to snoop PW packets
      malicious rerouting of a PW to snoop or modify PW packets
      unauthorized tearing down of a PW
      unauthorized snooping of PW packets
      traffic analysis of PW connectivity
      unauthorized deletion of PW packets
      unauthorized modification of PW packets
      unauthorized insertion of PW packets
      replay of PW packets
      denial of service or significantly impacting PW service quality
   These threats are not mutually exclusive, for example, rerouting can
   be used for snooping or insertion/deletion/replay, etc.

   Special considerations arising for MS-PWs are for further study.

2.  PW Security Weaknesses and Strengths

   The PW user plane suffers from the following security weaknesses:
      the PW label is the only identifier in the packet (there is no
      verifiable source address, cookies, etc.)
      hence it is relatively easy to introduce seemingly valid foreign
      packets




Stein                    Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                pwe3-sec-req                      Feb 2006


      the control word sequence number processing algorithm can be used
      for a DoS attack (the sequence number processing algorithm can
      cause dropping of late packets, so inserting a single future
      packet can cause a large number of legitimate packets to be
      discarded)
   VPLS services built on Ethernet PWs, autodiscovery mechanisms, and
   multisegment PWs all introduce new problems.

   Note that many implementations start by assigning low PW labels, and
   thus a small number will usually correspond to a valid PW label.  In
   any case there is no penalty to incorrect guessing, and if one can
   inject one thousand PW packets per second, then one exhausts the
   entire PW label space in about fifteen minutes.

   The PWE control protocol introduces its own weaknesses:
      no (secure) peer autodiscovery technique is standardized
      authentication is not mandated, so an intruder can potentially
      impersonate a PE
      then unauthorized PWs may be set up, consuming resources and
      perhaps allowing access to user networks
      similarly, desired PWs may be torn down, giving rise to denial of
      service
      a PW that is to be torn down may be left up.

   Despite these weaknesses, PWs have the following advantages:
      most attacks require compromising edge or core routers (although
      not necessarily those along PW path)
      adequate protection of the control plane messaging is sufficient
      to rule out many attacks
      for MPLS PWs it is not possible to maliciously insert a properly
      formatted packet from outside the service provider network (since
      IP packets can not masquerade as PW packets).

3.  Example Attacks

   A PW man-in-the-middle occurs when an impostor causes two PWs to be
   set up instead of one, and stitches them at a provider router of
   which he has gained control.  Such an impostor can then snoop,
   delete, insert, and change, PW packets.

   This is different from an MPLS man-in-the-middle attack, which
   results from an impostor compromising a provider LSR somewhere along
   the PW path.  Such an attack can compromise PW security, but must be
   dealt with as an MPLS attack, and is out of scope here.

   In another scenario the attack involves compromising a forwarding
   device (router or Ethernet switch) that is not part of the PW path.
   In this case the attack exploits the MPLS mechanism for tunnel



Stein                    Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                pwe3-sec-req                      Feb 2006


   merging.  The attacker can now insert a packet with the PW label
   associated with any PW (as inner labels are not expected by provider
   routers).  By judicious choice of sequence number, the attacker may
   be able to force massive packet loss, as discussed above.

4.  PW Packet Authentication

   One way of ensuring that a packet is a valid PW packet, is to
   authenticate it by inserting a cryptographically derived field
   between the control word and the payload.  It is envisaged that the
   insertion of such a field will be agreed upon between the two PEs
   using an extension to the PWE control protocol.  This method will
   only be useful when the desired PW packets emanate from a PE with
   this capability, and when there is a secure key distribution
   infrastructure.

   In a light-weight version that may be sufficient for some
   applications, and which could be implemented entirely in software, a
   32-bit cookie is inserted that is derived entirely from the control
   word, or (for SS-PWs), from the control word and PW label.  The
   mapping of control word to cookie may make use of symmetric or
   public-key methods.

   In a more heavy-weight version a 64-bit authentication cookie is
   inserted which results from a cryptographic hash on the entire PW
   payload.  The authentication of this cookie should be hardware-
   assisted in order to avoid a denial of service attack based on
   sending invalid packets in order to overload computational resources.

5.  PW Packet Encryption

   In order to secure PW traffic from interception we may encrypt it
      below the PW level (link encryption)
      at the PW level
      above the PW level (service encryption).

   Link encryption and service encryption are well understood, but PW
   level encryption requires a new mechanism.  The first question is
   what is encrypted at this layer.  Since the PW label is part of the
   MPLS label stack, encrypting it would render the packet illegal from
   an MPLS point of view.  The first nibble of the control word enables
   packet classification for ECMP, and thus encrypting it would disrupt
   ECMP mechanisms.

   On the other hand, if only the payload is encrypted, how is PW level
   encryption different from service encryption?  The main difference
   relates to the use of the sequence number.  PW mechanisms do not
   provide packet reliability, thus encryption must function on a



Stein                    Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                pwe3-sec-req                      Feb 2006


   packet-by-packet basis, and recover from occasional lost packets.
   Hence service level encryptions based on stream ciphers may not
   directly applicable.  PW layer encryption may rely on the sequence
   number (when the control word is used) but not directly on the data
   stream, or even the number of bytes that have been transmitted.

6.  Security Considerations

   Since this entire document is about security considerations, a
   security consideration section is superfluous.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This Internet Draft does not propose a protocol, nor a change to any
   existing protocol, and thus no IANA considerations are raised.


Author's Address

   Yaakov (J) Stein
   RAD Data Communications
   24 Raoul Wallenberg St., Bldg C
   Tel Aviv  69719
   ISRAEL

   Phone: +972 3 645-5389
   Email: yaakov_s@rad.com
























Stein                    Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                pwe3-sec-req                      Feb 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Stein                    Expires August 30, 2006                [Page 6]

