INTERNET DRAFT		                                       H. Tang
draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt                                    J. Ruutu
Expires: August 2000                                       J. Loughney
                                                 Nokia Research Center
		                                        February, 2000

        Problems and Requirements of Some IP Applications 
              Based on Spatial Location Information 
                  <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
     with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are 
     working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
     its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may 
     also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.






Abstract

This Internet draft describes the basic problems that are needed to 
be solved for some IP applications based on spatial location 
information. The requirements on the system are also identified from 
these problems.











Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 1]


INTERNET DRAFT                                            August, 2000


Contents

1.	Introduction						2
1.1	Scope							2
1.2	Abbreviations						3
2.	Problems						3
2.1	Trusted Location Data Exchange Between Two IP Devices	3
2.2	Locate Another IP Device Geographically			3
2.3	Locate IP Devices Geographically for Certain Resources	4
2.4	Publish IP Device Information Geographically		4
2.5	Send a Message to Certain IP Devices in a Geo-Region	4
3.	Requirements on the System				4
3.1	Security						4
3.2	Location Request Routing				4
3.3	Location Based Messaging				5
3.4	Location Information Verification			5
3.5	Device Server Association				6
4.	Discussion						6
5.	Acknowledgements					7
6.	Authors' Addresses					7


1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Scope

The current efforts dealing with the spatial location related tasks 
work with either a physical device on a layer-2 network (e.g., LCS of 
GSM, LPS of Bluetooth, etc.) or a position based service/application 
to a user (e.g., the envisioned services in W@P and web community). 
An open area of study is IP-centric or the networking issues that are 
related to spatial location and seem neglected so far.

Given the nature of the current Internet; the large number of IP 
domains with possibly different operating policies; mix of layer-2 
technologies; large number of applications with different 
requirements - an application related to spatial location information 
might not be scalable if its related networking problems are not 
solved. 

Another consideration is that the interested location information 
and associated devices/applications/services are not known to the 
involved end(s). It is unlikely that a few centralized servers could 
cope with the potentially highly dynamic and demanding nature of the 
location data exchange and update within the scope of the Internet, 
nor or is desirable. A distributed system of autonomously managed 
servers directly/indirectly connecting each other is thus a natural 
selection. An end point may thus have to go through the network of 
the servers in order to reach certain server that provides the actual 
requested information service.  



Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 2]


INTERNET DRAFT                                            August, 2000


This draft will consider the problems and their requirements on the 
system in order to support some IP applications based on spatial 
location information. It is outside the scope of this document to 
specify certain solutions for the determined problems. 

1.2 Abbreviations

DSA  - Device Server Association

ISLF - IP Spatial Location Forum

ISLP - IP Spatial Location Protocol

LBM  - Location Based Messaging

LCS  - Location Services

LIV  - Location Information Verification

LRR  - Location Request Routing

LPS  - Local Positioning System

WAP  - Wireless Application Protocol

2. PROBLEMS

There are five basic problems that need to be solved for some IP 
applications based on spatial location information. The problems are 
described in this chapter.

2.1 Trusted Location Data Exchange Between Two IP Devices

Assume two IP devices want to exchange the actual geo-location 
information of one or both of the devices. However, one of the device 
may not trust the other or both of them do not trust each other on the 
truthfulness of the information if it is directly exchanged between 
them without certain proving party involved. In addition, one or both 
devices may not know themselves the geo-information such as the (x,y,z)
or other geo-location expressions of their geo-location. If so, they 
need another trusted party or parties to supply the geo-location 
information of the device(s) first and then perform the mentioned 
exchange. 

2.2 Locate Another IP Device Geographically

Suppose an IP device (A) would like to geographically locate another 
IP device (B) in a particular geo-region for various reasons. What has
been normally known to IP device A is the IP address or the other 
identifier of IP device B.  There may be no further information on IP 
device B available to IP device A. IP device A will need to ask the 
help from another trusted party or parties. 

Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            August, 2000

2.3 Locate IP Devices Geographically for Certain Resources

Assume an IP device want to know certain information (geo-location 
information, resources for services, etc.) of certain IP device(s) 
situated in certain geo-region or on the earth, because the IP device 
is interested in some of their resources for services. 

2.4 Publish IP Device Information Geographically

Suppose an IP device would like to publish its information (geo-
location information, provided service(s), etc.)  to a geo-region or 
the earth via certain IP device(s). Other IP devices in the geo-region
or the world can then surely find the published IP device, not by 
depending on the searching engines but via a query to certain IP 
device or devices that know the published information directly or 
indirectly. 

2.5 Send a Message to Certain IP Devices in a Geo-Region

Assume an IP device would like to send a message to specific available
IP devices in certain geo-location(s). However, the IP device does 
not know the geo-information and any other device-specific information
of those IP devices to be targeted. The IP device thus needs a 
trusted party or parties to supply the information of those devices 
in order to send the message. Alternatively, the IP device may need a 
trusted party or parties to deliver the message to those IP devices for
it, because the IP device is not allowed to know the information of 
those IP devices to be targeted. 

Note: (a) An IP device is a physical or virtual device with IP 
protocols. (b) A virtual IP device can be referenced via its hosting 
physical IP device. (c) An IP device can be a physically static or
moving IP device. 
 
3. REQUIREMENTS ON THE SYSTEM

In order to solve the problems discussed in Chapter 2, there are five 
identified requirements on the system. While not mentioned directly in
the following context, scalability is always a crucial requirement to
the system.
 
3.1 Security

Security is a crucial requirement on the system. Security components 
fall into the following four categories: (a) availability, (b) access,
(c) integrity, and (d) confidentiality (privacy).  Anonymity can be 
an alternative to protect the involved party or parties for certain 
situations, so that the possible high complexity or cost for using a 
security approach can be avoided. Security/anonymity requirements are 
usually affected by the use cases. We thus further discuss them with 
the following crucial requirements.

3.2 Location Request Routing

Location request routing (LRR) is identified as a requirement for 
solving some of the basic problems. Suppose an IP device wants to 

Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            August, 2000

acquire the spatial location information of some IP devices that are 
beyond the knowledge scope of the servers known to the IP device. 
What can really help the device now is a scalable spatial location 
request routing approach to make the device really reaching the 
location servers that actually have the interested spatial location 
information. 

In order to forward a location information request from an IP device, 
an involved server should have a map of some or all other involved 
servers and server aggregations. The map is learned from the location 
information exchange among the servers and server aggregations. Here, 
a server aggregation is a group of servers that look as one server to 
the outside of the group. Therefore, for the location request routing,
there are the following basic requirements further identified: 

(1) an approach for the location information exchange and update
(2) an approach for the location request forwarding, 
(3) the location data format for exchanging
(4) an approach of managing security/anonymity levels and rules 
required by the involved entities (the IP devices and the involved 
servers).

3.3 Location Based Messaging

Location based messaging (LBM) is required for solving some of the 
basic problems. Assume an IP device like to send a message to certain 
available IP devices in certain spatial location(s). However, the IP 
device does not know the spatial positions and any other device-
specific information of the targeted devices. What the IP device can 
do is 

(1) find all involved servers of the targeted unknown IP devices 
through the discussed location request routing 
(2) send the message through the involved servers or directly, based 
on the various policies required by the involved servers and the 
targeted devices. 

For sending a spatial location based message, an IP device has to find
all involved servers of the targeted devices through LRR. The device 
can thus send the message through the involved location servers or 
directly. Therefore, LBM has the same further-identified requirements 
as LRR does.

3.4 Location Information Verification

Location information verification (LIV) is necessary for solving some 
of the basic problems. Suppose an IP device would like to verify the 
given spatial location information of a targeted IP device. The IP 
device needs to issue a locating request, via the involved server over
IP, to a server on the layer-2 network where the targeted IP device 
is actually attached. The verification can then be done by comparing 
the given spatial location information with the information from the 
layer-2 network.

Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 5]


INTERNET DRAFT                                            August, 2000



There are four groups of further-identified requirements here: 

(1) the requirements of LRR when LRR is involved
(2) the interface between an involved IP server and a location server 
on a layer-2 network (the interface should be able to serve as an 
interface between an involved IP server and various layer-2 networks)
(3) an approach for mapping between the spatial location information 
from a layer-2 location server and that of an involved IP server
(4) an approach to manage security/anonymity levels and rules 
associated with the interface mentioned above.

3.5 Device Server Association

Device server association (DSA) is required for solving some of the 
basic problems. Assume an IP device has moved out of a spatial scope 
served by a server. The IP device thus needs to associate to a server 
in the new scope through contracting. What the device can do is to let
it be located by or let the device itself report its spatial location
information to the network attached. The network then sends the 
location information of the IP device to the server of the new scope 
(Note: the scopes can be overlapping). The IP device can thus contact 
to or be contacted by the server and then, the association is set up 
by contracting. 

In order to achieve the association of an IP device to an involved 
server, there are five requirement groups further identified: 

(1) an approach for an IP device to discover an involved server or for
an involved server to locate an IP device that inside its geo-scope
(2) an approach of contract negotiation between an IP device and an 
involved server
(3) an approach to manage security/anonymity levels and rules 
associated with the IP device, the server, and their inter-operation
(4) the requirements of LRR
(5) the requirements of LIV if a layer-2 location server is involved 
for setting up the association.

4. DISCUSSION

While this document considers only the problems that need to be solved 
and their requirements on the system, there are still some additional 
observations found in the study. 

(1) there seems no protocol or protocol combination that is available 
and can give a whole solution to the basic problems
(2) there might be a need to develop an IP Spatial Location Protocol 
(ISLP) for the solution, while there can be other answers for the basic
problems.



Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 6]


INTERNET DRAFT                                            August, 2000

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank all those people who have actively 
participated in the discussion of the mailing list at 
"http://www-nrc.nokia.com/ip-location". The authors are also grateful
to all the folks with whom the authors have discussed concerning the 
location effort and the setup of the mailing list.

6. AUTHORS' ADDRESSES

Haitao Tang
Nokia Research Center
It„merenkatu 11-13
FIN-00180, Helsinki, Finland
email: haitao.tang@nokia.com 

Jussi Ruutu
Nokia Research Center
It„merenkatu 11-13
FIN-00180, Helsinki, Finland
email: jussi.ruutu@nokia.com 

John Loughney
Nokia Research Center
It„merenkatu 11-13
FIN-00180, Helsinki, Finland
email: john.loughney@nokia.com 


Please send comments to Haitao Tang, haitao.tang@nokia.com

Expires August, 2000



















Tang              <draft-tang-islf-req-00.txt>                [Page 7]