

Proto Team                                                  H. Levkowetz
Internet-Draft                                               ipUnplugged
Expires: August 19, 2004                               February 19, 2004


   Protocol Pilot: Workgroup Chair Followup of AD Evaluation Comments
              <draft-ietf-proto-ad-comments-pilot-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt .

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html .

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 19, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a pilot implementation of a protocol change
   within the IETF.  The essence of the change is to have workgroup
   chairs handle the feedback of AD (Area Director) Evaluation comments
   on a draft to the authors (and workgroup if necessary) and make sure
   that needed draft changes are made, and the AD notified when a new
   draft which resolves the comments is available.

1. Introduction

   As part of the currently ongoing effort to improve the work flow
   (e.g. speed) of approval of documents, the PROTO team is defining
   pilot projects to test possible protocol changes.  This document
   describes such a pilot.



Levkowetz               Expires August 19, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments       February 2004


   The purpose of the pilot described here is to test offloading
   follow-up work which an Area Director (AD) traditionally has done
   after he has read through and evaluated a document submitted to the
   IESG for publication.  It is hoped that offloading this onto the
   chair (or one of the chairs) of the workgroup which submitted the
   draft will reduce the workload of the AD, and increase the
   transparency of the process, to boot.  The pilot does not include
   offloading of follow-up for drafts which do not originate in a
   workgroup.

   For a discussion of the reasoning underlying piloting of process
   changes, see [JULY14].

2. Pilot description

2.1 Participants

   This pilot involves Area Directors of selected areas, and some or all
   of the chairs for which the Area Director is Area Advisor.

2.2 Running time and pilot size

   This pilot is to be run not less than 4 months, and not more than 8
   months, unless early experience shows it to be clearly detrimental.
   It is expected that it will be started shortly after the IETF 59
   meeting, and completed in time for the results to be reported at the
   IETF 60 meeting.  The pilot should be run with no less than 3 and not
   more than 6 ADs, and between 10 and 20 workgroups.

2.3 Assumptios

   The pilot assumes that the steps an Area Director currently (before
   this pilot goes into effect) are as follows:
   1.  Read and evaluate the document, taking notes of issues found. It
       is expected that each AD has his own style and method of
       evaluating documents, but roughly the elements given in Section
       3.3 of [SIRS] are probably present in the review.
   2.  Depending on the magnitude of the issues found (and other
       considerations?), either
       a) return the document to the chairs with the review, requesting
        further workgroup work, and post the review to the workgroup
        mailing list
       b) send the full review to the authors, with copy to the chairs,
        and ask for issues to be resolved; post a summary of the review
        to the workgroup mailing list






Levkowetz               Expires August 19, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments       February 2004


       c) send the full review to the authors, possibly with copy to the
        chairs, and ask for nits to be fixed.
   3.  Follow-up, nudge and iterate until the authors (and workgroup if
       required) has fixed the issues found, and submitted an updated
       draft.  At this point, the draft is ready for IETF last call if
       it is a standards-track document (or BCP), or for placement on
       telechat agenda otherwise.

2.4 Pilot Process Description

   The pilot process is changed compared with the process described
   above in that the responsibility for step 3 above is put squarely on
   the Workgroup Chair, rather than on the Area Director.  Step 2 should
   preferably be modified so that the Area Director sends the AD
   Evaluation review comments to the chair(s), who in turn forward them
   to the authors and workgroup as appropriate.  The steps are then as
   follows:
   1.  The AD reads, evaluates and writes down comments as before.
   2.  Depending on the magnitude of the issues found (and other
       considerations?), the AD either
       d) returns the document to the chairs with the review, requesting
        further workgroup work, and asks the chairs to post the review
        to the workgroup mailing list
       e) send the full review to the chairs, and asks them to ensure
        that authors and workgroup are informed of the issues which need
        be resolved
       f) send the full review to the chairs, and asks them to ensure
        that the authors fix nits as needed.
   3.  If there is more than one chair, they decide on which one should
       be responsible for ensuring that the needed fixes are done.
   4.  The chair responsible reads through the AD Evaluation comments,
       making very certain that all comments are understood, so that it
       is possible to follow up on them with the authors and workgroup.
       If there is some uncertainty as to what is requested, this must
       be resolved with the Area Director.
   5.  The responsible chair follows-up, nudges and iterates until the
       authors (and workgroup if required) has fixed the issues found,
       and submitted an updated draft.  At this point, the AD is
       notified.
   6.  The Area Director verifies that the issues he found during AD
       Evaluation are resolved in the new version of the draft.

2.5 Wrap-up








Levkowetz               Expires August 19, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments       February 2004


3. Security considerations

   This document specifies a pilot implementation of a change in IETF
   procedures. It does not raise or consider any protocol-specific
   security issues.  When evaluating the result of the pilot, the IESG
   should evaluate if the changes has reduced the quality of security
   review and consideration for protocols, and take this into
   consideration when deciding whether the changes should be made
   permanent.

Informative References

   [JULY14]  Klensin, J. and S. Dawkins, "A model for IETF Process
             Experiments", draft-klensin-process-july14-00 (work in
             progress), February 2004.

   [SIRS]    Carpenter, B. and D. Crocker, "Careful Additional Review of
             Documents (CARD)by Senior IETF Reviewers  (SIRS)",
             draft-carpenter-solution-sirs-01 (work in progress), June
             2003.


Author's Address

   Henrik Levkowetz
   ipUnplugged AB
   Arenavagen 23
   Stockholm  S-121 28
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 708 32 16 08
   EMail: henrik@levkowetz.com



















Levkowetz               Expires August 19, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments       February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Levkowetz               Expires August 19, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments       February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Levkowetz               Expires August 19, 2004                 [Page 6]

