


Network Working Group                                         D. Crocker
Internet-Draft                               Brandenburg InternetWorking
Intended status: Best Current                           October 23, 2006
Practice
Expires: April 26, 2007


                DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves
                     draft-crocker-dns-attrleaf-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   Historically, any DNS RR may occur for any domain name.  Recent
   additions have defined DNS leaf nodes that contain a reserved node
   name, beginning with an underscore.  The underscore construct is used
   to define a semantic scope for the associated, parent domain name,
   within which the use of some RRs is constrained.  Hence the
   underscore construct defines a basic paradigm modification to the
   DNS.  This note explores the nature of this DNS usage and defines the



Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


   procedures for registering "underscore names" with IANA.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Disclaimer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     1.2.  Procedural Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     1.3.  Discussion Venue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Scaling Benefits and TXT and SRV Resource Records . . . . . . . 4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  References -- Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.2.  References -- Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8

































Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


1.  Introduction

   Historically, any DNS RR may occur for any domain name.  The DNS
   technical specification assigns no semantics to domain names and no
   constraints upon which resource records may be associated with a
   particular name.  Over time, some leaf node names, such as "www" and
   "ftp" have come to imply support for particular services, but this is
   a matter of operational convention, rather than defined semantics.
   This freedom in the basic technology has permitted a wide range of
   administrative and semantic policies to be used -- in parallel --
   with the DNS.  In the DNS, data semantics have been limited to the
   specifications of particular resource records, on the expectation
   that new ones would be added as needed.  Although there remains the
   view that this method of enhancement is preferred, alternative
   approaches have been explored and gained widespread deployment.

   Recent additions have defined DNS leaves that contain a reserved leaf
   node name, beginning with an underscore.  The underscore construct is
   used to define a semantic scope for for the associated, parent domain
   name, within which the use of some RRs is constrained.  Hence the
   underscore construct defines a basic paradigm modification to the
   DNS.  Within the scope of a defined underscore leaf, the uses of
   specific resource records can be formally defined and constrained.
   An established example is the SRV record [RFC2782] which generalizes
   concepts long-used for email routing in the MX
   record.[RFC0974][RFC2821] The use of special DNS names has
   significant benefits and detriments.  Some of these are explored in
   [I-D.iab-dns-choices].

   [Comment]:   The term "resolution context" has been suggested, in
      place of "semantic scope".  It is not yet clear what resolution is
      being given particular context by this proposal, whereas the
      intent behind the phrase "semantic scope" is to note that the
      interpretation -- ie, semantics -- of particular RRs is
      constrained. [/Dave]

   One use that has perhaps not been noticed is that the underscore
   construct substantially changes possible concerns for scaling
   effects.  For example, different uses for the same RR, such as the
   free-form TXT record, become manageable when those are defined to be
   within different, scoped leaf nodes.

   This note discusses this enhancement, provides an explicit definition
   of it, and establishes an IANA registry for the reserved names
   beginning with underscore.






Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


1.1.  Disclaimer

   This document does not seek to recommend or debate the merits of
   using sub-domain names that begin with underscore.  The practise
   already exists, for multiple services.  The sole goal for this
   document is to specify a registry for the underscore-based names that
   get used.

1.2.  Procedural Model

   NOTE:   This procedure is modeled after that specified in [RFC2489].

   "The author of a new DHCP option will follow these steps to obtain
   approval for the option and publication of the specification of the
   option as an RFC:

   1.  The author devises the new option.

   2.  The author documents the new option as an Internet Draft,
       choosing a node name that has not yet been registered.

   3.  The author submits the Internet Draft for publication as an RFC,
       either as an independent submission or as an IETF-approved
       document.

   4.  The specification of the new option is reviewed for publication
       by the appropriate bodies.

   5.  At the time of publication as an RFC, IANA formally lists the
       node name."

1.3.  Discussion Venue

   Discussion about this draft is directed to the
   dnsop@lists.uoregon.edu [1]mailing list of the IETF DNSOP Working
   Group [2].


2.  Scaling Benefits and TXT and SRV Resource Records

   It is intended that additional semantics, associated with a domain
   name, be provided by the definition and deployment of new resource
   records, the use of underscore-based naming is sometimes used to
   distinguish among different semantics for the same RR.  The primary
   examples of this are TXT and SRV records.

   In the case of TXT records, use for different semantics has developed
   organically and largely without coordination.  Underscore-based names



Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


   therefore provide an administrative way of separating TXT records
   that might have different semantics, but otherwise would have no
   syntactic markers for distinguishing among them.

   In the case of the SRV RR this method of distinguishing among uses
   was part of the design.  [RFC2782] In reality, the SRV specification
   defines an RR that may only be used for specific applications when
   there is an additional specification.  So the SRV specification is
   best thought of as a template for future specifications.  The
   template definition includes reference to tables of names from which
   underscore-names should be drawn.  So, the set of <service> names is
   defined in terms of other IANA tables, namely any table with symbolic
   names.  The other SRV naming field is <proto>, although its pool of
   names is not explicitly defined.


3.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to establish the DNS Underscore Name Registry, for
   DNS node names that begin with the underscore character and have been
   specified in any published RFC.

   These documents provide specific meanings for specific resource
   records.  They do not constrain the usage of resource records that
   are not specified.  The purpose of this registry tis to avoid
   collisions resulting from the use of the same underscore name, for
   different applications.

   A request to register an entry in the DNS Underscore Name Registry
   MUST contain:



      Name:   Specifies the underscore name that is being reserved.  The
         name may be multi-part.  That is, it may cover more than one
         domain name field, such as "_sip._tcp".

      RR(s)  Specifies the Resource Records that are explicitly defined
         for the scope of this registration.

      RFC(s)  These specify the semantics for the RRs defined for use
         within the scope of the registered underscore name.









Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


                 Initial entries in the registry comprise:

                     +-----------+-------+-----------+
                     | NAME      | RR(s) | RFC       |
                     +-----------+-------+-----------+
                     | _sip._tcp | SRV   | [RFC3263] |
                     | _sip._udp | SRV   | [RFC3263] |
                     | _spf      | TXT   | [RFC4408] |
                     +-----------+-------+-----------+

           Table 1: DNS Underscore Name Registry Initial Values


4.  Security Considerations

   This memo raises no security issues


5.  References

5.1.  References -- Normative

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC3263]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263,
              June 2002.

   [RFC4408]  Wong, M. and W. Schlitt, "Sender Policy Framework (SPF)
              for Authorizing Use of Domains in E-Mail, Version 1",
              RFC 4408, April 2006.

5.2.  References -- Informative

   [I-D.iab-dns-choices]
              Faltstrom, P., "Design Choices When Expanding DNS",
              draft-iab-dns-choices-03 (work in progress), April 2006.

   [RFC0974]  Partridge, C., "Mail routing and the domain system",
              RFC 974, January 1986.

   [RFC2489]  Droms, R., "Procedure for Defining New DHCP Options",
              BCP 29, RFC 2489, January 1999.

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.



Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


URIs

   [1]  <mailto:dnsop@lists.uoregon.edu>

   [2]  <http://ietf.org/html.charters/dnsop-charter.html>


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks go to Bill Fenner, Tony Hansen, Peter Koch, Olaf Kolkman for
   diligent review.


Author's Address

   Dave Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking
   675 Spruce Dr.
   Sunnyvale, CA  94086
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.246.8253
   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net
   URI:   http://bbiw.net/



























Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  DNS Scoped Data Through Attribute Leaves    October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Crocker                  Expires April 26, 2007                 [Page 8]


