



Internet Engineering Task Force                     J Crowcroft
INTERNET DRAFT                                      UCL
                                                    February 1999


                         RTCP location reports
                 <draft-crowcroft-rtcp-latlong-00.txt>

Status of this memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
     with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This note is a proposal to add lat/long data to RTCP reports to
   enable transport protocols, and applications to carry out a number of
   useful  tasks.






1.0 Introduction

   This is a proposal to add geographical location reporting data into
   RTCP reports in the AVT work, as an "APP: Application specific
   function", but with an agreed format (T,L,V) so that they can be
   shared across multiple uses.

1.0 Rationale




Expires August  1999                                            ^L[Page 1]





Internet Draft              Simple Multicast               February 1999


   It would be useful to know where participants are geographically
   located in an RTP session.

   Reasons for this information are legion:  Many systems can now render
   audio (and even video) data in 3D - actual location could be mapped
   into the receviers rendering space

   Change in position over time maps to velocity - this information can
   be used by mobile IP to provide similar functions to power metering
   in the physical layer for wireless networking.

   Positional information can help with routing, particularly to media
   (or H.323/SIP) gateway selection (load balancing).

   As the network gets faster and faster, the geographical distance
   between two sites domiantes the end2end delay. It is hard to do RTT
   estimation in a multicast session without clock synchronisation, but
   to at least a first approximation, distance/c = delay.

   Some applications utilise retransmissions to gain reliability (many
   use FEC, but in short haul interactive sessions, and in streaming
   apps, retransmits are reasonable). Many retransmit schems build a
   self organising system (tree, ring etc) to help decide where to
   source retransmits from (SRM, RMTP etc etc). Geogrqaphical location
   would be another hint for these algorithms.

   Geographical information might allow better synchronisation.

   Geographic (distance) based billing may be needed by some providers
   (e.g. of internet telephony).

   Some folks have proposed geogrpahic based addresses. Howeever,
   without these, there may also be some room for geographic based
   scoping (and correlation with multicast zone checking schemes).

   I am sure there are other uses.

1.0 Formats

   The RTP RFC defines the format within which we add such application
   specific data. WIthin this, we have to choose a format for the data
   itself.

   There are a number of different formats that already exist for
   carrying geographic location information. In keeping with the
   internet multimedia design principles, we want an extensible
   protocol, this we code the position field as a {Type, Length, Value}
   triple. Because it needs to be decoded fast (may be handed to an



Expires August  1999                                            ^L[Page 2]





Internet Draft              Simple Multicast               February 1999


   active filter in an audio renderer), some formats may be binary and
   hardwired into applications - so be it...

   The code points for type will be assigned by the IANA.

   It would be interesting to add the same data in session announcements
   as per SAP - A congruent SDP defined field would suffice.

4 Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Colin Perkins for some suggestions.

References

RFC 1889 RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications. Audio-Video
    Transport Working Group, H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick & V.
     Jacobson. January 1996.

RFC 2327 SDP: Session Description Protocol. M. Handley, V. Jacobson. April 1998.

Authors' Addresses


Jon Crowcroft
Department of Computer Science
University College London
Gower Street
London, WC1E 6BT, UK
J.Crowcroft@cs.ucl.ac.uk






















Expires August  1999                                            ^L[Page 3]


