

Problem Statement                                              E. Davies
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Expires: March 3, 2004                                          A. Doria
                                                                    ETRI
                                                              J. Hofmann
                                             Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin
                                                      September 03, 2003


              IETF Structural Problems Improvement Process
               draft-davies-structural-rev-process-00.txt

Status of this Memo

      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
      other groups may also distribute working documents as
      Internet-Drafts.

      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
      documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
      as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
      progress."

      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
      www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

      This Internet-Draft will expire on March 3, 2004.

Copyright Notice

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

      This document suggests a possible process to address the
      structural problems identified in the IETF Problem Statement as
      requested in Version 02 of the IETF Problem Resolution draft.

      The process proposes that the IESG delegate responsibility for
      coordinating, moderating and synthesising proposals for solutions
      to parts of the structural problems to a Synthsis and Action Panel



Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


      (SAP) selected through a variant of the nomcom selection process.
      The SAP should, if possible, deliver an integrated set of
      proposals for changes derived from community input, both
      unsolicited and, if necessary, solicited. The SAP would act as a
      moderator between authors of alternative propoasals in attempting
      to achieve a proposal on which the community could agree. The
      agreed plan be would be delivered to the IESG for final approval
      and action.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  A Proposal for Changing the Structure and Practices of the
       IETF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.1 Constitution and Selection of the SAP  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2 Initial List of Issues to be Considered  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.3 Open Solicitation of Contributions to the Solution . . . . . .  5
   2.4 Achieving an Integrated Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.5 Acceptance of the Integrated Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  9

























Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


   1. Introduction

      Version 02 of the Problem Resolution draft[4] solicited proposals
      from the community for processes to resolve the more structural
      problems identified in the Problem Issues draft[1]. This document
      offers one possible process.

      The process proposed requests the IESG to delegate responsibility
      for identifying the changes that need to be made to rectify all or
      most of the existing structural problems identified in [1] to a
      Synthesis and Action Panel (SAP). The SAP would coordinate and
      moderate between authors of community proposals for change in
      order to synthesise an integrated plan of action leading to a
      reinvigorated IETF.

   1.1 Acknowledgements

      The development of this proposal was assisted by Dave Crocker, and
      Spencer Dawkins.

   2. A Proposal for Changing the Structure and Practices of the IETF

      A significant number of the issues that were identified in the
      IETF Problem Statement appear to require alterations to the
      structure of the IETF and/or the core practices which effectively
      characterize the IETF.

      The process documented in this section is designed to overcome the
      objections that lead to the rejection of the working group process
      which was proposed in earlier versions of the Problem Resolution
      draft[4]. It is intended to produce, in a well-defined period of
      time,

      o  a proposal for such structural changes to the IETF as the
         community finds necessary to allow the various issues to be
         resolved, together with

      o  a migration plan which will allow the IETF to transform itself
         as painlessly as possible.

      In outline the plan requires:

      o  Selection of a Synthesis and Action Panel (SAP) which will
         moderate the process and own the final proposal for change
         under the general oversight of the IESG.

      o  Generation of a list of issues that appear to require
         attention, initially in this document, but subject to additions



Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


         by agreement of the SAP.

      o  Solicitation of contributions from individuals or groups of
         IETF stakeholders which will address solutions to any part of
         the problem space as described in the Problem Issues draft[1].

      o  Moderation between contributors and synthesis of the resulting
         contributions by the SAP in order to create a proposal which
         appears to result in an organization which will, so far as is
         possible, no longer suffer from the issues identified, and a
         minimally disruptive changeover process.

      o  Acceptance of the proposal initially by as large a part of the
         IETF community as possible through open discussion by email and
         at plenary session(s), and finally by the existing IESG at the
         time of completion.

      The plan will be subject to a tight timetable, enforced by the SAP
      with the backing of the IAB, IESG and ISOC that is intended to
      deliver an accepted proposal at the second IETF meeting after the
      inception of the SAP.

      The following sections expand on the plan outline and give details
      of the way in which the work should be carried out.

   2.1 Constitution and Selection of the SAP

      The SAP will comprise a number of members that is sufficiently low
      so that the group is able to take decisions rapidly and
      effectively. The members of the SAP (SAPs) will be selected to
      represent the interests of as wide a range of the stakeholders in
      the IETF as is possible. To this end one group of the SAPs will be
      nominated by the existing management structures of the IETF (IESG,
      IAB and ISOC) whilst the remainder will be selected through a
      re-use of the latest nomcom selection process.

      There will be eleven members of the SAP as follows:

      o  Two members of the current IESG nominated by the IESG.

      o  Two members of the current IAB nominated by the IAB.

      o  One member of the current ISOC Board nominated by the ISOC
         Board.

      o  Six members selected by the same process as is used to select
         the nomcom as described in RFC 2727[2] and RFC2777[3] but using
         an extended eligibility period as is currently being suggested



Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


         by the nomcom working group in the revisions to RFC 2727[10]
         and RFC 2777[11] (i.e. attendance at least 3 out of the
         preceding 5 IETF meetings).

      The SAP will elect its chair from amongst its members in the same
      way as the IAB does at present.

      We believe that is important that the full range of stakeholder
      interests should be represented.  To this end, we encourage people
      from all parts of the community to put their names forward, so
      that subject to the luck of the draw, there will be a true
      diversity of views in the SAP.

   2.2 Initial List of Issues to be Considered

      The following issues taken from the problem statement document and
      the analysis in [4]:

      o  The Mission Problem (Section 4.1 of [4], [9]),

      o  the Complex Problems problem (Section 4.3 of [4], [5], [8]),

      o  the Standards Hierarchy problem (Section 4.4 of [4], [6]),

      o  the Management Scaling problem (Section 4.6 of [4], [8], [5],
         [2]), and

      o  The longer-term portions of the Engagement Problem (Section 4.5
         of [4], [7])

      (Additional references on each item indicate associated documents
      that may need to be updated as a result of this process).

      The SAP will discuss this list and may add further issues if it is
      deemed necessary.

   2.3 Open Solicitation of Contributions to the Solution

      The IESG will issue an invitation for proposals and actively
      encourage people to contribute to the change process. Proposals
      are solicited for both single items and comprehensive problems.
      Individuals and groups are invited to participate. In addition the
      SAP will approach people individually or as groups as tghey see
      fit and ask for suggestions to address structural problems not
      adequately covered by any other contributions. THE SAP will
      publish all contributions in order to ensure transparency and to
      allow people to get involved at each stage of the process.




Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


   2.4 Achieving an Integrated Solution

      The SAP's chief task will be to generate an integrated proposal,
      which includes solutions to all items of the issue list (if
      possible) and a transition or migration plan. This task requires
      moderating the communication between all contributors,
      ascertaining consensus among contributors and producing a
      synthesis of the various proposals.

   2.5 Acceptance of the Integrated Solution

      The SAP will publish the proposed integrated solution as widely as
      possible. Since the IETF lacks an all-embracing forum which is
      guaranteed to place the result in front of all all stakeholders,
      various mailing lists and plenary meetings will be used for final
      community input and to confirm the overall acceptance of the
      proposed solutions.

      After final modifications based on community feedback, the SAP
      will send the proposed solutions to the IESG for implementation.

   3. Conclusion

      The IETF has problems, and we need to work to solve those
      problems, both via focused immediate improvements and via an
      integrated effort to build an IETF organizational structure and
      develop processes that can better handle our current size and
      complexity.

      The proposed solicitation process and the Sythesis and Answer
      Panel aims at including input of as many IETF members as possible
      to the solution of the more structural problems of the IETF. At
      the same time, the proposed solution process allows for faster
      results than a regular working group.

   4. Security Considerations

      This document contains suggestions for processes that the IETF
      could use to resolve process-related and organizational problems
      with the IETF. Although the structure and quality of the IETF's
      processes may have an affect on the quality of the IETF's
      security- related work, there are no specific security-related
      issues raised in this document.

Normative References

      [1]  Davies, E., Ed., "IETF Problem Statement",
           draft-ietf-problem-issue-statement-02 (work in progress), Jun



Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


           2003.

      [2]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall
           Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees",
           RFC 2727, Feb 2000.

      [3]  Eastlake, D., "Publicly Verifiable Nomcom Random Selection",
           RFC 2777, February 2000.

      [4]  Davies, E., Ed. and J. Hofmann, Ed., "IETF Problem Resolution
           Processes", draft-ietf-problem-process-02 (work in progress),
           August 2003.

Informative References

      [5]   Alvestrand, H., "An IESG charter", draft-iesg-charter-03
            (work in progress), Apr 2003.

      [6]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
            RFC 2026, Oct 1996.

      [7]   Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures",
            BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

      [8]   Carpenter, B., "Charter of the Internet Architecture Board
            (IAB)", RFC 2850, May 2000.

      [9]   Harris, S., "The Tao of IETF - A Novice's Guide to the
            Internet Engineering Task Force", RFC 3160, August 2001.

      [10]  Galvin, J., Ed., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
            Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
            Committees", draft-ietf-nomcom-rfc2727bis-07 (work in
            progress), August 2003.

      [11]  Eastlake, D., "Publicly Verifiable Nomcom Random Selection",
            draft-eastlake-rfc2777bis-selection-02 (work in progress),
            June 2003.













Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


Authors' Addresses

   Elwyn B. Davies
   Nortel Networks
   Harlow Laboratories
   London Road
   Harlow, Essex  CM17 9NA
   UK

   Phone: +44 1279 405 498
   EMail: elwynd@nortelnetworks.com


   Avri Doria
   ETRI
   161 Gajeong-dong
   Yuseong-gu
   Daejeon  305-350
   Korea

   Phone: +82 16 9608 5024
   EMail: avri@acm.org


   Jeanette Hofmann
   Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin
   Reichpietschufer 50
   Berlin  10785
   Germany

   Phone: +49 30 25491 288
   EMail: jeanette@wz-berlin.de



















Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
      intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
      pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
      in this document or the extent to which any license under such
      rights might or might not be available; neither does it represent
      that it has made any effort to identify any such rights.
      Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in
      standards-track and standards-related documentation can be found
      in BCP-11. Copies of claims of rights made available for
      publication and any assurances of licenses to be made available,
      or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
      permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementors
      or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF
      Secretariat.

      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
      any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
      proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be required
      to practice this standard. Please address the information to the
      IETF Executive Director.


Full Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

      This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
      to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
      explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared,
      copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
      restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
      and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
      works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any
      way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the
      Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
      for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
      procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards
      process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
      languages other than English.

      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
      be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

      This document and the information contained herein is provided on
      an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
      ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR



Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    IETF Structural Improvement Process     September 2003


      IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
      THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
      WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

      Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
      Internet Society.










































Davies, et al.           Expires March 3, 2004                 [Page 10]

