


DNS Operations                                                 M. Larson
Internet-Draft                                                  VeriSign
Intended status: Informational                            O. Gudmundsson
Expires: July 16, 2007                               OGUD Consulting LLC
                                                        January 12, 2007


           DNSSEC Trust Anchor Configuration and Maintenance
                   draft-larson-dnsop-trust-anchor-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007).













Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


Abstract

   This document recommends a single preferred format for specifying
   trust anchors in DNSSEC validating resolvers and describes how the
   validating resolver should initalize the trust anchor for use upon
   start-up.  This document also describes different mechanisms for
   keeping trust anchors up to date over time.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Trust Anchor Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Trust Anchor Priming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Trust Anchor Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Internationalization considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14



























Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


1.  Introduction

   The DNSSEC standards documents ([2], [3] and [4]) describe the need
   for trust anchors and how they are used.  A DNSSEC validating
   resolver must be configured with one or more trust anchors, which
   specify the public keys of signed zones.  To authenticate DNS data, a
   validating resolver builds a chain of trust from a configured trust
   anchor to that data.  This document augments the DNSSEC standards
   documents by specifying a standardized format for describing trust
   anchors in validating resolver configuration data, describing how to
   initialize trust anchors for use and listing options for keeping
   trust anchor information current over time.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].



































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


2.  Trust Anchor Format

   A validating resolver's configuration MUST allow one or more trust
   anchors to be specified.  Each trust anchor SHOULD be specified as a
   DS resource record (RR).  (DS records are defined in Section 5 of RFC
   4034 [3].)  A DS RR used to specify a trust anchor in this manner
   SHOULD use a digest algorithm of SHA-256 [5], which is DS digest type
   2.  DS RRs using SHA-1 (DS digest type 1) are NOT RECOMMENDED.

   Either a DS RR (which contains the hash of a DNSKEY RR) or the DNSKEY
   RR itself can be used to specify a trust anchor.  Using the DS RR
   offers a slight advantage because it forces a DNS query to obtain the
   trust anchor's complete DNSKEY RRSet during a priming operation
   (described below).  If only a DNSKEY record were specified, an
   implementor could conceivably avoid the priming step (though in
   practice, priming is almost always required because data in the trust
   anchor zone will usually be signed with a different key than the one
   configured as the trust anchor, thus requiring the validating
   resolver to have all keys in the DNSKEY RRSet).

   Using a DS RR is also recommended because it is smaller than the
   DNSKEY RR and is easier to enter manually, either by typing or
   cutting and pasting.

   Truncation of the configured trust anchor MAY be supported by
   validating resolvers as a human-factors convenience.

























Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


3.  Trust Anchor Priming

   A validating resolver needs to obtain and validate the DNSKEY RRSet
   corresponding to a configured DS RR for that trust anchor to be
   usable in DNSSEC validation.  This process is called "priming" the
   trust anchor and typically occurs when the validating resolver
   starts.  This section adds additional details to the discussion of
   trust anchors in Section 5 of RFC 4035 [4].

   Following are the steps a validating resolver SHOULD take to prime a
   configured trust anchor:

   1.  Read the trust anchor's DS RR from the validating resolver's
       configuration (e.g., a text file).

   2.  Look up the DNSKEY RRset corresponding to the owner name of the
       DS RR.  (The validating resolver can either perform iterative
       resolution or request recursive service from a recursive name
       server, depending on its capabilities.)

   3.  Verify that the DNSKEY RR corresponding to the configured DS RR
       (i.e., the DNSKEY whose hash appears in the DS record) appears in
       the DNSKEY RRset and that the DNSKEY RR has the Zone Key Flag
       (DNSKEY RDATA bit 7) set.

   4.  Verify that the DNSKEY RRSet is signed by one of the DNSKEYs
       found in the previous step, i.e., that there exists a valid RRSIG
       (cryptographically and temporally) for the DNSKEY RRSet generated
       with the private key corresponding to the DNSKEY found in the
       previous step.

   If the validating resolver can successfully complete the steps above,
   all DNSKEY RRs in the RRSet may be considered authenticated and used
   authenticate RRSets at or below the trust anchor.

   TBD: Need a discussion of exception handling.  What actions should be
   taken if any of the steps above fail?  One or all DS at a name
   needed, when to log, when to throw error?













Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


4.  Trust Anchor Maintenance

   Trust anchors correspond to zones' key signing keys and these keys do
   change in the course of normal operation.  Validating resolver
   operators MUST ensure that configured trust anchor information
   remains current and does not go stale: each configured trust anchor
   DS RR SHOULD correspond to a DNSKEY RR in the trust anchor zone's
   apex DNSKEY RRSet.  This process is called trust anchor maintenance.
   (Initial trust anchor configuration requires human intervention to
   verify the trust anchor's authenticity using out-of-band means and is
   outside the scope of this document.)

   This section provides a brief overview of mechanisms to keep trust
   anchor information current:

   Manual configuration:  The validating resolver operator MAY choose to
      maintain trust anchor information completely manually.  In this
      case, the operator assumes responsibility for noticing stale trust
      anchor information (i.e., DS records that no longer point to a
      corresponding DNSKEY RR in the trust anchor zone's apex DNSKEY
      RRSet) and updating that information.  This process MAY require
      the operator to use the same out-of-band verification mechanism
      used to initial configuration to ensure that the new trust anchor
      DS RR is trustworthy.  Because manual maintenance is burdensome
      and prone to error, and because other automated trust anchor
      maintenance processes either exist or are in development, manual
      trust anchor maintenance is NOT RECOMMENDED.

   Trusted update mechanism:  Updated trust anchor information MAY be
      obtained via a trusted non-DNS update mechanism.  One possibility
      is the operating system update mechanism provided by most software
      vendors; for example, Windows Update, Apple Software Update,
      individual Linux vendor package update mechanisms, etc.  Operators
      must already place considerable trust in this mechansim, so it is
      reasonable to extend this trust to allow distribution and update
      of DNSSEC key material.  Another possibility is to obtain trust
      anchor configuration directly from the validating resolver
      software vendor.  For example, the Internet Systems Consortium,
      developers of BIND, ship a current root hints file in the BIND
      source code distribution.  Trust anchor configuration could
      conceivably be added to the source code distribution, as well.

   DNSSEC In-band Update:  The IETF DNS Extensions Working Group has
      developed a protocol to automatically update DNSSEC trust anchors
      entitled "Automated Updates of DNSSEC Trust Anchors" [6].  This
      protocol relies on a small DNSSEC protocol change (an additional
      flag in the DNSKEY record) and can be run either inside the
      validating resolver or in an external program with access to the



Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


      trust anchor configuration data.  This protocol is capable of
      keeping trust anchors up to date indefinitely if the trust anchor
      zone's operator follows the proper procedures.
















































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


5.  Acknowledgments

   This work was undertaken at the suggestion of the DNSSEC Deployment
   working group (www.dnssec-deployment.org).















































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


6.  Security considerations

   TBD: The security considerations section has not yet been written.
















































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


7.  IANA considerations

   This document does not have any IANA actions.
















































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


8.  Internationalization considerations

   There are no new internationalization considerations introduced by
   this memo.















































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
        "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC 4033,
        March 2005.

   [3]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
        "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions", RFC 4034,
        March 2005.

   [4]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
        "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions",
        RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [5]  Hardaker, W., "Use of SHA-256 in DNSSEC Delegation Signer (DS)
        Resource Records (RRs)", RFC 4509, May 2006.

9.2.  Informative References

   [6]  StJohns, M., "Automated Updates of DNSSEC Trust Anchors",
        draft-ietf-dnsext-trustupdate-timers-05 (work in progress),
        November 2006.
























Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Matt Larson
   VeriSign, Inc.
   21345 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20166-6503
   USA

   Email: mlarson@verisign.com


   Olafur Gudmundsson
   OGUD Consulting LLC
   3821 Village Park Drive
   Chevy Chase, MD  20815
   USA

   Email: ogud@ogud.com

































Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    DNSSEC Trust Anchor Config and Maint.     January 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Larson & Gudmundsson      Expires July 16, 2007                [Page 14]

