



Network Working Group                                            B. Weis
Internet-Draft                                               R. Gagliano
Intended status: Best Current Practice                     Cisco Systems
Expires: June 14, 2018                                          K. Patel
                                                            Arrcus, Inc.
                                                       December 11, 2017


                   BGPsec Router Certificate Rollover
                 draft-ietf-sidrops-bgpsec-rollover-04

Abstract

   Certification Authorities (CAs) within the Resource Public Key
   Infrastructure (RPKI) manage BGPsec router certificates as well as
   RPKI certificates.  The rollover of BGPsec router certificates must
   be carefully performed in order to synchronize the distribution of
   router public keys with BGPsec Update messages verified with those
   router public keys.  This document describes a safe rollover process,
   as well as discussing when and why the rollover of BGPsec router
   certificates are necessary.  When this rollover process is followed
   the rollover will be performed without routing information being
   lost.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 14, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Key rollover in BGPsec  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Rollover Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  BGPsec router key rollover as a measure against replay
       attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  BGP UPDATE window of exposure requirement . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  BGPsec key rollover as a mechanism to protect against
           replay attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Introduction

   In BGPsec, a key rollover (or re-key) is the process of changing a
   router's BGPsec key pair (or key pairs), issuing the corresponding
   new BGPsec router certificate and (if the old certificate is still
   valid) revoking the old certificate.  This process will need to
   happen at regular intervals, normally due to policies of the local
   network.  This document describes a safe rollover process that
   results in a BGPsec receiver always having the needed verification
   keys.  Certificate Practice Statements (CPS) documents may reference
   this memo.  This memo only addresses changing of a router's BGPsec
   key pair within the RPKI.  Refer to [RFC6489] for a procedure to
   rollover RPKI Certification Authority key pairs.



Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   When a router receives or creates a new key pair (using a key
   provisioning mechanism), this key pair will be used to sign new
   BGPsec updates [RFC8205] that are originated or that transit through
   the BGP speaker.  Additionally, the BGP speaker will refresh its
   outbound BGPsec Update messages to include a signature using the new
   key (replacing the old key).  When the rollover process finishes, the
   old BGPsec router certificate (and its key) will no longer be valid,
   and thus any BGPsec Update that includes a signature performed by the
   old key will be invalid.  Consequently, if the router does not
   refresh its outbound BGPsec Update messages, previously sent routing
   information may be treated as unauthenticated after the rollover
   process is finished.  It is therefore extremely important that new
   BGPsec router certificates have been distributed throughout the RPKI
   before the router begin signing BGPsec updates with a new private
   key.

   It is also important for an AS to minimize the BGPsec router key
   rollover interval (i.e., the period between the time when an AS
   distributes a BGPsec router certificate with a new public key and the
   time a BGPsec router begins to use its new private key).  This can be
   due to a need for a BGPsec router to distribute BGPsec updates signed
   with a new private key in order to invalidate BGPsec updates signed
   with the old private key.  In particular, if the AS suspects that a
   stale BGPsec update is being distributed instead of the most recently
   signed attribute it can cause the stale BGPsec updates to be
   invalidated by completing a key rollover procedure.  The BGPsec
   router rollover interval can be minimized when an automated
   certificate provisioning process such as Enrollment over Secure
   Transport (EST) [RFC7030] is used.

   The Security Requirements for BGP Path Validation [RFC7353] also
   describes the need for protecting against suppression of BGP WITHDRAW
   messages or replay of BGP UPDATE messages, such as controlling
   BGPsec's window of exposure to such attacks.  The BGPsec router
   certificate rollover method in this document can be used to achieve
   this goal.

   In [I-D.ietf-sidr-rtr-keying], the "operator-driven" method is
   introduced, in which a key pair can be shared among multiple BGP
   speakers.  In this scenario, the rollover of the correspondent BGPsec
   router certificate will impact all the BGP speakers sharing the same
   private key.

3.  Key rollover in BGPsec

   A BGPsec router certificate SHOULD be replaced when the following
   events occur, and can be replaced for any other reason at the
   discretion of the AS responsible for the BGPsec router certificate.



Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   Scheduled rollover:  BGPsec router certificates have an expiration
         date (NotValidAfter) that requires a frequent rollover process
         to refresh certificates or issue new certificates.  The
         validity period for these certificates is typically expressed
         in the CA's CPS document.

   Router certificate field changes:  Information contained in a BGPsec
         router certificate (such as the ASN or the Subject) may need to
         be changed.

   Emergency router key rollover:  Some special circumstances (such as a
         compromised key) may require the replacement of a BGPsec router
         certificate.

   Protection against withdrawal suppression and replay attacks:  An AS
         may determine that withdrawn BGPsec updates are being
         propagated instead of the most recently propagated BGPsec
         updates.  Changing the BGPsec router signing key, distributing
         a new BGPsec router certificate, and revoking the old BGPsec
         router certificate will invalidate the replayed BGPsec updates.

   In some of these cases it is possible to generate a new certificate
   without changing the key pair.  This practice simplifies the rollover
   process as the BGP speakers receiving BGPsec Updates do not even need
   to be aware of the change of certificate.  However, not replacing the
   certificate key for a long period of time increases the risk that a
   compromised router private key may be used by an attacker to deliver
   unauthorized or false BGPsec Updates.  Distributing the old public
   key in a new certificate is NOT RECOMMENDED when the rollover event
   is due to a compromised key, or when it is suspected that withdrawn
   BGPsec updates are being distributed.

3.1.  Rollover Process

   The key rollover process is dependent on the key provisioning
   mechanisms adopted by an AS [I-D.ietf-sidr-rtr-keying].  An automatic
   provisioning mechanism such as EST will allow router key management
   procedures to include automatic re-keying methods with minimum
   development cost.

   A safe BGPsec router key rollover process is as follows.

   1.  New Certificate Publication: The first step in the rollover
       mechanism is to publish the new certificate.  If required, a new
       key pair will be generated for the BGPsec router.  A new
       certificate will be generated and the certificate published at
       the appropriate RPKI repository publication point.  The details
       of this process will vary as they depend on whether the keys are



Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


       assigned per-BGPsec speaker or shared among multiple BGPsec
       speakers, whether the keys are generated on each BGPsec speaker
       or in a central location, and whether the RPKI repository is
       locally or externally hosted.

   2.  Staging Period: A staging period will be required from the time a
       new certificate is published in the RPKI global repository until
       the time it is fetched by RPKI caches around the globe.  The
       exact minimum staging time will be dictated by the conventional
       interval chosen between repository fetches.  If rollovers will be
       done more frequently, an administrator can provision two
       certificates for every router concurrently with different valid
       start times.  In this case when the rollover operation is needed,
       the relying parties around the globe would already have the new
       router public keys.  However, if an administrator has not
       previously provisioned the next certificate then a staging period
       may not be possible to implement during emergency key rollover.
       If there is no staging period, routing may be disrupted due to
       the inability of a BGPsec router to validate BGPsec updates
       signed with a new private key.

   3.  Twilight: At this moment, the BGPsec speaker holding the rolled-
       over private key will stop using the old key for signing and
       start using the new key.  Also, the router will generate
       appropriate refreshed BGPsec updates just as in the typical
       operation of refreshing out-bound BGP polices.  This operation
       may generate a great number of BGPsec updates.  A BGPsec speaker
       may vary the Twilight moment for every peer in order to
       distribute the system load (e.g., skewing the rollover for
       different peers by a few minutes each would be sufficient and
       effective).

   4.  Certificate Revocation: This is an optional step, but SHOULD be
       taken when the goal is to invalidate BGPsec updates signed with
       the old key.  Reasons to invalidate old BGPsec updates include:
       (a) the AS has reason to believe that the router signing key has
       been compromised, and (b) the AS needs to invalidate already
       propagated BGPsec updates signed with the old key.  As part of
       the rollover process, a CA MAY decide to revoke the old
       certificate by publishing its serial number on the CA's CRL.
       Alternatively, the CA will just let the old certificate expire
       and not revoke it.  This choice will depend on the reasons that
       motivated the rollover process.

   5.  RPKI-Router Protocol Withdrawals: At the expiration of the old
       certificate's validation, the RPKI relying parties around the
       globe will need to communicate to their router peers that the old
       certificate's public key is no longer valid (e.g., using the



Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


       RPKI-Router Protocol described in [RFC8210]).  A router's
       reaction to a message indicating withdrawal of a router key in
       the RPKI-Router Protocol SHOULD include the removal of any RIB
       entries (i.e., BGPsec updates) signed with that key and the
       generation of the corresponding BGP WITHDRAWALs (either implicit
       or explicit).

   This rollover mechanism depends on the existence of an automatic
   provisioning process for BGPsec router certificates.  It requires a
   staging mechanism based on the RPKI propagation time (typically a 24
   hour period at the time this document was published), and an AS is
   REQUIRED to re-sign all originated and transited BGPsec updates that
   were previously signed with the old key.

   The first two steps (New Certificate Publication and Staging Period)
   may happen in advance of the rest of the process.  This will allow a
   network operator to perform its subsequent key rollover in an
   efficient and timely manner.

   When a new BGPsec router certificate is generated without changing
   its key, steps 3 (Twilight) and 5 (RPKI-Router Protocol Withdrawals)
   SHOULD NOT be executed.

4.  BGPsec router key rollover as a measure against replay attacks

   There are two typical generic measures to mitigate replay attacks in
   any protocol: the addition of a timestamp or the addition of a serial
   number.  However, neither BGP nor BGPsec provide either measure.  The
   timestamp approach was originally proposed for BGPsec
   [I-D.sriram-replay-protection-design-discussion] but later dropped in
   favor of the key rollover approach.  This section discusses the use
   of using a key rollover as a measure to mitigate replay attacks.

4.1.  BGP UPDATE window of exposure requirement

   The need to limit the vulnerability to replay attacks is described in
   [RFC7353] Section 4.3.  One important comment is that during a window
   of exposure, a replay attack is effective only in very specific
   circumstances: there is a downstream topology change that makes the
   signed AS path no longer current, and the topology change makes the
   replayed route preferable to the route associated with the new
   update.  In particular, if there is no topology change at all, then
   no security threat comes from a replay of a BGPsec update because the
   signed information is still valid.

   The BGPsec Operational Considerations document [RFC8207] gives some
   idea of requirements for the size of the window of exposure to replay




Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   attacks.  It states that the requirement will be in the order of a
   day or longer.

4.2.  BGPsec key rollover as a mechanism to protect against replay
      attacks

   Since the window requirement is on the order of a day (as documented
   in [RFC8207]) and the BGP speaker performing re-keying is the edge
   router of the origin AS, it is feasible to use key rollover to
   mitigate replays.  In this case it is important to complete the full
   process (i.e., the old and new certificates do not share the same
   key).  By re-keying, an AS is letting the BGPsec router certificate
   validation time be a type of "timestamp" to mitigate replay attacks.
   However, the use of frequent key rollovers comes with an additional
   administrative cost and risks if the process fails.  As documented
   before, re-keying should be supported by automatic tools, and for the
   great majority of the Internet it will be done with good lead time to
   ensure that the public key corresponding to the new router
   certificate will be available to validate the corresponding BGPsec
   updates when received.

   If a transit AS also originates BGPsec updates for its own prefixes
   and it wishes to mitigate replay attacks on those prefixes, then the
   transit AS SHOULD be provisioned with two unique key pairs and
   certificates.  One of the key pairs is used to sign BGPsec updates
   for prefixes originated from the transit AS, and can have a replay
   protection policy applied to it.  The other key pair is used to sign
   BGPsec updates in transit and SHOULD NOT have replay protection
   policy applied to it.  Because the transit AS is not likely to know
   or care what is the policy of origin ASes elsewhere, there is no
   value for the transit AS to perform key rollovers to mitigate replay
   attacks against prefixes originated elsewhere.  If the transit AS
   were instead to perform replay protection for all updates that it
   signs, its key rollover process would generate a large number of
   BGPsec UPDATE messages, even in the complete Default Free Zone (DFZ).
   Therefore, it is best to let each AS independently manage the replay
   attack vulnerability window for the prefixes it originates.

   Advantages to re-keying as replay attack protection mechanism are as
   follows:

   1.  All expiration policies are maintained in the RPKI.

   2.  Much of the additional administrative cost is paid by the
       provider that wants to protect its infrastructure, as it bears
       the cost of creating and initiating distribution of new router
       key pairs and BGPsec router certificates.  (It is true that the
       cost of relying parties will be affected by the new objects, but



Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


       their responses should be completely automated or otherwise
       routine.)

   3.  The re-keying can be implemented in coordination with planned
       topology changes by either origin ASes or transit ASes (e.g., if
       an AS changes providers, it completes a key rollover).

   Disadvantages to Re-keying as replay attack protection mechanism are
   as follows:

   1.  Frequent rollovers add administrative and BGP processing loads,
       although the required frequency is not clear.  Some initial ideas
       are found in [RFC8207].

   2.  The minimum replay vulnerability is bounded by the propagation
       time for RPKI caches to obtain the new certificate and CRL (2x
       propagation time because first the new certificate and then the
       CRL need to propagate through the RPKI system).  If provisioning
       is done ahead of time, the minimum replay vulnerability window
       size is reduced to 1x propagation time (i.e., propagation of the
       CRL).  However, these bounds will be better understood when RPKI
       and RPs are well deployed, as well as the propagation time for
       objects in the RPKI is better understood.

   3.  Re-keying increases the dynamics and size of the RPKI repository.

5.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.  This section may be removed upon
   publication.

6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not contain a protocol update to either the RPKI
   or BGPsec.  It describes a process for managing BGPsec router
   certificates within the RPKI.

   Routers participating in BGPsec will need to rollover their signing
   keys as part of conventional certificate management processes.
   However, because rolling over signing keys will also have an effect
   of invalidating BGPsec updates signatures, the rollover process must
   be carefully orchestrated to ensure that valid BGPsec updates are not
   treated as invalid.  This situation could affect Internet routing.
   This document describes a safe method for rolling over BGPsec router
   certificates.  It takes into account both normal and emergency key
   rollover requirements.





Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   Additionally, the key rollover method described in this document can
   be used as a measure to mitigate BGP update replay attacks, in which
   an entity in the routing system is suppressing current BGPsec updates
   and replaying withdrawn updates.  When the key used to sign the
   withdrawn updates has been rolled over, the withdrawn updates will be
   considered invalid.  When certificates containing a new public key
   are provisioned ahead of time, the minimum replay vulnerability
   window size is reduced to the propagation time of a CRL invalidating
   the certificate containing an old public key.  For a discussion of
   the difficulties deploying a more effectual replay protection
   mechanism for BGPSEC, see
   [I-D.sriram-replay-protection-design-discussion].

7.  Acknowledgments

   Randy Bush, Kotikalapudi Sriram, Stephen Kent and Sandy Murphy each
   provided valuable suggestions resulting in an improved document.
   Kotikalapudi Sriram contributed valuable guidance regarding the use
   of key rollovers to mitigate BGP update replay attacks.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-rtr-keying]
              Bush, R., Turner, S., and K. Patel, "Router Keying for
              BGPsec", draft-ietf-sidr-rtr-keying-14 (work in progress),
              October 2017.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997, <https://www.rfc-
              editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.sriram-replay-protection-design-discussion]
              Sriram, K. and D. Montgomery, "Design Discussion and
              Comparison of Protection Mechanisms for Replay Attack and
              Withdrawal Suppression in BGPsec", draft-sriram-replay-
              protection-design-discussion-09 (work in progress),
              October 2017.





Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   [RFC6489]  Huston, G., Michaelson, G., and S. Kent, "Certification
              Authority (CA) Key Rollover in the Resource Public Key
              Infrastructure (RPKI)", BCP 174, RFC 6489,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6489, February 2012, <https://www.rfc-
              editor.org/info/rfc6489>.

   [RFC7030]  Pritikin, M., Ed., Yee, P., Ed., and D. Harkins, Ed.,
              "Enrollment over Secure Transport", RFC 7030,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7030, October 2013, <https://www.rfc-
              editor.org/info/rfc7030>.

   [RFC7353]  Bellovin, S., Bush, R., and D. Ward, "Security
              Requirements for BGP Path Validation", RFC 7353,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7353, August 2014, <https://www.rfc-
              editor.org/info/rfc7353>.

   [RFC8205]  Lepinski, M., Ed. and K. Sriram, Ed., "BGPsec Protocol
              Specification", RFC 8205, DOI 10.17487/RFC8205, September
              2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8205>.

   [RFC8207]  Bush, R., "BGPsec Operational Considerations", BCP 211,
              RFC 8207, DOI 10.17487/RFC8207, September 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8207>.

   [RFC8210]  Bush, R. and R. Austein, "The Resource Public Key
              Infrastructure (RPKI) to Router Protocol, Version 1",
              RFC 8210, DOI 10.17487/RFC8210, September 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8210>.

Authors' Addresses

   Brian Weis
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: bew@cisco.com


   Roque Gagliano
   Cisco Systems
   Avenue des Uttins 5
   Rolle, VD  1180
   Switzerland

   Email: rogaglia@cisco.com




Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         BGPsec certificate rollover         December 2017


   Keyur Patel
   Arrcus, Inc.

   Email: keyur@arrcus.com















































Weis, et al.              Expires June 14, 2018                [Page 11]
