
Service Location Working Group                              Mikael Pahmp
INTERNET DRAFT                                       Axis Communications

2 December 1998

   Definition of printer:raw-tcp:  URLs for use with Service Location
             draft-ietf-svrloc-rawtcp-printer-scheme-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Service Location Working Group
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be
   submitted to the srvloc@srvloc.org mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Abstract

   This document defines the raw-tcp service type which is a concrete 
   service type of the abstract printer service type defined in [1].

   This template is designed to be used in conjuction with the Service
   Location Protocol, version 2 defined in [2].











Mikael Pahmp               Expires 2 June 1998                  [Page i]

Internet Draft         Service Templates and URLs        2 December 1998


                                Contents


Status of This Memo                                                    i

Abstract                                                               i

 1. Introduction                                                       1

 2. Raw TCP printing                                                   1
     2.1. Service Attributes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1

 3. Printer Service Template                                           2

 A. References                                                         3


1. Introduction

   Service Type templates are used to describe in a standard way those
   services which use the service: URL. The template described in this
   document extends the abstract service type described in [1], called
   printer, with another concrete printer type, called raw-tcp.


2. Raw TCP printing

   Printing using TCP for transparent communication between a client
   and a print service is common today. How print data, status,
   messages, etc is formatted when exchanged across the TCP connection
   varies. It is up to the printing client to determine how data should
   be formatted and interpreted. This may be determined based on the
   information available in the service attributes.

2.1. Service Attributes

   Attributes of the Raw TCP printing service includes those
   defined in [1]. The following additional semantics applies.

     The 'concrete-protocols' attribute value should always be 'tcp'.

     The 'abstract-protocols' attribute is optional in [1] and should
     not be advertised with the Raw TCP printing service since data
     exchanged across the TCP connection isn't defined by the service.

   A new optional attribute 'device-id' is defined for the Raw TCP
   printing service. This attribute is the Device ID string defined in
   IEEE 1284 [3] which may be used to uniqely identify a printer and
   match it with a software driver on the printing client.



Mikael Pahmp               Expires 2 June 1998                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft         Service Templates and URLs        2 December 1998


3. Printer Service Template

   The service template defined below, conforms to the grammar
   described in "Service Templates and service:  Schemes".  Please refer
   to [4] for detailed explaination of the syntax.

   Name of submitter: Mikael Pahmp
   Language of service template: en
   Security Considerations:
     This service neither adds nor detracts from the security of the
     opaque data stream itself. The service could be used to obfuscate
     or lie about the service endpoint's characteristics if SLP 
     authentication blocks are not used.
   Template Text:
   -------------------------template begins here-----------------------
   template-type=service:printer:raw-tcp:

   template-version=0.0

   template-description=
     The printer:raw-tcp: URL describes a transparent bidirectional
     communication channel for printing. Print data, status, messages,
     etc is written or read by opening a TCP connection to the port in 
     the service URL. How data is formatted and sent across the
     connection is decided by the printing client and the print service
     and is not defined in this document.

   template-url-syntax=
     url-path     = ;

   concrete-protocols = STRING L M
   # The names of the concrete protocol types supported
   # by the printer abstract service type.  Example values
   # include http and lpr.
   # Is always 'tcp' for this concrete service.

   abstract-protocol = STRING L O
   # The name of the abstract protocol which may be run over
   # any concrete types listed.  For example, the abstract
   # protocol 'ipp' may be run over the concrete types of http
   # or 'mailto'.
   # Should not be advertised with this concrete service.

   device-id= STRING L O
   # The Device ID string defined in IEEE 1284 which uniqely identifies
   # a printer type and model.

   --------------------------template ends here------------------------




Mikael Pahmp               Expires 2 June 1998                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft         Service Templates and URLs        2 December 1998



   Note: The 'concrete-protocols' and 'abstract-protocol' attributes is
   defined in [1] but is given a more narrow definition here when used
   with the Raw TCP printing service. The 'device-id' attribute is a new
   attribute defined for this concrete service type.



A. References


    [1]P. St. Pierre, S. Isaccson.  "Definition of printer:  URLs for
    use with Service Location", Work in Progress, March 1998.

    [2]E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades and M. Day.  "Service
    Location Protocol, Version 2", Work in Progress, November 1998.

    [3] "IEEE Std.1284-1994 Standard Signaling Method for a
    Bi-directional Parallel Peripheral Interface for Personal
    Computers", 1994.

    [4]E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Kempf, "Service Templates and service:
    Schemes", Work in Progress, November, 1998





























Mikael Pahmp               Expires 2 June 1998                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft         Service Templates and URLs        2 December 1998





Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1997).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However,
   this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by
   removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society
   or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose
   of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures
   for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."





Authors' Address

   Questions about this memo can be directed to:

   Mikael Pahmp
   Axis Communications
   Scheelev. 16
   S - 223 70  Lund
   Sweden
   Phone: +46 46 270 18 00
   email: Mikael.Pahmp@axis.com






Mikael Pahmp              Expires 2 June 1998                   [Page 3]
