Mobile Ad-hoc Networks working group                        Errong Pei
Internet Draft                             School of Communication and
                                                Information Engineering
                                                  Chongqing University
                                                 of Postsand Telecommu.
                                                          December 2017
Intended status: Informational
Expires: June 2018

     Energy efficient node selection framework in cooperative spectrum
                                 sensing
                      draft-pei-nodeselection-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 21, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this



Pei                      Expires June,2018                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Nodes selection framework          December 2017


   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   Based on the hybrid spectrum sensing method, this paper proposes a
   SENS node selection algorithm which effectively reduces the number
   of nodes participated in spectrum sensing. The algorithm reduces the
   loads and energy consumption of the cognitive wireless sensor
   networks. It conforms to the development trend of current cognitive
   wireless sensor networks. At the same time, This method is also
   suitable for traditional wireless sensor networks. This algorithm
   which considers the perception of energy consumption and performance
   parameters of nodes forms a node priority function, The network
   selects the nodes according to the priority of nodes, It reduces
   energy consumption and improves the spectrum sensing performance. In
   the cooperative spectrum sensing, sensor nodes transmit the sensing
   results to the fusion center. Moreover, this paper uses the "OR"
   standard, the node whose local sensing decision is "1" transmits the
   local sensing result to the fusion center. So it can reduce the
   energy consumption in the process of spectrum sensing and achieve
   the purpose of energy saving.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ................................................ 2
   2. Conventions used in this document............................ 4
   3. The System Model and node selection algorithm ................ 4
      3.1. The Energy framework of sensor users .................... 4
      3.2. node selection algorithm................................ 5
   4. Formal Syntax ............................................... 6
   5. Security Considerations     .................................. 6
   6. IANA Considerations ......................................... 6
   7. Conclusions ................................................. 6
   8. References .................................................. 7
      8.1. Normative References................................... 7
      8.2. Informative References.................................. 7

  1. Introduction

   It is commonly believed that there is a spectrum scarcity at
   frequencies   that   can   be   economically   used   for   wireless
   communications. This concern has arisen from the intense competition
   for  use  of  spectra  at  frequencies  below  3  GHz.  The  Federal
   Communications  Commission's  (FCC)  frequency  allocation  chart
   indicates overlapping allocations over all of the frequency bands,


Pei                      Expires June, 2018                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Nodes selection framework          December 2017


   which reinforces the scarcity mindset. On the other hand, actual
   measurements taken in downtown Berkeley are believed to be typical
   and indicate low utilization, especially in the 3-6 MHz bands. the
   power spectral density (PSD) of the received 6 GHz wide signal
   collected for a span of 50s sampled at 20 GS/s.This view is
   supported by recent studies of the FCC's .Spectrum Policy Task Force
   who reported vast temporal and geographic variations in the usage of
   allocated spectrum with utilization ranging from 15% to 85%. In
   order to utilize these spectrum 'white spaces', the FCC has issued a
   Notice of advancing Cognitive Radio (CR) technology as a candidate
   to implement negotiated or opportunistic spectrum sharing.

   Wireless systems today are characterized by wasteful static spectrum
   allocations, fixed radio functions, and limited network coordination.
   Some systems in unlicensed frequency bands have achieved great
   spectrum efficiency, but are faced with increasing interference that
   limits network capacity and scalability. Cognitive radio systems
   offer the opportunity to use dynamic spectrum management techniques
   to help prevent interference, adapt to immediate local spectrum
   availability by creating time and location dependent in "virtual
   unlicensed bands", i.e. bands that are shared with primary users.
   Unique to cognitive radio operation is the requirement that the
   radio is able to sense the environment over huge swaths of spectrum
   and adapt to it since the radio does not have primary rights to any
   pre-assigned frequencies. This new radio functionality will involve
   the design of various analog, digital, and network processing
   techniques  in  order  to  meet  challenging  radio  sensitivity
   requirements and wideband frequency agility.

   In CRSN, not only cooperative spectrum sensing enhances the accuracy
   of sensing, but also there are some shortcomings. For example, the
   participation of all nodes in spectrum sensing will increase network
   overhead and computational complexity. In summary, we propose a SENS
   node selection algorithm. Under the constraints of detection rate
   and false alarm rate, the energy-saving problem of cooperative
   spectrum sensing is transformed into 0-1 integer linear programming
   problem  through  mathematical  analysis.  Based  on  mathematical
   analysis, an energy efficient node selection algorithm by adjusting
   the energy consumption of node and the weight coefficient of node
   performance in the priority function is formed, some nodes are
   selected to perform spectrum sensing and the sensing result is
   delivered to the fusion center to reduce the energy consumption
   while ensuring that the system constraints are met. Since the OR
   criterion is adopted in this paper, the node with the decision
   result of 0 will not affect the final decision of the fusion center.
   Therefore, in the process of transmitting the local perception
   result, only the node with the decision result of 1 performs the


Pei                      Expires June, 2018                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Nodes selection framework          December 2017


   result  transmission,  so  it  can  effectively  reduce  the  energy
   consumption in the transmission of results.

  2. Conventions used in this document

   "CSS" indicates Cooperative Spectrum Sensing.
   "RSSA" indicates Random Sensor Selection Algorithm.
   "Cognitive users" also indicates the sensor nodes
   "Detect" also indicates sense

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying significance described in RFC 2119.

   In this document, the characters ">>" preceding an indented line(s)
   indicates a statement using the key words listed above. This
   convention aids reviewers in quickly identifying or finding the
   portions of this RFC covered by these keywords.

  3. The System Model and node selection algorithm

  3.1.The Energy framework of sensor users

   In order to minimize the energy consumption, we have to calculate
   the energy consumption in the cooperative spectrum sensing. The
   total energy consumption includes. The first part is the energy
   consumed to sense the channel and to process the signal. The second
   part is the energy consumed to transmit reliable information to the
   fusion center, assuming that all the nodes have the same perceived
   energy. So the total energy is calculated as follows:

   E_total=SUM (E_c+E_t)

   E_t=k*E_elec+k*e_fs*(d_i)^2

   In the traditional literature on spectrum sensing, it is stipulated
   that all nodes participating in sensing transmit the local sensing
   results to the fusion center. Because this article adopts the "OR"
   fusion rule, the node whose decision result is "0" does not affect
   the  fusion  result.  Therefore,  in  order  to  reduce  the  energy
   consumption of node transmission, only the local decision result of
   the node judged as "1" Fusion Center. Let the probability of node



Pei                      Expires June, 2018                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Nodes selection framework          December 2017


   with local decision result "1" be Pd-1, then Pd-1 is calculated as
   follows:

   P-d-1=P(H_0)Pf-i+P(H_1)Pd-i

   Therefore, the calculation of energy becomes

   E_total=SUM (X_i*E_c+X_i*E_t-i*Pd-i)

   The energy minimization problem convert into the following questions:

   P1:Min|E_total|

   s.t.1-product(1-X_i*Pd-i^fc)>=alpha

       1-product(1-X_i*Pf-i^fc)<=beta

   The problem P1 is a 0-1 nonlinear programming problem. The 0-1
   nonlinear programming problem is more complex and difficult to solve,
   so the constraints under the model can be reasonably transformed and
   the problem can be carried out Simplify.

   The optimal solution to the 0-1 integer linear programming problem
   can use the more mature algorithms such as branch and bound method
   or Gomory cut plane method. Branch and bound method is a search and
   iterative method. Gomory cut plane method In the process of solution,
   it is necessary to calculate the fraction in the rotation iteration,
   so the computational complexity is very high. The complexity of time
   and space of these algorithms is high, especially the complexity of
   n increases. Therefore, heuristic algorithm can be used to solve the
   optimization problem under the inequality constraint under the
   condition of satisfying certain accuracy. The complexity of the
   algorithm can be reduced by solving the optimal solution instead of
   the optimal solution under the linear programming problem. It can be
   known from the analysis that the nodes selected for spectrum sensing
   should have smaller E_i,smaller ln(1-Pd-i^fc),and larger ln(1-Pf-
   i^fc).

   Therefore, a function c(i)that represents the priority of a node can
   be constructed according to these factors, and according to the size
   of c(i)Node prioritization.

3.2.node selection algorithm

   [step1] k-min=0,k-max=c(C is less than 1 and relatively large)

   [step2]while(|(k-min)-(k-max)|)>eps,k=(k-max+k-min)/2


Pei                      Expires June, 2018                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Nodes selection framework          December 2017


   [step3]calculate c(i) in ascending order, Choose n nodes at random
         Calculate Pd

   [step4] Decree Pd-temp=Pd

   [step5] if(Pd>=alpha),while(Pd-temp>=alpha),n=n-1,update Pd-temp,end

           n=n+1,calculate Pf

           if(Pf<=beta),Get the minimum number of nodes n,and decree

           k_max=k,else Pf>beta, Can not get the right n,and decree
           k_min=k,end.

           Else (Pd<alpha),while(Pd-temp<alpha),n=n+1,update Pd-temp,end.

           Calculate Pf, if(Pf<=beta),Get the minimum number of nodes
           n,and decree k_max=k, else Pf>beta, Can not get the right
           n,and decree k_min=k,end.e

           After many iterations, the optimal K value and the minimum
           number of nodes n are obtained

  4. Formal Syntax

   The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus-Naur
   Form (BNF) as described in RFC-2234 [RFC2234].

  5. Security Considerations

   This specification forms a node selection algorithm based on the
   constraints for Cognitive sensor networks

  6. IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

  7. Conclusions

   This proposal proposes an energy efficient node selection algorithm
   whose goal is to reduce energy consumption in the spectrum sensing
   process by minimizing the number of nodes involved in sensing. By
   analyzing the factors that affect the spectrum sensing performance
   (detection rate and false alarm rate), a priority formula of
   spectrum sensing nodes is formed, and then nodes are selected
   through the node selection algorithm. SENS algorithm can effectively
   select fewer nodes for spectrum sensing. While improving the sensing


Pei                      Expires June, 2018                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Nodes selection framework          December 2017


   accuracy, it can effectively save the energy consumption of spectrum
   sensing and improve the performance of cognitive sensor networks.

  8. References

8.1. Normative References

   REN Ju, ZHANG Yaoxue, and ZHANG Ning,et al. Dynamic channel access
   to improve energy efficiency in cognitive radio sensor networks[J].
   IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2016, 15(5): 3143-3156.

   MUCHANDI   N,KHANAI   R.Cognitive   radio   spectrum   sensing:   A
   survey[C]//Electrical,  Electronics,  and  Optimization  Techniques
   (ICEEOT), International Conference on. IEEE, 2016: 3233-3237.

   BALAJI V, Nagendra T, Hota C, et al. Cooperative spectrum sensing in
   Cognitive  Radio:  An  Archetypal  Clustering  approach[C]//Wireless
   Communications,  Signal  Processing  and  Networking  (WiSPNET),
   International Conference on. IEEE, 2016: 1137-1143.

8.2. Informative References

   T. Zhang, R. Safavi-Naini, and Z. Li, "ReDiSen: Reputation-based
   securecooperative sensing in distributed cognitive radio networks"
   inProc. IEEE ICC, Budapest, Hungary, Jun. 9-13, 2013, pp. 2601-2605.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

Authors' Addresses

   Errong Pei
   School of Communication and Information Engineering
   Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
   Nanan Dist., Chongqing, China
   <Address>

   Phone: 008613638323589
   Email: peier@cqupt.edu.cn











Pei                      Expires June, 2018                   [Page 7]

