


GEOPRIV WG                                               J. Winterbottom
Internet-Draft                                                M. Thomson
Expires: January 12, 2006                                         Nortel
                                                             J. Peterson
                                                           NeuStar, Inc.
                                                           July 11, 2005


                  Rationale for Location by Reference
                 draft-winterbottom-location-uri-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document motivates the provisioning of location by-reference
   within the GEOPRIV architecture.  Location by-reference takes the
   form of a URI in contrast to provisioning a static location.






Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Definition of Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.   Location By Reference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.   Access Technology Agnostic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.   Access Topologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.   Location-Reference Benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  12







































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


1.  Introduction

   Circumstances exist where pre-configuring an IP end-point with
   location and having the end-point communicate that location to other
   entities is undesirable and/or unsatisfactory.  This document
   describes real network configurations that pose challenges to pre-
   configured location solutions, and suggests how a location by-
   reference can ubiquitously be used to overcome these circumstances
   and ensure that an end-point's location is current, accurate,
   dependable and secure.









































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


2.  Definition of Terms

      Location-Reference: A URI that when accessed by an authorized
      entity will yield the location of the end-point to which the
      reference is associated.

      Location Dependability: refers to the level of confidence that
      consumers of the location can, or are prepared, to place in the
      location being accurate and attributable to an end-point

      Location Currency: refers to how applicable the provided location
      is when compared to where the end-device is as the time of a
      location request.  That is, how current is the provided location.

      Location-Key: mechanism used to provide a reference to a location.
      This may be a URI, a URL or some other kind of identifier.



































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


3.  Location By Reference

   The concept of location by-reference, also referred to as a location-
   key, is to provide an end-point with a URI that when accessed will
   provide the location of the end-point.  Such a mechanism provides a
   number of advantages that are not achievable through existing by-
   value location provisioning solutions.  The advantages provided
   include location binding, location dependability, location currency,
   session decoupling and intransitive trust of location.

   Location binding is achieved using location references by forcing the
   requesting node to ask the access network or other location provider
   about the location of a specified end-device.  In this situation the
   location generator must be able to identify the end-device, based on
   the provided reference, and subsequently determine its location.
   This has the desired affect of ensuring that the location provided is
   for the end-device about which the request was made.  Similarly a
   query response mechanism of this nature moves towards providing
   better location currency, and because the location is provided
   directly from the location generator the dependability of the
   location is of a higher degree also.

   Location references support session decoupling by allowing the end-
   point to distribute the location reference to third parties so that
   they may obtain the end-point's location without the end-point
   needing to maintain a session with the third party.  This may be
   realized through a SIP subscription or other mechanism, but is
   something that is not possible where location information may only be
   conveyed in-band between the end-point and the third party.

   Location by-reference support intransitive trust because the consumer
   of location information forms a direct connection to the generators
   of location information without using the endpoint as an
   intermediary.  Consumers of location information that have strong
   need to trust the veracity of location information are likelier to
   have stronger trust relationships with the generators of location
   information than they are with endpoints.  Furthermore, some
   generators of location information might not want to disclose this
   information directly to endpoints for various business-model reasons,
   but might be perfectly willing to give this information to trusted
   requestors.










Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


             +--------------------+   Third Party-Location-Request
             |                    |<----------------------------+
             | Location Generator |                             |
             |                    |---- Current Location --+    |
             +--------------------+                        |    |
               ^             |                             V    |
               |             |                      +--------------+
      Location |             | Location-ref         |              |
      Request  |             |                      | Third Party  |
               |             |                      |              |
               |             V                      +--------------+
            +-------------------+                          ^
            |                   |      Location-ref        |
            |    End-Device     |--------------------------+
            |                   |
            +-------------------+

   Unlike in-band location conveyance, where if one intermediary node is
   able to see the contents of a message then all may, a location
   reference may limit the disclosure of a user's location to a limited
   subset of network nodes, rather than all intermediary nodes, based on
   a authorization level.  That is, location can be provided on a need
   to know basis.  This has several key advantages particularly for SIP
   and similar session based protocols.  Firstly, it allows specific
   intermediary nodes that require access to location in order to
   determine routes and so on to obtain the information, but it may
   restrict the final destination from obtaining the end-device's
   location if appropriate.  Secondly, it allows an end-device the
   confidence to always send a location reference with all session
   initiations, so that if location is required by an authorized node it
   will have access to the information to complete the service.  The
   converse to this would be that either the end-device must know in
   advance to provide this information, or it would need to be prompted
   during the session initiation to provide it.  Providing this sort of
   selective disclosure with by-value provisioning of location
   information is extremely difficult (requiring separate encrypted
   bodies for separate anticipated recipients) and in some cases simply
   impossible (where recipients cannot be anticipated by endpoints).

   The existing PIDF-LO structure is relatively large and can easily
   exceed several hundred bytes.  A location reference on the other
   hand, being a URI, will likely be small enough to be accommodated in
   signalling message headers.  Small structures are generally more
   easily processed by high capacity switching devices, leading to a
   more efficient message traversal through the network.






Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


4.  Access Technology Agnostic

   The way in which an end-point accesses a network will have a direct
   impact on how the location of the end-point is determined, and on the
   level of precision shared with the network.  The freedom of movement
   allowed to an Internet endpoint once it has connected to the network
   impacts the most appropriate time to determine its location.  In
   networks where freedom of movement is tightly constrained, variations
   in location currency are less likely to be an issue than in highly
   mobile environments.  In networks that allow large amounts of
   movement, for example WiMAX where freedom of movement can be measured
   in kilometers, it is far less easy to provide any assurances about
   the currency of location at any given point in time without re-
   measuring it.  Coupling the provisioning of static location
   information with network-layer autoconfiguration (e.g., DHCP) is
   therefore applicable to only certain environments, and other
   environments require a different solution.

   Maintaining accurate and current locations for highly mobile end-
   points in a network is challenging.  Continually or periodically re-
   measuring the location of each end-point and then notifying or
   pushing this new location to the end-point is expensive and generally
   unnecessary.  In such networks a location-reference can be used
   deferring location determination until the time that the location is
   actually required, when the reference is accessed.  Such a mechanism
   reduces overall network load, and provides requestors and consumers
   of location information a more current location with greater
   assurances as to its authenticity.  By contrast, by-value
   provisioning in these sorts of environments would result in continual
   and probably unnecessary updates to all endpoints for the benefits of
   the few that will ultimately require location-based services.




















Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


5.  Access Topologies

   In addition to access technologies having an impact on location, so
   too network topologies have an impact on location determination and
   acquisition.  It is not uncommon for broadband services to be
   provided to end-consumers through infrastructure owned and operated
   by several different organizations.  Such networks generally do not
   comprise of single DHCP servers, but rather use AAA and RADIUS
   devices, often in proxy configurations, to obtain and distribute
   configuration information.  Modifying such systems to include native
   support for location acquisition proliferates a problem that is
   already starting to take hold in a number of layer 2 based protocols.
   An alternative approach is to provide a location reference mechanism
   that can be common across all access configuration protocols allowing
   simplification and solution consolidation.




































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


6.  Location-Reference Benefits

      Location not explicitly included in provisioning messages, but
      available to authorized nodes (which may or may not include the
      provisioned endpoint).

      Smaller messages traverse much of the network, larger location
      components only retrieved as required.  Less load on access
      network elements as location is only generated and supplied as
      required.

      End-devices do not need to maintain a trust relationship with the
      location recipient in order for the location recipient to obtain
      the end-device's location.

      Location consumers obtain location directly from the generator for
      a given end-point increasing location dependability and reducing
      unnecessary transitive trust (where recipients would have to trust
      the consumer "through" a user-controlled endpoint).

      Location is determined at request time resulting in more current
      locations being returned, especially in dynamic environments where
      location might change over time.

      Can be easily integrated into existing presence architectures to
      make use of existing privacy, authorization and authentication
      techniques.

      Compensates well for network-layer tunnels etc as location-
      reference can be provided at the local level.





















Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


7.  Security Considerations

   There maybe some concern about location-reference theft and
   subsequent replay attacks.  Where they are used with protocols that
   have good support for identity and authentication management they are
   likely to be far more secure than currently proposed LCI and in-band
   location conveyance.  In addition to protocol security mechanisms,
   additional precautions may be taken such as single usage, limited
   usage, and timed usage references being used.

8.  References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pidf-lo]
              Peterson, J., "A Presence-based GEOPRIV Location Object
              Format", draft-ietf-geopriv-pidf-lo-03 (work in progress),
              September 2004.

   [W3C.REC-xml-exc-c14n-20020718]
              3rd, D., Boyer, J., and J. Reagle, "Exclusive XML
              Canonicalization Version 1.0", W3C REC REC-xml-exc-c14n-
              20020718, July 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   James Winterbottom
   Nortel
   PO Box U87
   University of Wollongong, NSW  2500
   AU

   Phone: +61 2 4223 3038
   Email: winterb@nortel.com
   URI:   http://www.nortel.com/














Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


   Martin Thomson
   Nortel
   PO Box U87
   University of Wollongong, NSW  2500
   AU

   Phone: +61 2 4254 7515
   Email: martin.thomson@nortel.com
   URI:   http://www.nortel.com/


   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar, Inc.
   1800 Sutter St, Suite 570
   Concord, CA  94520
   US

   Phone: +1 925/363-8720
   Email: jon.peterson@neustar.biz
   URI:   http://www.neustar.biz/































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.





Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                Location URI                     July 2005


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires January 12, 2006               [Page 13]

