



Homenet Working Group                                           S. Barth
Internet-Draft                                               Independent
Intended status: Experimental                           October 16, 2015
Expires: April 18, 2016


                       Home Network WiFi Roaming
                  draft-barth-homenet-wifi-roaming-00

Abstract

   This document describes a mechanism to manage host routes and
   statelessly proxy IPv6 Duplicate Address Detection messages between
   multiple WiFi links to allow client roaming.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Homenet WiFi Roaming              October 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Stateless Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Proxy . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Receipt of DAD Messages and forwarding to routers . . . .   3
     3.2.  Distributing DAD Messages received from other routers . .   4
   4.  Maintaining Host Routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Roaming Interface Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     8.1.  Normative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     8.2.  Informative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Appendix A.  Discussion Points [RFC Editor: please remove]  . . .   6
   Appendix B.  Changelog [RFC Editor: please remove]  . . . . . . .   6
   Appendix C.  Draft Source [RFC Editor: please remove] . . . . . .   6
   Appendix D.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   In a multi router home network it can be desirable to have a WiFi
   network accessible in different physical locations.  Synchronization
   of configuration parameters like ESSID and authentication allows
   clients to seamlessly roam the network.  However, a client switching
   from one WiFi AP to another might suffer from service disruption if
   each AP uses a different IP address prefix.  To mitigate this issue,
   all AP links could be bridged on layer 2, which would lead to
   increased traffic on the home network backbone.  This draft offers an
   alternative solutions based on host routing and proxying of Duplicate
   Address Detection for IPv6.

   In order to minimize additional complexity on routers, this draft
   either relies on existing state in the form the neighbor cache
   entries used for host routing or introduces only lightweight,
   stateless mechanism to distribute Duplicate Address Detection
   messages.

   However, an additional mechanism is needed to identify and share
   information about which routers have roaming interfaces, to which
   roaming interface set they belong, under which addresses these
   routers are reachable and which specific roaming prefixes are
   assigned.  The specific mechanism is out of scope for this draft,
   however a solution based on [I-D.ietf-homenet-hncp] is conceivable.





Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Homenet WiFi Roaming              October 2015


2.  Terminology

   ESSID             IEEE 802.11 Extended Service Set Identifier

   host route        an IPv6 route with a prefix length of 128 intended
                     to track a host on a roaming interface

   roaming interface a network interface (typically IEEE 802.11) which
                     shares an address prefix with other similar
                     interfaces to allow seamless client roaming

   roaming interface the set of roaming interfaces which share a
   set               particular address prefix

   roaming prefix    an IPv6 address prefix shared between all
                     interfaces in a roaming interface set

2.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119 [RFC2119].

3.  Stateless Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Proxy

   Sharing a roaming prefix across multiple separate interfaces might
   lead to address collisions between hosts on different interfaces of
   the same set.  Therefore, it needs to be ensured that DAD messages
   are shared across interfaces.  The typical DAD process involves the
   querying host sending one or more Neighbor Solicitations using the
   unspecified address as a source and any colliding host replying to
   the all-nodes address as specified in [RFC4862] and [RFC4861].  Since
   the source addresses of the DAD solicitations and the destination
   addresses of the DAD advertisements are fixed, the whole process can
   happen statelessly.

3.1.  Receipt of DAD Messages and forwarding to routers

   The following requirements apply for receiving DAD traffic from hosts
   on roaming interfaces and forwarding them to other DAD proxy routers:

      A router MUST listen for all Neighbor Solicitations with a target
      addresses from an assigned roaming prefix having the unspecified
      address as the source address.  Similarly it MUST listen for all
      Neighbor Advertisements with a target address from an assigned
      roaming prefix and having the all-nodes multicast address as the
      destination address.



Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Homenet WiFi Roaming              October 2015


      A router MUST forward all such messages via global unicast to all
      other routers having roaming interfaces sharing the roaming
      prefixes the target address of the respective message belongs to.

3.2.  Distributing DAD Messages received from other routers

   The following requirements apply for distributing DAD traffic,
   forwarded by other routers, to clients on roaming interfaces:

      A router MUST listen for Neighbor Solicitations and Advertisements
      sent via global unicast from other routers having roaming
      interfaces with the same roaming prefix.

      Upon reception of such a Neighbor Solicitation, the router MUST
      forward the message to all roaming interfaces having prefixes
      matching the target address.  It MUST use the unspecified address
      as source and the respective solicited node multicast-address as
      destination address.

      Upon reception of such a Neighbor Advertisement, the router MUST
      forward the message to all roaming interfaces having prefixes
      matching the target address.  It MUST use the all-nodes multicast-
      address as destination address.

4.  Maintaining Host Routes

   Host routes are necessary in order to unambiguously forward packets
   to potentially roaming WiFi clients.  This draft ties the
   announcement of host routes to the presence of Neighbor Cache
   [RFC4861] entries for addresses of roaming prefixes.  The following
   requirements apply:

      A router MUST announce a host route for an IPv6 address belonging
      to a roaming prefix whenever there is a corresponding entry for it
      in the roaming interface's neighbor cache with the states
      REACHABLE, STALE, DELAY or PROBE.

      A router MUST retract any host route for an IPv6 address
      immediately when a neighbor lookup for it has finally failed on
      the roaming interface OR when a physical disconnect of the
      respective client (e.g., a WiFi disassociation) has been noticed.

      A router SHOULD be able to manage and publish host routes for at
      least two IPv6 addresses for every connected host and IPv6 roaming
      prefix announced on a roaming interface.

      The router SHOULD NOT flush neighbor cache entries in STALE state
      and respective host routes.  Instead it SHOULD try to promote



Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Homenet WiFi Roaming              October 2015


      STALE entries to REACHABLE and only upon failure remove the cache
      entry and route.  This ensures that the address is actually not
      used anymore and the host does not happen to be merely temporarily
      inactive and potentially waiting for incoming packets.

5.  Roaming Interface Configuration

   The following requirements are suggested for interfaces intended to
   use the roaming features described in this draft:

      Router Advertisements SHOULD only include Prefix Information
      Options for one more IPv6 roaming prefixes.  Such Prefix
      Information Options MUST have the A-Bit set and the L-Bit cleared.

      The IPv6 address fe80::1 SHOULD be used as fixed link-local
      address exclusively by the router on roaming interfaces.  This is
      to ensure that the IPv6 default route for clients stays the same
      across roaming interfaces.  Furthermore the address SHOULD be
      announced as recursive DNS server address should the router
      provide such a service.

      Router Advertisements SHOULD be sent as described in
      [I-D.ietf-v6ops-reducing-ra-energy-consumption].

      Stateful DHCPv6 MUST NOT be used to avoid the need to synchronize
      lease information and relay DHCPv6 packets.  Similarly Router
      Advertisements MUST be sent with the M-Bit cleared.

      NAT64 and DNS64 SHOULD be used if IPv4 connectivity is desired,
      alternatively different and disjoint native IPv4 prefixes MAY be
      used on each individual roaming interface.

6.  Security Considerations

   TBD

7.  IANA Considerations

   No action needed.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative references

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.





Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Homenet WiFi Roaming              October 2015


   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-reducing-ra-energy-consumption]
              Yourtchenko, A. and L. Colitti, "Reducing energy
              consumption of Router Advertisements", draft-ietf-v6ops-
              reducing-ra-energy-consumption-02 (work in progress),
              October 2015.

8.2.  Informative references

   [I-D.ietf-homenet-hncp]
              Stenberg, M., Barth, S., and P. Pfister, "Home Networking
              Control Protocol", draft-ietf-homenet-hncp-09 (work in
              progress), August 2015.

Appendix A.  Discussion Points [RFC Editor: please remove]

   o  It is debatable which kind of transport could be used for the
      proxied DAD messages.  Plain ICMPv6 could be possibly but might be
      dropped by certain hosts.  Similarly UDP or DTLS encapsulation
      could be used easily if a port was allocated or exchanged.

   o  Is additional reliability useful and if so what kind?  Normally
      hosts only send a single DAD solicitation, so the probability of a
      total packet loss increases with each forwarding hop.  Trivially
      one could simply duplicate all proxied DAD messages or use TCP
      framing or SCTP.  However the announced Retrans Timer value in the
      RA and retransmission parameters of the transport need to be
      adjusted, so that any resend and matching replies happen before
      the host considers the DAD process to have resulted in no
      collisions.

Appendix B.  Changelog [RFC Editor: please remove]

   draft-barth-homenet-wifi-roaming-00:

   o  Initial version.

Appendix C.  Draft Source [RFC Editor: please remove]

   As usual, this draft is available at https://github.com/fingon/ietf-
   drafts/ in source format (with nice Makefile too).  Feel free to send
   comments and/or pull requests if and when you have changes to it!



Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Homenet WiFi Roaming              October 2015


Appendix D.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Markus Stenberg for comments and feedback on the draft.

Author's Address

   Steven Barth
   Independent
   Halle  06114
   Germany

   Email: cyrus@openwrt.org







































Barth                    Expires April 18, 2016                 [Page 7]
