


Proto                                                       H. Levkowetz
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Expires: November 11, 2006                                     A. Mankin
                                                            May 10, 2006


    Requirements on I-D Tracker Extensions for IAB and IRTF Document
                               Shepherds
                draft-ietf-proto-iab-irtf-tracker-ext-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 11, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes the states which need to be added to the I-D
   tracker to make it possible for IAB and IRTF document shepherds
   (whoever the IAB and IRTF designate, e.g. the IAB Chair, RG Chairs)
   to update the I-D tracker during document shepherding.  It is a
   companion document of draft-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext which describes
   additional additional requirements for the chairs to use the I-D
   tracker for managing WG documents from their earliest stages.



Levkowetz & Mankin      Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements           May 2006


1.  Introduction

   In order to make it possible for IAB and IRTF document shepherds to
   do the full duties of shepherding it is necessary for them to be able
   to enter document state changes and issue resolutions into the I-D
   tracker.  At the time of writing, only area directors have the
   necessary write access to the tracker.  The requirements for
   providing sufficient write access to document shepherds in general,
   and the new states needed for working group chairs acting as
   shepherds in particular are described in
   draft-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext.  This document describes the
   additional tracker states which are specific to the IAB and the IRTF
   document flow.

1.1.  Terminology

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalised.  The key
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document
   are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The requirements in this document are specified using a set of
   requirements.  These requirements are English phrases ending with an
   "(R-nnn)" indication, where "nnn" is a unique requirement number.


2.  New Document States

   In order to be able to provide appropriate document state indications
   for documents which are IAB documents or IRTF documents and have not
   yet been submitted for publication as RFC, additional states are
   needed in the tracker.  These are described in the following
   sections.

2.1.  IAB Document States

   The following states and sub-states should be added to the tracker,
   for use for IAB documents.

   *  Active IAB Document
      This document is being actively worked at by the IAB

      Possible next states: "Parked IAB Document", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states:
      (R-00a)




Levkowetz & Mankin      Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements           May 2006


   *  Parked IAB Document
      This document has lost its author or editor, is waiting for
      another document to be written, or cannot currently be worked on
      by the working group for some other reason.

      Possible next states: "Active IAB Document", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states: "Need Editor", "Waiting for Dependency
      Document", "Other Problem - see comment log"
      (R-00b)

   *  In IAB Internal Last Call
      An IAB internal last call has been issued for this document.

      Possible next states: "Active IAB Document", "Parked IAB
      Document", "In IAB Community Review", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states: "1st", "2nd", "3rd", "4th", "5th", "6th",
      "7th", "8th", "9th", "Revised ID Needed".
      (R-00c)

   *  In IAB Community Review
      An IAB "Impending publication" message has been issued as a
      community last call for this document.

      "Active IAB Document", "Parked IAB Document", "RFC Ed Queue",
      "Dead"

      (R-00d)

2.2.  IRTF Document States

   The following states and sub-states should be added to the tracker,
   for use for IRTF documents.

   *  Active RG Document
      This document has been adopted by a research group, and is being
      actively developed.

      Possible next states: "Parked RG Document", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states:
      (R-00e)

   *  Parked RG Document
      This document has lost its author or editor, is waiting for
      another document to be written, or cannot currently be worked on
      by the working group for some other reason.



Levkowetz & Mankin      Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements           May 2006


      Possible next states: "Active RG Document", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states: "Need Editor", "Waiting for Dependency
      Document", "Other Problem - see comment log"
      (R-00f)

   *  In RG Last Call
      A RG last call has been issued for this document.

      Possible next states: "Active RG Document", "Parked RG Document",
      "Publication Requested", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states: "1st", "2nd", "3rd", "4th", "5th", "6th",
      "7th", "8th", "9th".
      (R-00g)

   *  IRSG Evaluation
      The document has been submitted for reviews by the IRSG prior to
      publication

      Possible next states: "RFC Ed Queue", "Active RG Document", "Dead"

      Permitted sub-states: none are envisioned due the the IRSG use of
      its own tracker.
      (R-00h)


3.  IANA considerations

   This document does not require any new number assignments from IANA,
   and does not define any new numbering spaces to be administered by
   IANA.

   RFC-Editor: Please remove this section before publication.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not propose any new internet mechanisms, and has
   no security implications for the internet.

5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.






Levkowetz & Mankin      Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements           May 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Henrik Levkowetz
   Ericsson
   Torsgatan 71
   Stockholm  S-113 37
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 708 32 16 08
   Email: henrik@levkowetz.com


   Allison Mankin

   Phone: +1 301 728 7199
   Email: mankin@psg.com



































Levkowetz & Mankin      Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      IAB and IRTF Tracker Requirements           May 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Levkowetz & Mankin      Expires November 11, 2006               [Page 6]

