



Network Working Group                                   C. Filsfils, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                           S. Previdi, Ed.
Intended status: Standards Track                             A. Bashandy
Expires: November 6, 2015                            Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                             B. Decraene
                                                            S. Litkowski
                                                                  Orange
                                                            M. Horneffer
                                                        Deutsche Telekom
                                                               R. Shakir
                                                         British Telecom
                                                             J. Tantsura
                                                                Ericsson
                                                               E. Crabbe
                                                              Individual
                                                             May 5, 2015


                      Segment Routing Architecture
                  draft-ietf-spring-segment-routing-02

Abstract

   Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm.  A node
   steers a packet through an ordered list of instructions, called
   segments.  A segment can represent any instruction, topological or
   service-based.  A segment can have a local semantic to an SR node or
   global within an SR domain.  SR allows to enforce a flow through any
   topological path and service chain while maintaining per-flow state
   only at the ingress node to the SR domain.

   Segment Routing can be directly applied to the MPLS architecture with
   no change on the forwarding plane.  A segment is encoded as an MPLS
   label.  An ordered list of segments is encoded as a stack of labels.
   The segment to process is on the top of the stack.  Upon completion
   of a segment, the related label is popped from the stack.

   Segment Routing can be applied to the IPv6 architecture, with a new
   type of routing extension header.  A segment is encoded as an IPv6
   address.  An ordered list of segments is encoded as an ordered list
   of IPv6 addresses in the routing extension header.  The segment to
   process is indicated by a pointer in the routing extension header.
   Upon completion of a segment, the pointer is incremented.








Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 6, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Companion Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Link-State IGP Segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  IGP Segment, IGP SID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  IGP-Prefix Segment, Prefix-SID  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  IGP-Node Segment, Node-SID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  IGP-Anycast Segment, Anycast SID  . . . . . . . . . . . .   9



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


     3.5.  IGP-Adjacency Segment, Adj-SID  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       3.5.1.  Parallel Adjacencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.5.2.  LAN Adjacency Segments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.6.  Binding Segment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       3.6.1.  Mapping Server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       3.6.2.  Tunnel Headend  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.7.  Inter-Area Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   4.  BGP Peering Segments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   5.  Multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   8.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   With Segment Routing (SR), a node steers a packet through an ordered
   list of instructions, called segments.  A segment can represent any
   instruction, topological or service-based.  A segment can have a
   local semantic to an SR node or global within an SR domain.  SR
   allows to enforce a flow through any path and service chain while
   maintaining per-flow state only at the ingress node of the SR domain.

   Segment Routing can be directly applied to the MPLS architecture (RFC
   3031) with no change on the forwarding plane.  A segment is encoded
   as an MPLS label.  An ordered list of segments is encoded as a stack
   of labels.  The active segment is on the top of the stack.  A
   completed segment is popped off the stack.  The addition of a segment
   is performed with a push.

   In the Segment Routing MPLS instantiation, a segment could be of
   several types:

   o  an IGP segment,

   o  a BGP Peering segments,

   o  an LDP LSP segment,

   o  an RSVP-TE LSP segment,

   o  a BGP LSP segment.





Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   The first two (IGP and BGP Peering segments) types of segments
   defined in this document.  The use of the last three types of
   segments is illustrated in [I-D.ietf-spring-segment-routing-mpls].

   Segment Routing can be applied to the IPv6 architecture (RFC2460),
   with a new type of routing extension header.  A segment is encoded as
   an IPv6 address.  An ordered list of segments is encoded as an
   ordered list of IPv6 addresses in the routing extension header.  The
   active segment is indicated by a pointer in the routing extension
   header.  Upon completion of a segment, the pointer is incremented.  A
   segment can be inserted in the list and the pointer is updated
   accordingly.

   Numerous use-cases illustrate the benefits of source routing either
   for FRR, OAM or Traffic Engineering reasons.

   This document defines a set of instructions (called segments) that
   are required to fulfill the described use-cases.  These segments can
   either be used in isolation (one single segment defines the source
   route of the packet) or in combination (these segments are part of an
   ordered list of segments that define the source route of the packet).

1.1.  Companion Documents

   This document defines the SR architecture, its routing model, the
   IGP-based segments, the BGP-based segments and the service segments.

   Use cases are described in
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases],
   [I-D.ietf-spring-ipv6-use-cases],
   [I-D.ietf-spring-resiliency-use-cases], [I-D.geib-spring-oam-usecase]
   and [I-D.kumar-spring-sr-oam-requirement].

   Segment Routing for MPLS dataplane is documented in
   [I-D.ietf-spring-segment-routing-mpls].

   Segment Routing for IPv6 dataplane is documented in
   [I-D.previdi-6man-segment-routing-header].

   IGP protocol extensions for Segment Routing are described in
   [I-D.ietf-isis-segment-routing-extensions],
   [I-D.ietf-ospf-segment-routing-extensions] and
   [I-D.ietf-ospf-ospfv3-segment-routing-extensions] referred in this
   document as "IGP SR extensions documents".

   The FRR solution for SR is documented in
   [I-D.francois-spring-segment-routing-ti-lfa].




Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   The PCEP protocol extensions for Segment Routing are defined in
   [I-D.ietf-pce-segment-routing].

   The interaction between SR/MPLS with other MPLS Signaling planes is
   documented in [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-ldp-interop].

2.  Terminology

   Segment: an instruction a node executes on the incoming packet (e.g.:
   forward packet according to shortest path to destination, or, forward
   packet through a specific interface, or, deliver the packet to a
   given application/service instance).

   SID: a Segment Identifier

   Segment List: ordered list of SID's encoding the topological and
   service source route of the packet.  It is a stack of labels in the
   MPLS architecture.  It is an ordered list of IPv6 addresses in the
   IPv6 architecture.

   Active segment: the segment that MUST be used by the receiving router
   to process the packet.  It is identified by a pointer in the IPv6
   architecture.  It is the top label in the MPLS architecture.

   PUSH: the insertion of a segment at the head of the Segment list.

   NEXT: the active segment is completed, the next segment becomes
   active.

   CONTINUE: the active segment is not completed and hence remains
   active.  The CONTINUE instruction is implemented as the SWAP
   instruction in the MPLS dataplane.

   SR Global Block (SRGB): local property of an SR node.  In the MPLS
   architecture, SRGB is the set of local labels reserved for global
   segments.  In the IPv6 architecture, it is the set of locally
   relevant IPv6 addresses.

   Global Segment: the related instruction is supported by all the SR-
   capable nodes in the domain.  In the MPLS architecture, a Global
   Segment has a globally-unique index.  The related local label at a
   given node N is found by adding the globally-unique index to the SRGB
   of node N.  In the IPv6 architecture, a global segment is a globally-
   unique IPv6 address.

   Local Segment: the related instruction is supported only by the node
   originating it.  In the MPLS architecture, this is a local label




Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   outside the SRGB.  In the IPv6 architecture, this is a link-local
   address.

   IGP Segment: the generic name for a segment attached to a piece of
   information advertised by a link-state IGP, e.g. an IGP prefix or an
   IGP adjacency.

   IGP-prefix Segment, Prefix-SID: an IGP-Prefix Segment is an IGP
   segment attached to an IGP prefix.  An IGP-Prefix Segment is always
   global within the SR/IGP domain and identifies an instruction to
   forward the packet over the ECMP-aware shortest-path computed by the
   IGP to the related prefix.  The Prefix-SID is the SID of the IGP-
   Prefix Segment.

   IGP-Anycast: an IGP-Anycast Segment is an IGP-prefix segment which
   does not identify a specific router, but a set of routers.  The terms
   "Anycast Segment" or "Anycast-SID" are often used as an abbreviation.

   IGP-Adjacency: an IGP-Adjacency Segment is an IGP segment attached to
   an unidirectional adjacency or a set of unidirectional adjacencies.
   By default, an IGP-Adjacency Segment is local (unless explicitly
   advertised otherwise) to the node that advertises it.

   IGP-Node: an IGP-Node Segment is an IGP-Prefix Segment which
   identifies a specific router (e.g. a loopback).  The terms "Node
   Segment" or Node-SID" are often used as an abbreviation.

   SR Tunnel: a list of segments to be pushed on the packets directed on
   the tunnel.  The list of segments can be specified explicitly or
   implicitly via a set of abstract constraints (latency, affinity,
   SRLG, ...).  In the latter case, a constraint-based path computation
   is used to determine the list of segments associated with the tunnel.
   The computation can be local or delegated to a PCE server.  An SR
   tunnel can be configured by the operator, provisioned via netconf or
   provisioned via PCEP.  An SR tunnel can be used for traffic-
   engineering, OAM or FRR reasons.

   Segment List Depth: the number of segments of an SR tunnel.  The
   entity instantiating an SR Tunnel at a node N should be able to
   discover the depth insertion capability of the node N.  The PCEP
   discovery capability is described in [I-D.ietf-pce-segment-routing].

3.  Link-State IGP Segments

   Within a link-state IGP domain, an SR-capable IGP node advertises
   segments for its attached prefixes and adjacencies.  These segments
   are called IGP segments or IGP SIDs.  They play a key role in Segment
   Routing and use-cases



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   ([I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases]) as they enable the
   expression of any topological path throughout the IGP domain.  Such a
   topological path is either expressed as a single IGP segment or a
   list of multiple IGP segments.

3.1.  IGP Segment, IGP SID

   The terms "IGP Segment" and "IGP SID" are the generic names for a
   segment attached to a piece of information advertised by a link-state
   IGP, e.g. an IGP prefix or an IGP adjacency.

3.2.  IGP-Prefix Segment, Prefix-SID

   An IGP-Prefix Segment is an IGP segment attached to an IGP prefix.
   An IGP-Prefix Segment is always global within the SR/IGP domain and
   identifies the ECMP-aware shortest-path computed by the IGP to the
   related prefix.  The Prefix-SID is the SID of the IGP-Prefix Segment.

   A packet injected anywhere within the SR/IGP domain with an active
   Prefix-SID will be forwarded along the shortest-path to that prefix.

   The IGP signaling extension for IGP-Prefix segment includes a set of
   flags.  The encoding details of the Prefix-SID and its flags are
   described in IGP SR extensions documents.

   The IGP signaling extension for IGP-Prefix segment includes the
   P-Flag.  A Node N advertising a Prefix-SID SID-R for its attached
   prefix R resets the P-Flag to allow its connected neighbors to
   perform the NEXT operation while processing SID-R.  This behavior is
   equivalent to Penultimate Hop Popping in MPLS.  When set, the
   neighbors of N must perform the CONTINUE operation while processing
   SID-R.

   While SR allows to attach a local segment to an IGP prefix (using the
   L-Flag), we specifically assume that when the terms "IGP-Prefix
   Segment" and "Prefix-SID" are used, the segment is global (the SID is
   allocated from the SRGB).  This is consistent with
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases] as all the described
   use-cases require global segments attached to IGP prefixes.

   A single Prefix-SID is allocated to an IGP Prefix in a topology.

   In the context of multiple topologies, multiple Prefix-SID's MAY be
   allocated to the same IGP Prefix (e.g.: using the "algorithm" field
   in the IGP advertisement as described in IGP SR extensions
   documents).  However, each prefix-SID MUST be associated with only
   one topology.  In other words: a prefix, within a topology, MUST have
   only a single Prefix-SID.



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   A Prefix-SID is allocated from the SRGB according to a process
   similar to IP address allocation.  Typically the Prefix-SID is
   allocated by policy by the operator (or NMS) and the SID very rarely
   changes.

   The allocation process MUST NOT allocate the same Prefix-SID to
   different IP prefixes.

   If a node learns a Prefix-SID having a value that falls outside the
   locally configured SRGB range, then the node MUST NOT use the Prefix-
   SID and SHOULD issue an error log warning for misconfiguration.

   The required IGP protocol extensions are defined in IGP SR extensions
   documents.

   A node N attaching a Prefix-SID SID-R to its attached prefix R MUST
   maintain the following FIB entry:

      Incoming Active Segment: SID-R
      Ingress Operation: NEXT
      Egress interface: NULL

   A remote node M MUST maintain the following FIB entry for any learned
   Prefix-SID SID-R attached to IP prefix R:

      Incoming Active Segment: SID-R
      Ingress Operation:
         If the next-hop of R is the originator of R
         and instructed to remove the active segment: NEXT
         Else: CONTINUE
      Egress interface: the interface towards the next-hop along
                        the shortest-path to prefix R.

3.3.  IGP-Node Segment, Node-SID

   An IGP-Node Segment is a an IGP-Prefix Segment which identifies a
   specific router (e.g. a loopback).  The N flag is set.  The terms
   "Node Segment" or "Node-SID" are often used as an abbreviation.

   A "Node Segment" or "Node-SID" is fundamental to SR.  From anywhere
   in the network, it enforces the ECMP-aware shortest- path forwarding
   of the packet towards the related node as explained in
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases].

   An IGP-Node-SID MUST NOT be associated with a prefix that is owned or
   advertised by more than one router within the same routing domain.





Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


3.4.  IGP-Anycast Segment, Anycast SID

   An IGP-Anycast Segment is an IGP-prefix segment which does not
   identify a specific router, but a set of routers.  The terms "Anycast
   Segment" or "Anycast-SID" are often used as an abbreviation.

   An "Anycast Segment" or "Anycast SID" enforces the ECMP-aware
   shortest-path forwarding towards the closest node of the anycast set.
   This is useful to express macro-engineering policies or protection
   mechanisms as described in
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases].

   The Anycast SID MUST be advertised with the N-flag unset.

3.5.  IGP-Adjacency Segment, Adj-SID

   An IGP-Adjacency Segment is an IGP segment attached to a
   unidirectional adjacency or a set of unidirectional adjacencies.  By
   default, an IGP-Adjacency Segment is local to the node which
   advertises it.  However, an Adjacency Segment can be global if
   advertised by the IGP as such.  The SID of the IGP-Adjacency Segment
   is called the Adj-SID.

   The adjacency is formed by the local node (i.e., the node advertising
   the adjacency in the IGP) and the remote node (i.e., the other end of
   the adjacency).  The local node MUST be an IGP node.  The remote node
   MAY be an adjacent IGP neighbor) or a non-adjacent neighbor (e.g.: a
   Forwarding Adjacency, [RFC4206]).

   A packet injected anywhere within the SR domain with a segment list
   {SN, SNL}, where SN is the Node-SID of node N and SNL is an Adj-SID
   attached by node N to its adjacency over link L, will be forwarded
   along the shortest-path to N and then be switched by N, without any
   IP shortest-path consideration, towards link L.  If the Adj-SID
   identifies a set of adjacencies, then the node N load- balances the
   traffic among the various members of the set.

   Similarly, when using a global Adj-SID, a packet injected anywhere
   within the SR domain with a segment list {SNL}, where SNL is a global
   Adj-SID attached by node N to its adjacency over link L, will be
   forwarded along the shortest-path to N and then be switched by N,
   without any IP shortest-path consideration, towards link L.  If the
   Adj-SID identifies a set of adjacencies, then the node N load-
   balances the traffic among the various members of the set.  The use
   of global Adj-SID allows to reduce the size of the segment list when
   expressing a path at the cost of additional state (i.e.: the global
   Adj-SID will be inserted by all routers within the area in their
   forwarding table).



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   An "IGP Adjacency Segment" or "Adj-SID" enforces the switching of the
   packet from a node towards a defined interface or set of interfaces.
   This is key to theoretically prove that any path can be expressed as
   a list of segments as explained in
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases].

   The encodings of the Adj-SID include the B-flag.  When set, the Adj-
   SID benefits from a local protection.

   The encodings of the Adj-SID include the L-flag.  When set, the Adj-
   SID has local significance.  By default the L-flag is set.

   A node SHOULD allocate one Adj-SIDs for each of its adjacencies.

   A node MAY allocate multiple Adj-SIDs to the same adjacency.  An
   example is where the adjacency is established over a bundle
   interface.  Each bundle member MAY have its own Adj-SID.

   A node MAY allocate the same Adj-SID to multiple adjacencies.

   Adjacency suppression MUST NOT be performed by the IGP.

   A node MUST install a FIB entry for any Adj-SID of value V attached
   to data-link L:

      Incoming Active Segment: V
      Operation: NEXT
      Egress Interface: L

   The Adj-SID implies, from the router advertising it, the forwarding
   of the packet through the adjacency identified by the Adj-SID,
   regardless its IGP/SPF cost.  In other words, the use of Adjacency
   Segments overrides the routing decision made by SPF algorithm.

3.5.1.  Parallel Adjacencies

   Adj-SIDs can be used in order to represent a set of parallel
   interfaces between two adjacent routers.

   A node MUST install a FIB entry for any locally originated Adjacency
   Segment (Adj-SID) of value W attached to a set of link B with:

      Incoming Active Segment: W
      Ingress Operation: NEXT
      Egress interface: loadbalance between any data-link within set B

   When parallel adjacencies are used and associated to the same Adj-
   SID, and in order to optimize the load balancing function, a "weight"



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   factor can be associated to the Adj-SID advertised with each
   adjacency.  The weight tells the ingress (or a SDN/orchestration
   system) about the loadbalancing factor over the parallel adjacencies.
   As shown in Figure 1, A and B are connected through two parallel
   adjacencies

                                  link-1
                                +--------+
                                |        |
                            S---A        B---C
                                |        |
                                +--------+
                                  link-2

                   Figure 1: Parallel Links and Adj-SIDs

   Node A advertises following Adj-SIDs and weights:

   o  Link-1: Adj-SID 1000, weight: 1

   o  Link-2: Adj-SID 1000, weight: 2

   Node S receives the advertisements of the parallel adjacencies and
   understands that by using Adj-SID 1000 node A will loadbalance the
   traffic across the parallel links (link-1 and link-2) according to a
   1:2 ratio.

   The weight value is advertised with the Adj-SID as defined in IGP SR
   extensions documents.

3.5.2.  LAN Adjacency Segments

   In LAN subnetworks, link-state protocols define the concept of
   Designated Router (DR, in OSPF) or Designated Intermediate System
   (DIS, in IS-IS) that conduct flooding in broadcast subnetworks and
   that describe the LAN topology in a special routing update (OSPF
   Type2 LSA or IS-IS Pseudonode LSP).

   The difficulty with LANs is that each router only advertises its
   connectivity to the DR/DIS and not to each other individual nodes in
   the LAN.  Therefore, additional protocol mechanisms (IS-IS and OSPF)
   are necessary in order for each router in the LAN to advertise an
   Adj-SID associated to each neighbor in the LAN.  These extensions are
   defined in IGP SR extensions documents.







Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


3.6.  Binding Segment

3.6.1.  Mapping Server

   A Remote-Binding SID S advertised by the mapping server M for remote
   prefix R attached to non-SR-capable node N signals the same
   information as if N had advertised S as a Prefix-SID.  Further
   details are described in the SR/LDP interworking procedures
   ([I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-ldp-interop].

   The segment allocation and SRGB Maintenance rules are the same as
   those defined for Prefix-SID.

3.6.2.  Tunnel Headend

   The segment allocation and SRGB Maintenance rules are the same as
   those defined for Adj-SID.  A tunnel attached to a head-end H acts as
   an adjacency attached to H.

   Note: an alternative would consist in representing tunnels as
   forwarding-adjacencies ( [RFC4206]).  In such case, the tunnel is
   presented to the routing area as a routing adjacency and will be
   considered as such by all area routers.  The Remote-Binding SID is
   preferred as it allows to advertise the presence of a tunnel without
   influencing the LSDB and the SPF computation.

3.7.  Inter-Area Considerations

   In the following example diagram we assume an IGP deployed using
   areas and where SR has been deployed.

                 !          !
                 !          !
          B------C-----F----G-----K
         /       |          |     |
   S---A/        |          |     |
        \        |          |     |
         \D------I----------J-----L----Z (192.0.2.1/32, Node-SID: 150)
                 !          !
         Area-1  ! Backbone ! Area 2
                 !   area   !

                   Figure 2: Inter-Area Topology Example

   In area 2, node Z allocates Node-SID 150 to his local prefix
   192.0.2.1/32.  ABRs G and J will propagate the prefix into the
   backbone area by creating a new instance of the prefix according to
   normal inter-area/level IGP propagation rules.



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   Nodes C and I will apply the same behavior when leaking prefixes from
   the backbone area down to area 1.  Therefore, node S will see prefix
   192.0.2.1/32 with Prefix-SID 150 and advertised by nodes C and I.

   It therefore results that a Prefix-SID remains attached to its
   related IGP Prefix through the inter-area process.

   When node S sends traffic to 192.0.2.1/32, it pushes Node-SID(150) as
   active segment and forward it to A.

   When packet arrives at ABR I (or C), the ABR forwards the packet
   according to the active segment (Node-SID(150)).  Forwarding
   continues across area borders, using the same Node-SID(150), until
   the packet reaches its destination.

   When an ABR propagates a prefix from one area to another it MUST set
   the R-Flag.

4.  BGP Peering Segments

   In the context of BGP Egress Peer Engineering (EPE), as described in
   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-central-epe], an EPE enabled
   Egress PE node MAY advertise segments corresponding to its attached
   peers.  These segments are called BGP peering segments or BGP Peering
   SIDs.  They enable the expression of source-routed inter-domain
   paths.

   An ingress border router of an AS may compose a list of segments to
   steer a flow along a selected path within the AS, towards a selected
   egress border router C of the AS and through a specific peer.  At
   minimum, a BGP Peering Engineering policy applied at an ingress PE
   involves two segments: the Node SID of the chosen egress PE and then
   the BGP Peering Segment for the chosen egress PE peer or peering
   interface.

   Hereafter, we will define three types of BGP peering segments/SID's:
   PeerNodeSID, PeerAdjSID and PeerSetSID.

   o  PeerNode SID.  A BGP PeerNode segment/SID is a local segment.  At
      the BGP node advertising it, its semantics is:

      *  SR header operation: NEXT.

      *  Next-Hop: the connected peering node to which the segment is
         related.

   o  PeerAdj SID: A BGP PeerAdj segment/SID is a local segment.  At the
      BGP node advertising it, its semantics is:



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


      *  SR header operation: NEXT.

      *  Next-Hop: the peer connected through the interface to which the
         segment is related.

   o  PeerSet SID.  A BGP PeerSet segment/SID is a local segment.  At
      the BGP node advertising it, its semantics is:

      *  SR header operation: NEXT.

      *  Next-Hop: loadbalance across any connected interface to any
         peer in the related group.

      A peer set could be all the connected peers from the same AS or a
      subset of these.  A group could also span across AS.  The group
      definition is a policy set by the operator.

   The BGP extensions necessary in order to signal these BGP peering
   segments will be defined in a separate document.

5.  Multicast

   Segment Routing is defined for unicast.  The application of the
   source-route concept to Multicast is not in the scope of this
   document.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action from IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document doesn't introduce new security considerations when
   applied to the MPLS dataplane.

   There are a number of security concerns with source routing at the
   IPv6 dataplane [RFC5095].  The new IPv6-based segment routing header
   defined in [I-D.previdi-6man-segment-routing-header] and its
   associated security measures described in
   [I-D.vyncke-6man-segment-routing-security] address these concerns.
   The IPv6 Segment Routing Header is defined in a way that blind
   attacks are never possible, i.e., attackers will be unable to send
   source routed packets that get successfully processed, without being
   part of the negations for setting up the source routes or being able
   to eavesdrop legitimate source routed packets.  In some networks this
   base level security may be complemented with other mechanisms, such
   as packet filtering, cryptographic security, etc.




Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


8.  Contributors

   The following contributors have substantially helped the definition
   and editing of the content of this document:

   Wim Henderickx
   Email: wim.henderickx@alcatel-lucent.com

   Igor Milojevic
   Email: milojevicigor@gmail.com

   Saku Ytti
   Email: saku@ytti.fi

9.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Dave Ward, Dan Frost, Stewart Bryant, Pierre
   Francois, Thomas Telkamp, Les Ginsberg, Ruediger Geib and Hannes
   Gredler for their comments and review of this document.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-isis-segment-routing-extensions]
              Previdi, S., Filsfils, C., Bashandy, A., Gredler, H.,
              Litkowski, S., Decraene, B., and J. Tantsura, "IS-IS
              Extensions for Segment Routing", draft-ietf-isis-segment-
              routing-extensions-03 (work in progress), October 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-ospf-ospfv3-segment-routing-extensions]
              Psenak, P., Previdi, S., Filsfils, C., Gredler, H.,
              Shakir, R., Henderickx, W., and J. Tantsura, "OSPFv3
              Extensions for Segment Routing", draft-ietf-ospf-ospfv3-
              segment-routing-extensions-02 (work in progress), February
              2015.

   [I-D.ietf-ospf-segment-routing-extensions]
              Psenak, P., Previdi, S., Filsfils, C., Gredler, H.,
              Shakir, R., Henderickx, W., and J. Tantsura, "OSPF
              Extensions for Segment Routing", draft-ietf-ospf-segment-
              routing-extensions-04 (work in progress), February 2015.

   [I-D.previdi-6man-segment-routing-header]
              Previdi, S., Filsfils, C., Field, B., and I. Leung, "IPv6
              Segment Routing Header (SRH)", draft-previdi-6man-segment-
              routing-header-06 (work in progress), May 2015.




Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   [I-D.vyncke-6man-segment-routing-security]
              Vyncke, E., Previdi, S., and D. Lebrun, "IPv6 Segment
              Routing Security Considerations", draft-vyncke-6man-
              segment-routing-security-02 (work in progress), February
              2015.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4206]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Label Switched Paths (LSP)
              Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-central-epe]
              Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Patel, K., Aries, E.,
              shaw@fb.com, s., Ginsburg, D., and D. Afanasiev, "Segment
              Routing Centralized Egress Peer Engineering", draft-
              filsfils-spring-segment-routing-central-epe-03 (work in
              progress), January 2015.

   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-ldp-interop]
              Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Bashandy, A., Decraene, B.,
              Litkowski, S., Horneffer, M., Milojevic, I., Shakir, R.,
              Ytti, S., Henderickx, W., Tantsura, J., and E. Crabbe,
              "Segment Routing interoperability with LDP", draft-
              filsfils-spring-segment-routing-ldp-interop-03 (work in
              progress), March 2015.

   [I-D.filsfils-spring-segment-routing-use-cases]
              Filsfils, C., Francois, P., Previdi, S., Decraene, B.,
              Litkowski, S., Horneffer, M., Milojevic, I., Shakir, R.,
              Ytti, S., Henderickx, W., Tantsura, J., Kini, S., and E.
              Crabbe, "Segment Routing Use Cases", draft-filsfils-
              spring-segment-routing-use-cases-01 (work in progress),
              October 2014.

   [I-D.francois-spring-segment-routing-ti-lfa]
              Francois, P., Filsfils, C., Bashandy, A., and B. Decraene,
              "Topology Independent Fast Reroute using Segment Routing",
              draft-francois-spring-segment-routing-ti-lfa-01 (work in
              progress), October 2014.








Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   [I-D.geib-spring-oam-usecase]
              Geib, R., Filsfils, C., Pignataro, C., and N. Kumar, "Use
              case for a scalable and topology aware MPLS data plane
              monitoring system", draft-geib-spring-oam-usecase-04 (work
              in progress), March 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-pce-segment-routing]
              Sivabalan, S., Medved, J., Filsfils, C., Crabbe, E.,
              Lopez, V., Tantsura, J., Henderickx, W., and J. Hardwick,
              "PCEP Extensions for Segment Routing", draft-ietf-pce-
              segment-routing-03 (work in progress), April 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-spring-ipv6-use-cases]
              Brzozowski, J., Leddy, J., Leung, I., Previdi, S.,
              Townsley, W., Martin, C., Filsfils, C., and R. Maglione,
              "IPv6 SPRING Use Cases", draft-ietf-spring-ipv6-use-
              cases-04 (work in progress), March 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-spring-resiliency-use-cases]
              Francois, P., Filsfils, C., Decraene, B., and R. Shakir,
              "Use-cases for Resiliency in SPRING", draft-ietf-spring-
              resiliency-use-cases-01 (work in progress), March 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-spring-segment-routing-mpls]
              Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Bashandy, A., Decraene, B.,
              Litkowski, S., Horneffer, M., Shakir, R., Tantsura, J.,
              and E. Crabbe, "Segment Routing with MPLS data plane",
              draft-ietf-spring-segment-routing-mpls-00 (work in
              progress), December 2014.

   [I-D.kumar-spring-sr-oam-requirement]
              Kumar, N., Pignataro, C., Akiya, N., Geib, R., Mirsky, G.,
              and S. Litkowski, "OAM Requirements for Segment Routing
              Network", draft-kumar-spring-sr-oam-requirement-03 (work
              in progress), March 2015.

   [RFC5095]  Abley, J., Savola, P., and G. Neville-Neil, "Deprecation
              of Type 0 Routing Headers in IPv6", RFC 5095, December
              2007.

Authors' Addresses

   Clarence Filsfils (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Brussels
   BE

   Email: cfilsfil@cisco.com



Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   Stefano Previdi (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Via Del Serafico, 200
   Rome  00142
   Italy

   Email: sprevidi@cisco.com


   Ahmed Bashandy
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170, West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: bashandy@cisco.com


   Bruno Decraene
   Orange
   FR

   Email: bruno.decraene@orange.com


   Stephane Litkowski
   Orange
   FR

   Email: stephane.litkowski@orange.com


   Martin Horneffer
   Deutsche Telekom
   Hammer Str. 216-226
   Muenster  48153
   DE

   Email: Martin.Horneffer@telekom.de


   Rob Shakir
   British Telecom
   London
   UK

   Email: rob.shakir@bt.com




Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               Segment Routing                    May 2015


   Jeff Tantsura
   Ericsson
   300 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: Jeff.Tantsura@ericsson.com


   Edward Crabbe
   Individual

   Email: edward.crabbe@gmail.com






































Filsfils, et al.        Expires November 6, 2015               [Page 19]