

Network Working Group                                           K. Drage
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Informational                            April 19, 2009
Expires: October 21, 2009


         A SIP/SIPS URI parameter for passing subscription data
                    draft-drage-dispatch-sub-data-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 21, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.









Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


Abstract

   This document provides a SIP/SIPS URI parameter to enable
   subscription data related to a SIP/SIPS URI to accompany that SIP/
   SIPS URI when required by other entities in the same system.  This
   can then be used by the receiving entity to assist in the provision
   of capabilities associated with that SIP/SIPS URI, either in this
   request or in other subsequent requests.











































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


1.  Introduction

   In a system of proxies or other SIP entities that form a network,
   there is often a need to deliver subscription data related to a
   particular subscriber or user (as represented by a SIP URI or SIPS
   URI, to other entities within the system.  This document provides a
   SIP/SIPS URI parameter that can contain such information.

   This information is primarily intended to be transferred from one
   entity to another either by attachment to SIP URIs or SIPS URIs
   within the P-Associated-URI header field (as defined in RFC 3455
   [RFC3455], or to SIP URIs or SIPS URIs within the reg event package
   (as defined in RFC 3680 [RFC3680] and
   draft-ietf-sipping-gruu-reg-event [I-D.ietf-sipping-gruu-reg-event]).
   However usage is not precluded on SIP URIs or SIPS URIs in other SIP
   requests or responses.

   The content of this information is intended to be specific to a
   system or network as defined by a single standards organisation or
   operator, so the contents of this parameter are not defined further
   in this document.  However a possible example of such information is
   given in the following paragraph.

   For the use of the Resource-Priority header field defined in RFC 4412
   [RFC4412], other proxies in the system need to learn what namespaces
   and priority levels within that namespace are legitimate for that
   user.  Suppose a user is entitled to use the GETS namespace, and is
   allowed to use priority levels 2 and 3 within that namespace, then a
   representation of the subscription data is needed that conveys:

   1.  multiple subscription data entries to represent both possible
       combinations above, separated by a separator, e.g. "-".

   2.  that it is the capability represented by the Resource-Priority
       header field that is being represented, e.g. "rph".

   3.  that the GETS namespace is allowed to be used, e.g. "gets".

   4.  that a priority level is allowed to be used, e.g. "2" or "3".

   All characters used will need to be legal characters within a SIP/
   SIPS URI parameter.

   In this example it would be assumed that the absence of such
   information conveys no right to use the capability.

   Using the above elements, a representation of this data could be:




Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


          P-Associated-URI: <sip:example.com;subdata=rphgets2-rhpgets3>


















































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


2.  Applicability Statement

   The information is only intended for use within a system, and
   therefore it is desirable that it is only be attached to URIs that
   are for consumption within the system, or information should only be
   included that contains information that is already known by the
   recipient outside the system.

   This implies that there is a danger in attaching the information to
   URIs in ordinary requests and responses exchanged between users, as
   the normal proxy behaviour is to pass this information through the
   system to the end user, no matter who that end user is.  If such
   usage is envisaged, then some sort of trust domain must be defined
   which encompasses the system where it is intended to be used, and
   where this SIP/SIPS URI parameter is removed when the trust domain is
   exited.



































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


3.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].













































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


4.  Definition of configuration data SIP/SIPS URI parameter

   The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus-Naur
   Form (BNF) as described in RFC5234 [RFC5234]..

   The "sos" URI parameter is a "uri-parameter", as defined by RFC 3261
   [RFC3261].

      uri-parameter =/ sub-data-param

      sub-data-param = "subdata=" token

   The token string is as defined in RFC 3261 [RFC3261].  The contents
   of this string is not defined in this document, and is defined by the
   specification of the system to which the data relates.

   It is up to the system designer to specify appropriate forward and
   backward compatibility rules for the content of this string.  A rule
   such as ignoring parts of the string between separators that are not
   recognised may be sufficient.































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


5.  Procedures at the including entity

   When a SIP user agent or proxy is passing on on SIP URI, or sending a
   SIP URI for purposes of its own, and wishes to also pass on user
   subscription information, the SIP user agent or proxy MAY include a
   "subdata" SIP URI parameter with the SIP URI, provided:

   1.  the included subscription information relates to the SIP URI; and

   2.  it is known that the privacy policy for the information can be
       met, see the security considerations.








































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


6.  Procedures at subsequent entities

   When a SIP user agent or proxy receives a SIP URI, the SIP user agent
   or proxy:

   1.  MUST remove the "subdata" SIP URI parameter if it knows the
       privacy requirements cannot be met by subsequent entities, if
       any; and

   2.  MAY retain the information within the "subdata" SIP URI
       parameter, and the relationship to the SIP URI, if it has a
       purpose for such data.







































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


7.  Security considerations

   No specific security considerations apply.  However a policy on the
   privacy of the information is expected to be defined for systems that
   use this information, and that privacy policy should then be adhered
   to in its usage.

   The information is only intended for use within a system, and
   therefore it is desirable that it is only be attached to URIs that
   are for consumption within the system, or information should only be
   included that contains information that is already known by the
   recipient outside the system.

   For example, if use is restricted to the reg event package defined in
   RFC 3680 [RFC3680], then the information should only be included in
   event package information where the subscriber is known (by existing
   SIP authentication mechanisms) to be another entity within the
   system.  It could also potentially be revealed to the owner of the
   SIP or SIPS URI where it is envisaged that the subscription data is
   already known by such a user.

   This implies that there is a danger in attaching the information to
   URIs in ordinary requests and responses exchanged between users, as
   the normal proxy behaviour is to pass this information through the
   system to the end user, no matter who that end user is.  If such
   usage is envisaged, then some sort of trust domain must be defined
   which encompasses the system where it is intended to be used, and
   where this SIP/SIPS URI parameter is removed when the trust domain is
   exited.






















Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


8.  IANA considerations

8.1.  Registration of SIP/SIPS URI Parameter

   This document specifies one new SIP/SIPS URI paramter: subdata.  The
   syntax is given in Section 3.  These headers are defined by the
   following information, which is to be added to the SIP/SIPS URI
   parameter sub-registry under
   http://www.iana.org/assignments/sip-parameters.

      Parameter Name     Predefined Values     Reference
      --------------     -----------------     ---------
      subdata            No                    [RFCxxxx]

   Note to the RFC editor: substitute xxxx with the RFC number of this
   document.



































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


9.  APPENDIX: Changes history

   Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this entire appendix before
   publication















































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3455]  Garcia-Martin, M., Henrikson, E., and D. Mills, "Private
              Header (P-Header) Extensions to the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) for the 3rd-Generation Partnership Project
              (3GPP)", RFC 3455, January 2003.

   [RFC3680]  Rosenberg, J., "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event
              Package for Registrations", RFC 3680, March 2004.

   [RFC4412]  Schulzrinne, H. and J. Polk, "Communications Resource
              Priority for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              RFC 4412, February 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-gruu-reg-event]
              Kyzivat, P., "Registration Event Package Extension for
              Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)  Globally Routable User
              Agent URIs (GRUUs)", draft-ietf-sipping-gruu-reg-event-09
              (work in progress), July 2007.

















Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  Subscription Data SIP/SIPS URI parameter      April 2009


Author's Address

   Keith Drage
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Quadrant, Stonehill Green, Westlea
   Swindon, Wilts
   UK

   Email: drage@alcatel-lucent.com










































Drage                   Expires October 21, 2009               [Page 14]


