                                                                        

INTERNET DRAFT                                          Cleve Mickles   
Document: draft-mickles-ngtrans-isp-cases-00.txt        AOL Time Warner 
Expires: October 2002                                   July 2002       
 
                  Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks 
     
Status of this Memo  
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.
        
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
        
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
        
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
        
Abstract  
    
   This document describes the different types of Internet Service
   Provider (ISP) networks in existence today.  It will provide design
   and operational considerations in delivering network services to
   customers for five specific areas in an effort to better identify
   specific issues which may arise during a transition to IPv6.  





















Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 1]   

                Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks      July 2002    


Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Scope of the document..........................................2 
   3. Transition scenarios...........................................3 
      3.1 CORE/Backbone Networks ....................................4 
      3.2 Broadband  HFC/Coax........................................4 
      3.3 Broadband DSL Networks.....................................4 
      3.4 Narrowband Dialup Networks.................................4 
      3.5 Ethernet to the Home/Home Networking.......................5 
   4. Security Considerations........................................6 
   5. Network Management Considerations..............................7 
   Acknowledgements..................................................7 
   References........................................................7 
   Author's Addresses................................................7 
       
Copyright  
        
   (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.   
        
1. Introduction  
        
   This document will describe the basic design of ISP networks today.
   It will be used to provide direction on what must be considered to
   transition today's networks to IPv6.  The main purpose of this
   document is to identify, and document the issues that must be
   considered before transitioning a network to IPv6.

   This document is not meant to determine exactly how the transition
   will occur for the various ISP networks.  This document will not
   describe what is or is not a "Tier 1" or "Tier 2"..."Tier N" ISP.  
   The document focuses on IP capable network devices and may
   reference non-IP related devices for clarification purposes only.
        
   At this point much of this document provides a template for the
   scenarios.  Content is present only in the Core/Backbone and
   Narrowband Dialup sections below.

   Comments to this draft may be sent to the primary author.

2. Scope of the document 
        
   The scope of this document is to cover the major topics ISPs must
   consider in building and running their IP networks.  The document
   will include sections on Core backbone networks, Broadband DSL 
   networks, Broadband HFC Cable networks, Narrowband Dialup networks,
   and Ethernet to the home networking.  The document will also
   identify Security and Network Management concerns which in some
   cases will be common to all as well some areas that may be unique
   to the particular service.


Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 2] 

                Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks      July 2002 


   Although the Optical core is important in today's networks, that
   layer is generally transparent to the IP layer except in a few
   special cases where ISPs have allowed the IP core to be aware of
   the optical layer underneath.  Hence, this draft does not include
   further optical considerations.

   Each scenario will discuss issues related to network topology, 
   network hardware, routing, policing, security, network management,
   configuration and host gear.




3. Transition Scenarios
        
   This section provides the description and design considerations
   for the different types of ISP networks in existence today.  In
   some cases a single ISP may provide services in more than one of
   the areas mentioned below.

3.1 Core/Backbone Networks 
        
   This section describes the general topologies of and characteristics
   of today's CORE networks.  Although there are numerous large scale
   networks out there today, most employ the same basic set of
   principles when designing and building their networks.
   
   In terms of physical equipment, today's backbone networks consist
   mainly of high speed routers which are configured in a basic core
   and edge configuration.  In most configurations, for redundancy,
   there are two or more core routers as well as two or more border
   routers.  The border routers provide any local connectivity and
   peering.  Generally filtering, routing policy and policing type
   functions are done on the border routers.  The core routers
   provide aggregation of border router traffic as well as aggregation
   of long haul circuits to remote sites.

   BGP4 is the standard gateway routing protocol.  In the core, the
   IGP choices are generally OSPF or ISIS.  Most networks employ some
   type of traffic engineering mechanism to steer traffic around
   potentially congestive areas.  There are also networks that employ
   an over provisioning model to limit packet loss.

   In terms of host gear, the CORE networks maintain hosts for
   supporting and managing the network, but not necessarily the end
   user.  The standard set of hosts include DNS servers, mail gateways,
   authentication( radius or tacacs), and network management servers.





Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 3] 

                Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks      July 2002 

3.2 Broadband HFC/Coax Networks 
        
   This section describes the infrastructure that exists in today's HFC
   cable networks that support cable modem services to the home.  Since
   many cable providers are regional they generally have used the
   backbone ISP networks for transit IP services beyond their region.

3.3 Broadband DSL Networks 
        
   This section describes the infrastructure that exists in today's
   High Speed DSL Networks.  DSL comes in many flavors that are
   dependent on the quality of central office facility equipment and
   copper plant to the home.
   

3.4 Narrowband Dialup Networks 
        
   This section describes Narrowband dialup networks that the majority
   of internet users use today to get online.  The scenarios will
   include solutions where the dial infrastructure is controlled by
   one entity as well as solutions where ISPs lease modems from a
   wholesale modem providers.

   There are multiple types of dialup services from plain/no frills
   access to the Internet, to wholesale dialup networks which can
   purchased by an organization wanting to resell internet services,
   and then there are the full service dialup providers that provide
   a long list of features to the end user.

   The infrastructure used in the foundation of these various offerings
   is somewhat similar although the deployments vary depending on the
   level of service offered.  The basic dialup service provider model
   that includes modem access to the Internet can be built from a
   terminal server (generally a digital modem bank), a Layer 2 switch
   and routers.  For global reachability the dialup provider must
   connect to a backbone provider.  The basic design calls for the
   terminal server to be attached to a layer 2 switch that would in
   turn have connections to a router.  For redundancy, a dialup
   provider can spread multiple shelves of terminal servers across
   individual routers and manually shift traffic if a router becomes
   disabled.  A more robust redundant solution would be to deploy
   pairs of routers and use VRRP functionality to maintain traffic
   in the event of a failure of one router.










Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 4] 

                Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks      July 2002 


   Generally smaller dialup ISPs purchase a T1 or greater facility from
   a Local Exchange Carrier(LEC) to the facility where modem equipment
   is housed.  The choice in terms of the number of T1s (or other) is
   made dependent on how many simultaneous users are supported in the
   ISPs business model.  Depending on the coverage area multiple phone
   numbers may be provided for the end-user to dial and the LEC may
   choose to route all calls to a common termination point or provide
   the traffic across multiple T1 facilities.  When an end-user dials
   an access number, the LEC routes the call to the modem server
   location and is generally mapped by the LEC into a T1 facility that
   terminates on the modem server.  The modem server attempts to
   verify the user credentials by querying the authentication server
   via an IP interface on the modem server.  The modem server is
   present on a LAN network segment along with any relevant hosts as
   well as the default gateway router.  Some services that are common
   to all dialup providers include the ability to provide DNS service
   either primary or secondary and an authentication server. 

   The wholesale dial provider builds out the dial network just as the
   small dialup provider does.  Differences include the ability of the
   wholesale provider to hand off aggregated traffic to the
   organization purchasing wholesale access or to allow the aggregated
   traffic to reach the Internet at large without the purchasing
   organization needing major internet access facilities.  Each case
   has different implications.  


3.5 Ethernet to the Home / Home Networking 
        
   This section describes the Home Networking arena which is basically
   in it's infancy.  The home of the future will possibly include a
   gateway device that will control access to the home, which will have
   numerous IP, enabled devices.



















Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 5] 

                Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks      July 2002 


4. Security Considerations  
     
   Security concerns will be described within the context of each
   scenario.  After the various scenarios are documented, a
   summarized section including all of the security considerations
   may be provided.


5. Network Management Considerations  

   Network Management concerns will be described within the context
   of each scenario.  After the various scenarios are documented, a
   summarized section including all of the Network Management
   considerations may be provided.






































Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 6] 

                Transition Scenarios for ISP Networks      July 2002 



Acknowledgements 
        
   [1] The author would like to thank Margaret Wasserman and Randy
       Bush for comments on this initial draft document.
        
References 
   [1] None currently
 
 Author's Addresses  
         
    Cleveland Mickles  
    AOL Time Warner                       IM: MicklesCK
    12100 Sunrise Valley Drive.           Phone:  703-265-5618  
    Reston, VA 20191, USA                 Email:  micklesc@aol.net 





































Mickles, et al.        Expires - October 2002                [Page 7] 
