

Network Working Group                                     Dino Farinacci
INTERNET-DRAFT                                          Procket Networks
Expiration Date: December 2004                                 Yiqun Cai
                                                           cisco Systems
                                                           June 21, 2004


                          Anycast-RP using PIM
                   <draft-ietf-pim-anycast-rp-02.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

   This specification allows Anycast-RP (Rendezvous Point) to be used
   inside a domain, which runs Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM)
   only. There are no other multicast protocols required to support
   Anycast-RP, such as MSDP, which has been used traditionally to solve
   this problem.






Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 1]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


1.0 Introduction

   Anycast-RP as described in [I1] is a mechanism ISP-based backbones
   have used to get fast convergence when a PIM Rendezvous Point (RP)
   router fails. To allow receivers and sources to Rendezvous to the
   closest RP, the packets from a source needs to get to all RPs to find
   joined receivers.

   This notion of receivers finding sources is the fundamental problem
   of source discovery which MSDP was intended to solve. However, if one
   would like to retain the Anycast-RP benefits from [I1] with less
   protocol machinery, removing MSDP from the solution space is an
   option.

   This memo extends the Register mechanism in PIM so Anycast-RP
   functionality can be retained without using MSDP.

1.1 Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.0 Requirements

   o Each router acting as an RP MUST be configured with a loopback
     interface using the same (shared) IP address. This address is used
     to tell other routers in the PIM domain what IP address to use
     for the RP address.

   o The RP address or a prefix that covers the RP address is injected
     into the unicast routing system inside of the domain.

   o Each RP configures all other RPs used in the Anycast-RP set. This
     must be consistently configured in all RPs in the set.















Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 2]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


3.0 Mechanism

   The following diagram illustrates a domain using 3 RPs where
   receivers are joining to the closest RP according to where unicast
   routing metrics take them and 2 sources sending packets to their
   respective RPs.

         S1-----RP1              RP2                RP3------S3
                / \               |
               /   \              |
              R1   R1'            R2

   Assume the above scenario is completely connected where R1, R1', and
   R2 are receivers for a group, and S1 and S2 send to that group.
   Assume RP1, RP2 and RP3 are all assigned the same IP address which is
   used as the Anycast-RP address (let's say the IP address is RPA).

   Note, the address used for the RP address in the domain (the Anycast-
   RP address) needs to be a different than the addresses used by the
   Ancyast-RP routers to communicate with each other.

   The following procedure is used when S1 starts sourcing traffic:

   o S1 sends a multicast packet.

   o The DR directly attached to S1 will form a PIM Register message to
     send to RP1. The IP address to use is the Anycast-RP address.

   o RP1 will receive the PIM Register message, decapsulate it, send the
     packet down the shared-tree to get the packet to receivers R1 and
     R1'.

   o RP1 is configured with RP2 and RP3's IP address. It will forward
     the Register message from S1's DR to both of them. RP1 will
     use its own IP address as the source address for the PIM Register
     message.

   o RP1 sends a Register-Stop back to the DR.

   o RP1 MAY join back to the source-tree by triggering a (S1,G) Join
     message toward S1. However, RP1 MUST create (S1,G) state.

   o RP2 receives the Register message from RP1, decapsulates it, and
     also sends the packet down the shared-tree to get the packet to
     receiver R2.

   o RP2 sends a Register-Stop back to the RP1. RP1 processes the
     Register-Stop just like it would if it was a DR.



Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 3]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


   o RP2 MAY join back to the source-tree by triggering a (S1,G) Join
     message toward S1. However, RP2 MUST create (S1,G) state.

   o RP3 receives the Register message from RP1, decapsulates it, but
     since there are no receivers joined for the group, it can discard
     the packet.

   o RP3 sends a Register-Stop back to the RP1.

   o RP3 creates (S1,G) state so when a receiver joins after S1 starts
     sending, RP3 can join quickly to the source-tree for S1.

   The procedure for S3 sending follows the same as above but it is RP3
   which forwards the Register originated by S3's DR to RP1 and RP2.
   Therefore, this example shows how sources anywhere in the domain,
   associated with different RPs, can reach all receivers, also
   associated with different RPs, in the same domain.


4.0 Observations and Guidelines about this Proposal

   o An RP will forward a Register only if the Register is received
     from an IP address not in the Anycast-RP list (i.e. the Register
     came from a DR and not another RP).

   o Each DR that PIM registers for a source will send the message to
     it's closest RP address. Therefore there are no changes to the
     DR logic.

   o Packets flow to all receivers no matter what RP they have joined
     to.

   o The source gets Registered to a single RP by the DR, it's the
     responsibility of the RP, the DR selects (based on routing
     metrics), to get the packet to all other RPs in the Anycast-RP
     set.

   o Logic is changed only in the RPs. The logic change is for
     forwarding Register messages. Register-Stop processing is
     unchanged. However, an implementation MAY suppress sending
     Register-Stop messages in response to a Register received from
     an RP.

   o The rate-limiting of Register and Register-Stop messages are done
     end-to-end. That is from DR -> RP1 -> {RP2 and RP3}. There is no
     need for specific rate-limiting logic between the RPs.

   o When topology changes occur, the existing source-tree adjusts as it



Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 4]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


     does today according to [N1]. The existing shared-trees, as well,
     adjust as it does today according to [N1].

   o Physical RP changes are as fast as unicast route convergence.
     Retaining the benefit of [I1].

   o An RP that doesn't support this specification can be mixed with RPs
     that do support this specification. However, the non-supporter RPs
     should not have sources registering to it but may have receivers
     joined to it.

   o If Null Registers are sent (Registers with an IP header and no IP
     payload), they MUST be replicated to all of the RPs in the Anycast-
     RP set so that source state remains alive for active sources.

   o The number of RPs in the Anycast-RP set should remain small so the
     amount of non-native replication is kept to a minimum.





5.0 Interaction with MSDP running in an Anycast-PIM Router


   The objective of this Anycast-PIM proposal is to remove the
   dependence on using MSDP. This can be achieved by removing MSDP
   peering between the Anycast RPs. However, to advertise internal
   sources to routers outside of a PIM routing domain and to learn
   external sources from other routing domains, MSDP may still be
   required.


5.1 Anycast-PIM Stub Domain Functionality


   In this capacity, when there are internal sources that need to be
   advertised externally, an Anycast-RP which receives a Register
   message, either from a DR or an Anycast-RP, should process it as
   described in this specification as well as how to process a Register
   message as described in [N1]. That means an SA for the same internal
   source could be originated by multiple Anycast-RPs doing the MSDP
   peering. There is nothing inherently wrong with this other than the
   source is being advertised into the MSDP infrastructure from multiple
   places from the source domain. However, if this is not desirable,
   configuration of one or more (rather than all) Anycast-RP MSDP
   routers would allow only those routers to originate SAs for the
   internal source. And in some situations, there is a good possibility



Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 5]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


   not all Anycast-RPs in the set will have MSDP peering sessions so
   this issue can be mitigated to a certain extent.

   From an Anycast-RP perspective, a source should be considered
   internal to a domain, when it is discovered by an Anycast-RP through
   a received Register message. Regardless, if the Register message was
   sent by a DR, another Anycast-RP member, or the router itself.

   For learning sources external to a domain, the MSDP SA messages could
   arrive at multiple MSDP-peering Anycast-RPs. The rules for processing
   an SA, according to [I1], should be followed. That is, if G is joined
   in the domain, an (S,G) join is sent towards the source. And if data
   accompanies the SA, each Anycast-PIM RP doing MSDP peering will
   forward the data down each of their respective shared-trees.

   The above assumes each Anycast-RP has external MSDP peering
   connections.  If this is not the case, the Anycast-PIM routers with
   the MSDP peering connections would follow the same procedure as if a
   Data-Register or Null-Register was received from either a DR or
   another Anycast-RP. That is, they would send Registers to the other
   members of the Anycast-RP set.

   If there is a mix of Anycast-RPs that do and do not have external
   MSDP peering connections, then the ones that do must be configured
   with the set that do not. So Register messages are sent only to the
   members of the Anycast-RP set that do not have external MSDP peering
   connections.


5.2 Anycast-PIM Transit Domain Functionality


   Within a routing domain, it is recommended that an Anycast-RP set
   defined in this specification should not be mixed with MSDP peering
   among the members. In some cases, the source discovery will work but
   it may not be obvious to the implementations what sources are local
   to the domain and which are not. This may affect external MSDP
   advertisement of internal sources.

   Having said that, this draft makes no attempt to connect MSDP peering
   domains together by using Anycast-PIM inside a transit domain.

6.0 IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.



Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 6]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


7.0 Security Consideration

This section describes the security consideration for Register and
Register-Stop messages between Anycast-RPs.  For PIM messages between DR
and RP, please see [I3].

7.1 Attack Based On Forged Messages

   An attacker may forge a Register message using one of the addresses
   in the Anycast-RP list in order to achieve one or more of the
   following effects:

      1. Overwhelm the target RP in a denial-of-service attack
      2. Inject unauthorized data to receivers served by the RP
      3. Inject unauthorized data and create bogus SA entries in other
         PIM domains if the target RP has external MSDP peerings

   An attacker may also forge a Register-Stop message using one of the
   addresses in the Anycast-RP list.  However, besides denial-of-
   service, the effect of such an attack is limited because an RP
   usually ignores Register-Stop messages.

7.2 Protect Register and Register-Stop Messages

   The DOS attack using forged Register or Register-Stop messages can
   not be prevented.  But the RP can still be protected.  For example,
   the RP can rate-limit incoming messages.  It can also choose to
   refuse to process any Register-Stop messages.  The actual protection
   mechansim is implementation specific.

   The distribution of unauthorized data and bogus SA entries can be
   prevented using the method recommended in [I3].  That is IPsec [I3]
   transport mode using the Authentication Header (AH).

   There are two options a network administrator can choose from.  An RP
   can be configured using a unique SA and SPI for traffic (Registers or
   Register-Stops) to each member of Anycast-RPs in the list.
   Alternatively, a single authentication algorithm and associated
   parameters can be used for the entire Anycast-RP set in order to
   reduce the overhead of key distribution.











Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 7]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


8.0 Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Yiqun Cai and Dino Farinacci for
   prototyping this draft in the cisco IOS and Procket implementations,
   respectively.

   The authors would like to thank John Zwiebel for doing
   interoperability testing of the two prototype implementations.

   And finally, the authors would like to thank Greg Shepard from
   Procket Networks, Lenny Giuliano from Juniper Networks, Prashant
   Jhingran from Huawei Technologies, and Pekka Savola from CSC/FUNET,
   for their comments on earlier drafts.


9.0 Author Information

   Dino Farinacci
   Procket Networks
   dino@procket.com

   Yiqun Cai
   cisco Systems
   ycai@cisco.com



10.0 References

10.1 Normative References

   [N1] Estrin, et al., "Protocol Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-
        SM): Protocol Specification", RFC 2362, June 1998.

10.2 Informative References

   [I1] Kim, Meyer, Kilmer, Farinacci, "Anycast RP mechanism using PIM
       and MSDP", RFC 3446, January 2003.

   [I2] Fenner, Handley, Holbrook, Kouvelas, "Protocol Independent
       Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):Protocol Specification
       (Revised)", Internet Draft draft-ietf-pim-sm-v2-new-09.txt,
       February 2004.

   [I3] Kent, "Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol", RFC
       2401, November 1998.





Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 8]





Internet Draft            Anycast-RP using PIM             June 21, 2004


Appendix A - Possible Configuration Language

   A possible set of commands to be used could be:

       ip pim anycast-rp <anycast-rp-addr> <rp-addr>

   Where:

       <anycast-rp-addr> describes the Anycast-RP set for the RP which
       is assigned to the group range. This IP address is the address
       that first-hop and last-hop PIM routers use to register and join
       to.

       <rp-addr> describes the IP address where Register messages are
       forwarded to. This IP address is any address assigned to the RP
       router not including the <anycast-rp-addr>.

   Example:

       From the illustration above, the configuration commands would be:

       ip pim anycast-rp RPA RP1
       ip pim anycast-rp RPA RP2
       ip pim anycast-rp RPA RP3

   Comment:

       It may be useful to include the local router's IP address in the
       command set so the above lines can be cut-and-pasted or scripted
       into all the RPs in the Anycast-RP set.

       But the implementation would have to be aware of it's own address
       and not inadvertently send a Register to itself.


















Farinacci, Cai                                                  [Page 9]
