

Internet Draft                                                 L. Berger
Expires: September 1997                                     FORE Systems
File: draft-ietf-issll-atm-imp-guide-00.txt



                RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines



                             March 25, 1997

Status of Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).

Abstract

   This note presents specific implementation guidelines for running
   RSVP over ATM switched virtual circuits (SVCs).  It presents
   requirements and specific guidelines for running over today's ATM
   networks.  The general problem is discussed in [5].   Integrated
   Services to ATM service mappings are covered in [7].


Author's Note

   The postscript version of this document contains figures that are not
   included in the text version, so it is best to use the postscript
   version.  Figures will be converted to ASCII in a future version.







Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 1]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


Table of Contents

1. Introduction ........................................................3
   1.1 Terms ...........................................................3
   1.2 Assumptions .....................................................4
2. Multicast RSVP Session Support ......................................4
   2.1 Data VC Management for Heterogeneous Sessions ...................5
   2.2 Multicast End-Point Identification ..............................6
   2.3 Multicast Data Distribution .....................................7
   2.4 Receiver Transitions ............................................7
3. General RSVP Session Support ........................................8
   3.1 RSVP Message VC Usage ...........................................8
   3.2 VC Initiation ...................................................9
   3.3 VC Teardown .....................................................10
   3.4 Reservation to VC Mapping .......................................10
   3.5 Dynamic QoS .....................................................11
   3.6 Short-Cuts ......................................................12
   3.7 Encapsulation ...................................................13
4. Security ............................................................13
5. Implementation Summary ..............................................13
   5.1 Requirements ....................................................13
   5.2 Baseline Requirements ...........................................14
6. Author's Address ....................................................15




























Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 2]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


1. Introduction

   This note discusses running IP over ATM in an environment where SVCs
   are used to support QoS flows and RSVP is used as the internet level
   QoS signaling protocol. The general issues related to running RSVP[8]
   over ATM have been covered in several papers including [5,4,6,11].
   This document is intended as a companion to [5] and as a guide to
   implementers.  The reader should be familiar with[5].  This document
   will define specific baseline requirements for implementations using
   ATM UNI3.x and 4.0. Some stated requirements must be adhered to by
   all RSVP over ATM implementations.  Other stated requirements provide
   a baseline set of functionality, while allowing for more
   sophisticated approaches. We expect some vendors to additionally
   provide some of the more sophisticated approaches described in [5],
   and some networks to only make use of such approaches.  The baseline
   set of functionality is defined to ensure predictability and
   interoperability between different implementations.  We expect that
   the baseline requirements may change in the future, and at such a
   time this document will be replaced.

   The rest of this section will define terms and assumptions used in
   the document.  Section 2 will cover implementation guidelines
   specific to multicast sessions.  Section 3 will cover implementation
   guidelines common to all RSVP session.  Section 5 will conclude with
   a summary of stated requirements.

   1.1 Terms

      The terms "reservation" and "flow" are used in many contexts,
      often with different meaning.  These terms are used in this
      document with the following meaning:


      o    Reservation is used in this document to refer to an RSVP
           initiated request for resources.  RSVP initiates requests for
           resources based on RESV message processing.  RESV messages
           that simply refresh state do not trigger resource requests.
           Resource requests may be made based on RSVP sessions and RSVP
           reservation styles. RSVP styles dictate whether the reserved
           resources are used by one sender or shared by multiple
           senders.  See [8] for details of each. Each new request is
           referred to in this document as an RSVP reservation, or
           simply reservation.

      o    Flow is used to refer to the data traffic associated with a
           particular reservation.  The specific meaning of flow is RSVP
           style dependent.  For shared style reservations, there is one
           flow per session.  For distinct style reservations, there is



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 3]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


           one flow per sender (per session).

   1.2 Assumptions

      The following assumptions are made:


      o    RSVP We assume RSVP as the internet signalling protocol which
           is described in [8].  The reader is assumed to be familiar
           with [8].

      o    IPv4 and IPv6 RSVP support has been defined for both IPv4 and
           IPv6.  The guidelines in this document are intended to be
           used to support RSVP with either IPv4 or IPv6.  This document
           does not require on version over the other.

      o    Best effort service model The current Internet only supports
           best effort service.  We assume that as additional components
           of the Integrated Services model that best effort service
           will continue to be a supported.

      o    ATM UNI 3.x and 4.0 We assume ATM service as defined by UNI
           3.x and 4.0.  ATM provides both point-to-point and point-to-
           multipoint Virtual Circuits (VCs) with a specified Quality of
           Service (QoS).  ATM provides both Permanent Virtual Circuits
           (PVCs) and Switched Virtual Circuits (SVCs).  In the
           Permanent Virtual Circuit (PVC) environment, PVCs are
           typically used as point-to-point link replacements.  So the
           support issues are similar to point-to-point links.  This
           draft assumes that SVCs are used to support RSVP over ATM.

2. Multicast RSVP Session Support

   There are several aspects to running RSVP over ATM that are
   particular to multicast sessions.  These issues result from the
   nature of ATM point-to-multipoint connections.  This section
   addresses multicast end-point identification, multicast data
   distribution, multicast receiver transitions and next-hops requesting
   different QoS values (heterogeneity) which includes the handling of
   multicast best-effort receivers.  Handling of best-effort receivers
   is not strictly an RSVP issues, but needs to be addressed in any RSVP
   over ATM implementation in order to maintain expected Internet
   service.  Implementation guidelines for issues related to all RSVP
   sessions are covered in Section 3.  Some of these guidelines cover
   issues that have special interactions for multicast session, these
   interactions are covered together with the more general issues.





Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 4]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


   2.1 Data VC Management for Heterogeneous Sessions

      The issues relating to data VC management of heterogeneous
      sessions are covered in detail in [5] and not repeated.  In
      summary, heterogeneity occurs when receivers request different
      levels of QoS within a single session, and also when some
      receivers do not request any QoS.  Both types of heterogeneity are
      shown in figure .

      [Figure goes here]
                    Figure 1: Types of Multicast Receivers


      [5] provided four models for dealing with heterogeneity: full
      heterogeneity,  limited heterogeneity, homogeneous, and modified
      homogeneous models.  No matter which model or combination of
      models is used by an implementation, implementations must not
      normally send more than one copy of a particular data packet to a
      particular next-hop (ATM end-point).  Some transient over
      transmission is acceptable, but only during VC setup and
      transition.

      Implementations must also ensure that data traffic is sent to
      best-effort receivers.  Data traffic may be sent to best-effort
      receivers via best-effort or QoS VCs as is appropriate for the
      implemented model.  In all cases, implementations must not create
      VCs in such a way that data cannot be sent to best-effort
      receivers.  This includes the case of not being able to add a
      best-effort receiver to a QoS VC,  but does not include the case
      where best-effort VCs cannot be setup. The failure to establish
      best-effort VCs is considered to be a general IP over ATM failure
      and is therefore beyond the scope of this document.

      The key issue to be addressed by an implementation is providing
      requested QoS downstream. One of or some combination of the
      discussed models [5] may be used to provide requested QoS.
      Unfortunately, none of the described models is the right answer
      for all cases.  For some networks, e.g. public WANs, it is likely
      that the limited heterogeneous model or a hybrid limited-full
      heterogeneous model will be desired.  In other networks, e.g.
      LANs, it is likely that a the modified homogeneous model will be
      desired.

      Since there is not one model that satisfies all cases,
      implementations must implement one of either the limited
      heterogeneity model or the modified homogeneous model.
      Implementations should support both approaches and provide the
      ability to select which method is actually used, but are not



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 5]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


      required to do so.  Implementations may also support heterogeneity
      through some other mechanism, e.g., using multiple appropriately
      sized VCs.

   2.2 Multicast End-Point Identification

      Implementations must be able to identify ATM end-points
      participating in an IP multicast group.  The ATM end-points will
      be IP multicast receivers and/or next-hops.  Both QoS and best-
      effort end-points must be identified.  RSVP next-hop information
      will usually provide QoS end-points, but not best-effort end-
      points.

      There is even a case where RSVP next-hop information will not
      provide the appropriate end-point.  This occurs when the next-hop
      is not RSVP capable, and RSVP is being automatically tunneled. In
      this case a PATH message travels through a non-RSVP egress router
      on the way to the next hop RSVP node.  When the next hop RSVP node
      sends a RESV message it may arrive at the source over a different
      route than what the data is using.  The source will get the RESV
      message, but will not know which egress router needs the QoS.  For
      unicast sessions, there is no problem since the ATM end-point will
      be the IP next-hop router.  Unfortunately, multicast routing may
      not be able to uniquely identify the IP next-hop router.  So it is
      possible that a multicast end-point can not be identified.

      In the host case, MARS can be used to identify all end-points of a
      multicast group.  In the router to router case, a multicast
      routing protocol may provide all next-hops for a particular
      multicast group.  In either case, RSVP over ATM implementations
      must obtain a full list of end-points, both QoS and non-QoS, using
      the appropriate mechanisms.  The full list can be compared against
      the RSVP identified end-points to determine the list of best-
      effort receivers.

      There is no straightforward solution to uniquely identifying end-
      points of multicast traffic handled by non-RSVP next hops.  The
      preferred solution is to use multicast routing protocols that
      support unique end-point identification.  In cases where such
      routing protocols are unavailable, all IP routers that will be
      used to support RSVP over ATM should support RSVP. To ensure
      proper behavior, baseline RSVP over ATM implementations must only
      establish RSVP-initiated VCs to RSVP capable end-points.  It is
      permissible to allow a user to override this behavior.







Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 6]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


   2.3 Multicast Data Distribution

      Two models are planned for IP multicast data distribution over
      ATM.  In one model, senders establish point-to-multipoint VCs to
      all ATM attached destinations, and data is then sent over these
      VCs.  This model is often called "multicast mesh" or "VC mesh"
      mode distribution.  In the second model, senders send data over
      point-to-point VCs to a central point and the central point relays
      the data onto point-to-multipoint VCs that have been established
      to all receivers of the IP multicast group.  This model is often
      referred to as "multicast server" mode distribution. Figure  shows
      data flow for both modes of IP multicast data distribution.  RSVP
      over ATM solutions must ensure that IP multicast data is
      distributed with appropriate QoS.

      [Figure goes here]
              Figure 2: IP Multicast Data Distribution Over ATM



      Current multicast servers [1] do not support any mechanisms for
      communicating QoS requirements to a multicast server.  For this
      reason, RSVP over ATM implementations must support "mesh-mode"
      distribution for RSVP controlled multicast flows. When using
      multicast servers that do not support QoS requests, a sender must
      set the service, not global, break bit(s).

      In the case of MARS[1], the selection of distribution modes is
      administratively controlled.  Therefore network administrators
      that desire proper RSVP over ATM operation must appropriately
      configure their network to support mesh mode distribution for
      multicast groups that will be used in RSVP sessions.

   2.4 Receiver Transitions

      When setting up a point-to-multipoint VCs there will be a time
      when some receivers have been added to a QoS VC and some have not.
      During such transition times it is possible to start sending data
      on the newly established VC.  The issue is when to start send data
      on the new VC.  If data is sent both on the new VC and the old VC,
      then data will be delivered with proper QoS to some receivers and
      with the old QoS to all receivers.  This means the QoS receivers
      would get duplicate data.  If data is sent just on the new QoS VC,
      the receivers that have not yet been added will lose information.
      So, the issue comes down to whether to send to both the old and
      new VCs, or to send to just one of the VCs.  In one case duplicate
      information will be received, in the other some information may
      not be received.  This issue needs to be considered for three



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 7]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


      cases: when establishing the first QoS VC, when establishing a VC
      to support a QoS change, and when adding a new end-point to an
      already established QoS VC.

      The first two cases are very similar.  It both, it is possible to
      send data on the partially completed new VC, and the issue of
      duplicate versus lost information is the same.

      The last case is when an end-point must be added to an existing
      QoS VC.  In this case the end-point must be both added to the QoS
      VC and dropped from a best-effort VC.  The issue is which to do
      first.  If the add is first requested, then the end-point may get
      duplicate information.  If the drop is requested first, then the
      end-point may loose information.

      In order to ensure predictable behavior and delivery of data to
      all receivers, data must not be sent on a new VCs until all
      parties have been added.  This will ensure that all data is only
      delivered once to all receivers.  This approach does not quite
      apply for the last case. In the last case, the add must be
      completed first, then the drop.  This last behavior requires
      receivers to be prepared to receive some duplicate packets at
      times of QoS setup.

3. General RSVP Session Support

   This section provides implementation guidelines that are common for
   all (both unicast and multicast) RSVP sessions.  The section covers
   RSVP VC usage, QoS VC initiation, VC teardown, reservation to VC
   Mapping, handling requested changes in QoS, short-cuts, and
   encapsulation.

   3.1 RSVP Message VC Usage

      [5] covered the issues related to VC usage by RSVP messages.  It
      discussed several options including: mixed control and data,
      single control VC per session,  single control VC multiplexed
      among sessions, and multiple VCs multiplexed among sessions.  QoS
      for control VCs was also discussed.  Again that discussion is not
      repeated, [5] should be reviewed for detailed information.

      Baseline RSVP over ATM implementations must send RSVP control
      (messages) over the best effort data path, see figure .  It is
      permissible to allow a user to override this behavior.  The stated
      approach minimizes VC requirements since the best effort data path
      will need to exist in order for RSVP sessions to be established
      and in order for RSVP reservations to be initiated.  The specific
      best effort paths that will be used by RSVP are: for unicast, the



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 8]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


      same VC used to reach the unicast destination; and for multicast,
      the same VC that is used for best effort traffic destined to the
      IP multicast group.  Note that for multicast there may be another
      best effort VC that is used to carry session data traffic, i.e.,
      for data that is both in the multicast group and matching a
      sessions protocol and port.

      [Figure goes here]
                   Figure 3: RSVP Control Message VC Usage



      The disadvantage of this approach is that best effort VCs may not
      provide the reliability that RSVP needs.  However the best-effort
      path is expected to satisfy RSVP reliability requirements in most
      networks. Especially since RSVP allows for a certain amount of
      packet loss without any loss of state synchronization.

   3.2 VC Initiation

      There is an apparent mismatch between RSVP and ATM. Specifically,
      RSVP control is receiver oriented and ATM control is sender
      oriented.  This initially may seem like a major issue, but really
      is not.  While RSVP reservation (RESV) requests are generated at
      the receiver, actual allocation of resources takes place at the
      sub-net sender.

      For data flows, this means that sub-net senders must establish all
      QoS VCs and the sub-net receiver must be able to accept incoming
      QoS VCs.  These restrictions are consistent with RSVP version 1
      processing rules and allow senders to use different flow to VC
      mappings and even different QoS renegotiation techniques without
      interoperability problems.  All RSVP over ATM approaches that have
      VCs initiated and controlled by the sub-net senders will
      interoperate.  Figure  shows this model of data flow VC
      initiation.

      [Figure goes here]
                      Figure 4: Data Flow VC Initiation



      Baseline RSVP over ATM implementations are prohibited from sending
      data on a RSVP initiated QoS VC in the backwards direction.  There
      are two reasons.  The first is that use of the backwards data path
      requires the VC initiator to appropriate set backwards QoS
      parameters.  The second is that backwards data paths are not
      available with point-to-multipoint VCs, so backwards data paths



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                 [Page 9]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


      could only be used to support unicast RSVP reservations.  Since
      reverse path usage is a special case that cannot be used to
      support multicast flows and such use for unicast requires some
      undefined out of band communication, implementations must not send
      data on QoS VCs in the backwards direction.

   3.3 VC Teardown

      Normally data VCs are torndown based on inactivity timers.  This
      mechanism is used since IP is connectionless and there is
      therefore no way to know when a VC is no longer needed.  Since
      RSVP provides explicit mechanisms (messages and timeouts) to
      determine when an associated data VC is no longer needed, the
      traditional VC timeout mechanisms is not needed.  Data VCs set up
      to support RSVP controlled flows should only be released at the
      direction of RSVP. Such VCs must not be timed out due to
      inactivity by either the VC initiator or the VC receiver.  This
      conflicts with VCs timing out as described in RFC 1755[12],
      section 3.4 on VC Teardown.  RFC 1755 recommends tearing down a VC
      that is inactive for a certain length of time. Twenty minutes is
      recommended.  This timeout is typically implemented at both the VC
      initiator and the VC receiver.  Although, section 3.1 of the
      update to RFC 1755[13] states that inactivity timers must not be
      used at the VC receiver.

      In RSVP over ATM implementations, the configurable inactivity
      timer mentioned in [12] must be set to "infinite" for VCs
      initiated at the request of RSVP.  Setting the inactivity timer
      value at the VC initiator should not be problematic since the
      proper value can be relayed internally at the originator.  Setting
      the inactivity timer at the VC receiver is more difficult, and
      would require some mechanism to signal that an incoming VC was
      RSVP initiated.  To avoid this complexity and to conform to [13],
      RSVP over ATM implementations must not use an inactivity timer to
      clear any received connection.

   3.4 Reservation to VC Mapping

      As discussed in [5], data associated with multiple RSVP sessions
      could be sent using the same shared VCs. Implementation of such
      "aggregation" models is still a matter for research.  Therefore,
      baseline RSVP over ATM implementations must use independent VCs
      for each RSVP session. Implementations may also support
      aggregation approaches.  Use of such approaches must be at the
      discretion of the user.






Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 10]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


   3.5 Dynamic QoS

      As stated in [5], there is a mismatch in the service provided by
      RSVP and that provided by ATM UNI3.x and 4.0.  RSVP allows
      modifications to QoS parameters at any time, while ATM does not
      support any modifications to QoS parameters after VC setup.  See
      [5] for more detail.

      The baseline method for supporting changes in RSVP reservations is
      to attempt to replace an existing VC with a new appropriately
      sized VC. During setup of the replacement VC, the old VC must be
      left in place unmodified. The old VC is left unmodified to
      minimize interruption of QoS data delivery.  Once the replacement
      VC is established, data transmission is shifted to the new VC, and
      only then is the old VC closed.

      If setup of the replacement VC fails, then the old QoS VC should
      continue to be used. When the new reservation is greater than the
      old reservation, the reservation request should be answered with
      an error. When the new reservation is less than the old
      reservation, the request should be treated as if the modification
      was successful. While leaving the larger allocation in place is
      suboptimal, it maximizes delivery of service to the user.
      Implementations should retry replacing the too large VC after some
      appropriate elapsed time.

      One additional issue is that only one QoS change can be processed
      at one time per reservation. If the (RSVP) requested QoS is
      changed while the first replacement VC is still being setup, then
      the replacement VC is released and the whole VC replacement
      process is restarted.  Implementations may also limit number of
      changes processed in a time period per [5].

      There is an interesting interaction between heterogeneous
      reservations and dynamic QoS.  In the case where a RESV message is
      received from a new next-hop and the requested resources are
      larger than any existing reservation, both dynamic QoS and
      heterogeneity need to be addressed.  A key issue is whether to
      first add the new next-hop or to change to the new QoS.  This is a
      fairly straight forward special case.  Since the older, smaller
      reservation does not support the new next-hop, the dynamic QoS
      process should be initiated first. Since the new QoS is only
      needed by the new next-hop, it should be the first end-point of
      the new VC.  This way signalling is minimized when the setup to
      the new next-hop fails.






Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 11]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


   3.6 Short-Cuts

      Short-cuts [10] allow ATM attached routers and hosts to directly
      establish point-to-point VCs across LIS boundaries, i.e., the VC
      end-points are on different IP sub-nets.  The ability for short-
      cuts and RSVP to interoperate has been raised as a general
      question.  The area of concern is the ability to handle asymmetric
      short-cuts.  Specifically how RSVP can handle the case where a
      downstream short-cut may not have a matching upstream short-cut.
      In this case, which is shown in figure , PATH and RESV messages
      following different paths.

      [Figure goes here]
       Figure 5: Asymmetric RSVP Message Forwarding With ATM Short-Cuts



      Examination of RSVP shows that the protocol already includes
      mechanisms that will support short-cuts.  The mechanism is the
      same one used to support RESV messages arriving at the wrong
      router and the wrong interface.  The key aspect of this mechanism
      is RSVP only processing messages that arrive at the proper
      interface and RSVP forwarding of messages that arrive on the wrong
      interface.  The proper interface is indicated in the NHOP object
      of the message.  So, existing RSVP mechanisms will support
      asymmetric short-cuts.

      The short-cut model of VC establishment still poses several issues
      when running with RSVP. The major issues are dealing with
      established best-effort short-cuts, when to establish short-cuts,
      and QoS only short-cuts. These issues will need to be addressed by
      RSVP implementations.

      The key issue to be addressed by any RSVP over ATM solution is
      when to establish a short-cut for a QoS data flow.  Baseline RSVP
      over ATM implementations should simply follow best-effort traffic.
      When a short-cut has been established for best-effort traffic to a
      destination or next-hop, that same end-point should be used when
      setting up RSVP triggered VCs for QoS traffic to the same
      destination or next-hop. This will happen naturally when PATH
      messages are forwarded over the best-effort short-cut.  Note that
      in this approach when best-effort short-cuts are never
      established, RSVP triggered QoS short-cuts will also never be
      established.







Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 12]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


   3.7 Encapsulation

      Since RSVP is a signalling protocol used to control flows of IP
      data packets, encapsulation for both RSVP packets and associated
      IP data packets must be defined. There are multiple encapsulation
      options for running IP over ATM, for example RFC 1483[9] and
      LANE[2].  There is also other encapsulation options, such as
      MPOA[3].

      Baseline RSVP over ATM  implementations must use a consistent
      encapsulation scheme for all IP over ATM packets.  This includes
      RSVP packets and associated IP data packets.  So, encapsulation
      used on QoS data VCs and related control VCs must be the same as
      used by best-effort VCs.

4. Security

   The same considerations stated in [8] and [12] apply to this
   document.  There are no additional security issues raised in this
   document.

5. Implementation Summary

   This section provides a summary of previously stated requirements.

   5.1 Requirements

      All RSVP over ATM UNI 3.0 and 4.0 implementations must conform to
      the following:


      o    Heterogeneity
           Implementations must not, in the normal case, send more than
           one copy of a particular data packet to a particular next-hop
           (ATM end-point).
           Implementations must ensure that data traffic is sent to
           best-effort receivers.

      o    Multicast Data Distribution
           When using multicast servers that do not support QoS
           requests, a sender must set the service, not global, break
           bit(s).

      o    Receiver Transitions
           While creating new VCs, senders must either send on only the
           old VC or on both the old and the new VCs.

      o    VC Initiation



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 13]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


           All RSVP triggered QoS VCs must be established by the sub-net
           senders.
           VC receivers must be able to accept incoming QoS VCs.

      o    VC Teardown
           VC initiators must not tear down RSVP initiated VCs due to
           inactivity.
           VC receivers must not tear down any incoming VCs due to
           inactivity.

   5.2 Baseline Requirements

      Baseline requirements define a minimum set of functionality that
      must be provided by implementations.  Implementations may also
      provide additional functionality that may be configured to
      override the baseline behavior.  Which behavior is selected is a
      policy issue for network providers.  We expect some networks to
      only make use of baseline functionality and others to only make
      use of additional functionality.


      o    Heterogeneity
           Either limited heterogeneity model or the modified
           homogeneous model must be supported for handling
           heterogeneity.
           Implementations should support both approaches and provide
           the ability to select which method is actually used, but are
           not required to do so.

      o    Multicast End-Point Identification
           Implementations must only establish RSVP-initiated VCs to
           RSVP capable end-points.

      o    Multicast Data Distribution
           Implementations must support "mesh-mode" distribution for
           RSVP controlled multicast flows.   In the case of MARS,
           distribution mode is administratively controlled.  So this
           requirement can only be implemented by network
           administrators.

      o    RSVP Control VC Management
           Implementations must send RSVP control (messages) over the
           best effort data path.

      o    Reservation to VC Mapping
           Implementations must use a single VC to support each RSVP
           reservation.




Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 14]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


      o    Dynamic QoS
           Implementations must support RSVP requested changes in
           reservations by attempting to replace an existing VC with a
           new appropriately sized VC. During setup of the replacement
           VC, the old VC must be left in place unmodified.

      o    Short-Cuts
           Implementations should establish QoS short-cut whenever a
           best-effort short-cut is in use to a particular  destination
           or next-hop.  This means that when best-effort short-cuts are
           never established, RSVP triggered short-cuts also should not
           be established.

      o    Encapsulation
           Implementations must encapsulate data sent on QoS VCs with
           the same encapsulation as is used on best-effort VCs.


6. Author's Address

      Lou Berger
      FORE Systems
      6905 Rockledge Drive
      Suite 800
      Bethesda, MD 20817

      Phone: +1 301 571 2534
      EMail: lberger@fore.com

REFERENCES

[1] Armitage, G., "Support for Multicast over UNI 3.0/3.1 based ATM
    Networks," Internet Draft, February 1996.

[2] The ATM Forum, "LAN Emulation Over ATM Specification", Version 1.0.

[3] The ATM Forum, "MPOA Baseline Version 1", 95-0824r9, September 1996.

[4] Berson, S., "`Classical' RSVP and IP over ATM," INET '96, July 1996.

[5] Berson, S., Berger, L., "IP Integrated Services with RSVP over ATM,"
    Internet Draft, March 1997.

[6] Borden, M., Crawley, E., Krawczyk, J, Baker, F., and Berson, S.,
    "Issues for RSVP and Integrated Services over ATM," Internet Draft,
    February 1996.

[7] Borden, M., and Garrett, M., "Interoperation of Controlled-Load and



Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 15]




Internet Draft  RSVP over ATM Implementation Guidelines       March 1996


    Guaranteed-Service with ATM," Internet Draft, June 1996.

[8] Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and Jamin, S.,
    "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional
    Specification," Internet Draft, November 1996.

[9] Heinanen, J., "Multiprotocol Encapsulation over ATM Adaptation Layer
    5," RFC 1483.

[10] Luciani, J., Katz, D., Piscitello, D., Cole, B., "NBMA Next Hop
    Resolution Protocol (NHRP)," Internet Draft, June 1996.

[11] Onvural, R., Srinivasan, V., "A Framework for Supporting RSVP Flows
    Over ATM Networks," Internet Draft, March 1996.

[12] Perez, M., Liaw, F., Grossman, D., Mankin, A., Hoffman, E., and
    Malis, A., "ATM Signalling Support for IP over ATM," RFC 1755.

[13] Perez, M., Mankin, A.  "ATM Signalling Support for IP over ATM -
    UNI 4.0 Update" Internet Draft, November 1996.































Berger                  Expires: September 1997                [Page 16]


