



      
      
     Network Working Group                             Eric Gray, Editor 
     Internet Draft                                             Ericsson 
     Expires: May, 2008 
     Intended Status: Informational 
                                                       November 19, 2007 
                                         
      
                                         
                The Architecture of an RBridge Solution to TRILL 
                      draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-arch-04.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
        any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
        aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
        becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
        BCP 79. 

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
        in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on January 19, 2008. 

         

     Abstract 

        RBridges are link layer (L2) devices that use a routing protocol 
        as a control plane. This combines several of the benefits of the 
        link layer with those of the network layer. For example RBridges 
        use existing link state routing, without necessarily requiring 
        configuration, to improve aggregate throughput, for RBridge to 
      
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 1] 
      






     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        RBridge traffic. RBridges also may support IP multicast and IP 
        address resolution optimizations. They are intended to be 
        applicable to L2 network sizes similar to those of conventional 
        bridges and are intended to be backward compatible with those 
        bridges as both ingress/egress and transit. They also support 
        VLANs (although this generally requires configuration) while 
        otherwise attempting to retain as much 'plug and play' as is 
        already available in existing bridges. This document proposes an 
        architecture for RBridge systems as a solution to the TRILL 
        problem, defines terminology, and describes basic components and 
        desired behavior. One (or more) separate documents will specify 
        protocols and mechanisms that satisfy the architecture presented 
        herein. 

































      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 2] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     Table of Contents 

         
        1. Introduction................................................4 
        2. Background..................................................7 
           2.1. Existing Terminology...................................7 
           2.2. RBridge Terminology...................................10 
        3. Components.................................................12 
           3.1. RBridge Device........................................12 
           3.2. RBridge Data Model....................................13 
              3.2.1. Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database................13 
              3.2.2. Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database......14 
              3.2.3. Ingress TRILL Forwarding Database................16 
        4. Functional Description.....................................17 
           4.1. TRILL Campus Auto-configuration.......................17 
           4.2. RBridge Peer Discovery................................17 
           4.3. Topology Discovery....................................17 
           4.4. Designated RBridge (DRB) Election.....................18 
           4.5. Learning..............................................18 
           4.6. Tunneling.............................................19 
        5. RBridge Operation..........................................19 
           5.1. RBridge General Operation.............................20 
           5.2. Ingress/Egress Operations.............................20 
           5.3. Transit Forwarding Operations.........................22 
              5.3.1. Unicast..........................................22 
              5.3.2. Broadcast, Multicast and Flooding................23 
                 5.3.2-1. Broadcast...................................23 
                 5.3.2-2. Multicast...................................24 
                 5.3.2-3. Flooding....................................26 
           5.4. Routing Protocol Operation............................27 
           5.5. Other Bridging and Ethernet Protocol Operations.......27 
              5.5.1. Wiring Closet Problem............................28 
        6. How RBridges Address the TRILL Problem Space...............29 
        7. Conclusions................................................30 
        8. Security Considerations....................................30 
        9. IANA Considerations........................................31 
        10. Acknowledgments...........................................31 
        11. References................................................32 
           11.1. Normative References.................................32 
           11.2. Informative References...............................32 
        12. Author's Addresses........................................32 
        Intellectual Property Statement...............................33 
        Disclaimer of Validity........................................34 
        Copyright Statement...........................................34 
        Acknowledgment................................................34 
         



     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 3] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     1. Introduction 

        This document describes an architecture that addresses the TRILL 
        problem and applicability statement [2]. This architecture 
        describes a solution that is composed of a set of devices called 
        RBridges.  RBridges cooperate together in an Ethernet network to 
        provide a layer two delivery service that makes efficient use of 
        available links using a link state routing protocol. The service 
        provided is analogous to creation of a single, virtual device 
        composed of an overlay of tunnels, constructed between RBridge 
        devices, using paths determined by link state routing. RBridges 
        thus support increased aggregate RBridge to RBridge bandwidth, 
        and fault tolerance, when compared to conventional Ethernet 
        bridges (which forward frames via a spanning tree, in a non-VLAN 
        or single VLAN context, or multiple spanning trees), while still 
        being compatible with bridges and hubs. 

        The principal objectives of this architecture is to provide an 
        overview of the use of these RBridges in meeting the following 
        goals: 

          1) Provide a form of optimized layer two delivery service. 

          2) Use existing technology as much as possible. 

          3) Allow for configuration free (or minimal configuration) 
             deployment. 

        In providing a (optimized) layer two (L2) service, key factors 
        we want to maintain are: transparency to higher layer (layer 3 
        and above) delivery services and mechanisms, and use of location 
        independent addressing. Optimization of the L2 delivery service 
        consists of: use of an optimized subset of all available paths 
        and support for optimization of ARP/ND and pruning of multicast 
        traffic delivery paths.  

        Not all optimizations are necessarily expected to be supported 
        in initial specification and some subset of these optimizations 
        may be specified at a later time.  This architecture should 
        allow some level of optimization support to be provided in 
        compliant implementations, in as many case as possible. 

        To accomplish the goal of using existing technologies as much as 
        possible, we intend to specify minimal extensions to an existing 
        link-state routing protocol, as well as defining specific sub-
        sets of existing bridging technologies that this architecture is 
        intended to makes use of.  
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 4] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        The extent to which routing protocol extensions may be required 
        depends on the closeness of the "fit" of the chosen routing 
        protocol (in this case, IS-IS) to RBridge protocol requirements. 
        The specific of routing protocol use - along with appropriate 
        extensions and enhancements - will be defined in corresponding 
        RBridge protocol specifications (see [3] for example). 

        Specific protocol specifications will also describe the details 
        of interactions between the RBridge protocol and specific L2 
        technologies - i.e. - Virtual Local Area Networking (VLAN), L2 
        Multicast, etc.  This document describes the general nature of 
        the RBridge solution without restricting related specifications. 

        As an overview, however, the intention is to use a link-state 
        routing protocol to accomplish the following: 

          1) Discover RBridge peers. 

          2) Determine RBridge link topology. 

          3) Potentiallt advertise L2 reachability information; note 
             that - at this time - the default method for acquiring L2 
             reachability information specified in [3] depends on use of 
             data-plane learning (see Bridge Learning in the terminology 
             section below). 

          4) Establish L2 delivery using shortest path (verses STP, RSTP 
             or MSTP). 

        There are additional RBridge protocol requirements - above and 
        beyond those addressed by any existing routing protocol - that 
        are identified in this document and need to be addressed in 
        corresponding RBridge protocol specifications. 

        To allow for configuration free deployment, specific protocol 
        specifications should explicitly define the conditions under 
        which RBridges may - and may not - be deployed as-is (plug and 
        play), and the mechanisms that are required to allow this. For 
        example, the first requirement any RBridge protocol must meet is 
        to derive information required by link-state routing protocol(s) 
        for protocol start-up and communications between peers - such as 
        higher-layer addressing and/or identifiers, encapsulation header 
        information, etc. 

        At the abstract level, RBridges need to maintain the following 
        information: 

      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 5] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

          1) Peer information, 

          2) Topology information, 

          3) Forwarding information -  

               a. unicast,  

               b. flooded, and  

               c. multicast. 

        In addition, RBridge specifications may suggest (or require) the 
        maintenance of other information as needed to support ARP/ND and 
        multicast optimizations. 

        Peer information may be acquired via the routing protocol, or 
        may be discovered as a result of RBridge-specific peer discovery 
        mechanisms.  Details of specific peer information requirements - 
        as well as how this information will be acquired is specified in 
        protocol specifications (e.g. - [3]).   

        Topology information is expected to be acquired via the link-
        state routing protocol. 

        Forwarding information is derived from the combination of 
        attached MAC address learning, snooping of multicast-related 
        protocols (e.g. - IGMP), and routing advertisements and path 
        computations using the link-state routing protocol. 

        Other information - such as the mapping of MAC and IP addresses, 
        or multicast pruning information - may be learned using snooping 
        of ARP/ND or IGMP (for example) and it is possible that RBridges 
        may need to participate actively in these protocols. 

        The remainder of this document outlines the TRILL architecture 
        of an RBridge-based solution and describes RBridge components, 
        interactions and functions. Note that this document is not 
        intended to represent the only solution to the TRILL problem 
        statement, nor does it specify the protocols that instantiate 
        this architecture - or that only one such set of protocols is 
        prescribed. The former may be contained in other architecture 
        documents and the latter would be contained in separate 
        specification documents (see - e.g. - [3]). 



      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 6] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     2. Background 

        This architecture is based on the RBridge system described in an 
        Infocom paper [1]. That paper describes the RBridge system as a 
        specific instance; this document abstracts architectural 
        features only. The remainder of this section describes the 
        terminology of this document, which may differ from that of the 
        original paper. 

     2.1. Existing Terminology 

        The following terminology is defined in other documents. A brief 
        definition is included in this section for convenience and - in 
        some cases - to remove any ambiguity in how the term may be used 
        in this document, as well as in derivative documents intended to 
        specify components, protocol, behavior and encapsulation 
        relative to the architecture described in this document. 

        o  IEEE 802.1D and IEEE 802.1Q: IEEE documents which include 
           specification for bridged Ethernet, including Media Access 
           Control (MAC) bridges and the BPDUs used in spanning tree 
           protocol (STP) [1], [8]. 

        o  ARP: Address Resolution Protocol - a protocol used to find an 
           address of form X, given a corresponding address of form Y. 
           In this document, ARP refers to the well-known protocol used 
           to find L2 (MAC) addresses, using a given L3 (IP) address. 
           See [7] for further information on IP ARP. 

        o  Bridge: an Ethernet (L2, 802.1D) device with multiple ports 
           that receives incoming frames on a port and transmits them on 
           zero or more of the other ports; bridges support both bridge 
           learning and STP. Transparent bridges do not modify the L2 
           PDU being forwarded. 

        o  Bridge Learning: process by which a bridge determines on 
           which (if any) single outgoing port to transmit (forward or 
           copy) an incoming unicast frame. This process depends on 
           consistent forwarding as "learning" uses the source MAC 
           address of frames received on each interface. Layer 2 (L2) 
           forwarding devices "learn" the location of L2 destinations by 
           peeking at layer 2 source addresses during frame forwarding, 
           and store the association of source address and receiving 
           interface.  L2 forwarding devices use this information to 
           create "filtering database" entries and - gradually - 
           eliminate the need for flooding. 

      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 7] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        o  Bridge Protocol Data Unit (BPDU): the frame type associated 
           with bridge control functions (for example: STP/RSTP). 

        o  Bridged LAN: see IEEE 802.1Q-2005, Section 3.3 [8]. 

        o  Broadcast Domain: the set of (layer 2) devices that must be 
           reached (or reachable) by (layer 2) broadcast traffic 
           injected into the domain. 

        o  Broadcast Traffic: traffic intended for receipt by all 
           devices in a broadcast domain.  

        o  Ethernet: a common layer 2 networking technology that 
           includes, and is often equated with, 802.3. 

        o  Filtering Database: database containing association 
           information of (source layer 2 address, arrival interface).  
           The interface that is associated with a specific layer 2 
           source address, is the same interface which is used to 
           forward frames having that address as a destination.  When a 
           layer 2 forwarding device has no entry for the destination 
           layer 2 address of any frame it receives, the frame is 
           "flooded". 

        o  Flooded Traffic: traffic that is subject to flooding - i.e. - 
           being forwarded on all interfaces, except the one on which it 
           was received, within a LAN or VLAN. 

        o  Flooding: the process of forwarding traffic to ensure that 
           frames reach all possible destinations when the destination 
           location is not known.  In "flooding", an 802.1D forwarding 
           device forwards a frame for any destination not "known" (i.e. 
           - not in the filtering or forwarding database) on every 
           active interface except that one on which it was received. 
           See also VLAN flooding and flooded traffic. 

        o  Frame: in this document, frame refers to an Ethernet (L2) 
           unit of transmission (PDU), including header, data, and 
           trailer (or payload and envelope). 

        o  Hub: Ethernet device with multiple ports that transparently 
           transmits frames arriving on any port to all other ports.  
           This is a functional definition, as there are devices that 
           combine this function with certain bridge-like functions that 
           may - under certain conditions - be referred to as "hubs". 


      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 8] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        o  IS-IS: Intermediate System to Intermediate System routing 
           protocol. See [6] for further information on IS-IS. 

        o  LAN: Local Area Network, is a computer network covering a 
           small geographic area, like a home, office, or group of 
           buildings, e.g., as based on IEEE 802.3 technology, see also 
           IEEE 802.1Q-2005, Section 3.11 [8]. 

        o  MAC: Media Access Control - mechanisms and addressing for L2 
           frame forwarding.  

        o  Multicast Forwarding: forwarding methods that apply to frames 
           with broadcast or multicast destination MAC addresses. 

        o  Node: a device with an L2 (MAC) address that sources and/or 
           sinks L2 frames. 

        o  Packet: in this document, packet refers to L3 (or above) data 
           transmission units (PDU - e.g. - an IP Packet (RFC791 [4]), 
           including header and data. 

        o  PDU: Protocol Data Unit - unit of data to be transmitted by a 
           protocol. To distinguish L2 and L3 PDUs, we refer to L2 PDUs 
           as "frames" and L3 PDUs as "packets" in this (and related) 
           document(s). 

        o  Router: a device that performs forwarding of IP (L3) packets, 
           based on L3 addressing and forwarding information. Routers 
           forward packets from one L2 broadcast domain to another (one, 
           or more in the IP multicast case) - distinct - L2 broadcast 
           domain(s). A router terminates an L2 broadcast domain. 

        o  Spanning Tree Protocol (STP): an Ethernet (802.1D) protocol 
           for establishing and maintaining a single spanning tree among 
           all the bridges on a local Ethernet segment. Also, Rapid 
           Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP). In this document, STP and RSTP 
           are considered to be the same. 

        o  SPF: Shortest Path First - an algorithm name associated with 
           routing, used to determine a shortest path graph traversal. 

        o  TRILL: Transparent Interconnect over Lots of Links - the 
           working group and working name for the problem domain to be 
           addressed in this document. 

        o  Unicast Forwarding: forwarding methods that apply to frames 
           with unicast destination MAC addresses. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008                [Page 9] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        o  Unknown Destination - a destination for which a receiving 
           device has no filtering database entry.  Destination (layer 
           2) addresses are typically "learned" by (layer 2) forwarding 
           devices via a process commonly referred to as "bridge 
           learning" (see definition above). 

        o  VLAN: Virtual Local Area Network, see IEEE 802.1Q-2005 [8]. 

        o  VLAN Flooding: flooding as described previously, except that 
           frames are only forwarded on those interfaces configured for 
           participation in the applicable VLAN. 

     2.2. RBridge Terminology 

        The following terms are defined in this document and intended 
        for use in derivative documents intended to specify components, 
        protocol, behavior and encapsulation relative to the 
        architecture specified in this document. 

        o  Adjacent RBridges: RBridges that communicate directly with 
           each other without relay through other RBridges. 

        o  Cooperating RBridges: a set of communicating RBridges that 
           will share a consistent set of forwarding information. 

        o  Designated RBridge (DRB): the RBridge that is elected to 
           handle ingress and egress traffic to a particular Ethernet 
           link having shared access and multiple RBridges; that RBridge 
           is such a link's "Designated RBridge". The Designated RBridge 
           is determined by an election process among those RBridges 
           having shared access via a single LAN. 

        o  Edge RBridge (edge of a TRILL Campus): describes RBridges 
           that may serve to ingress frames into the TRILL Campus and 
           egress frames from the TRILL Campus. L2 frames transiting an 
           TRILL Campus enter, and leave, it via an edge RBridge. 

        o  Egress RBridge: for any specific frame, the RBridge through 
           which that frame leaves the TRILL Campus. For frames 
           transiting a TRILL Campus, the egress RBridge is an edge 
           RBridge where RBridge encapsulation is removed from the 
           transit frames prior to exiting the TRILL Campus. 

        o  Encapsulation database: in the TRILL context, the database 
           that the Designated RBridge (ingress) uses to map the layer 2 
           destination address in the received frame to the egress 
           Rbridge. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 10] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        o  Forwarding Tunnels: in this document, Campus Forwarding 
           Tunnels (or Forwarding Tunnels) is used to refer to the paths 
           for forwarding transit frames, encapsulated at an RBridge 
           ingress and decapsulated at an RBridge egress. 

        o  Ingress RBridge: for any specific frame, the RBridge through 
           which that frame enters the TRILL Campus. For frames 
           transiting a TRILL Campus, the ingress RBridge is the edge 
           RBridge where RBridge encapsulation is added to the transit 
           traffic entering the TRILL Campus.  

        o  Multi-Destination Frames: Broadcast or Multicast frames, or 
           Unicast frames destined to a MAC DA that is unknown i.e. - 
           flooded frames (see flooded traffic).  Frames that need to be 
           delivered to multiple egress RBridges, via the RBridge 
           Distribution Tree. 

        o  Peer RBridge: The term "Peer RBridge", or (where usage is not 
           ambiguous) the term "Peer", are used in the RBridge context 
           to refer to any of the RBridges that make up a TRILL campus. 

        o  RBridge: a logical device as described in this document, 
           which incorporate both routing and bridging features, thus 
           allowing for the achievement of TRILL Architecture goals. A 
           single RBridge device which can cooperate with other RBridge 
           devices to create a TRILL Campus.  

        o  RBridge Distribution Tree: This term or (where usage is not 
           ambiguous) the term "distribution tree", refers to a tree 
           used by RBridges to deliver multi-destination frames. An RDT, 
           or distribution tree, is computed using a specific RBridge as 
           the root. May also be referred to as an R-tree. 

        o  TRILL Campus: this term, or the term "Campus" (where usage is 
           not ambiguous) is used in the RBridge context to refer to the 
           set of cooperating RBridges and TRILL Links that connect them 
           to each other. 

        o  TRILL Forwarding Database: this term, or the term "forwarding 
           database" (where not ambiguous) is used in an RBridge context 
           to refer to the database that maps the egress TRILL address 
           to the next hop TRILL link. 

        o  TRILL Header: a 'shim' header that encapsulates the ingress 
           L2 frame and persists throughout the transit of a TRILL 
           Campus, which may be further encapsulated within a hop-by-hop 
           L2 header (and trailer). The hop-by-hop L2 encapsulation in 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 11] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

           this case includes the source MAC address of the immediate 
           upstream RBridge transmitting the frame and destination MAC 
           address of the receiving RBridge - at least in the unicast 
           forwarding case. 

        o  TRILL Link: this term, or the term "Link" (where its usage is 
           not ambiguous) is used in the RBridge context to refer to the 
           Layer 2 connection that exists either between RBridges, or 
           between an RBridge and Ethernet end stations. 

     3. Components 

        A TRILL Campus is composed of RBridge devices and the forwarding 
        tunnels that connect them; all other Ethernet devices, such as 
        bridges, hubs, and nodes, operate conventionally in the presence 
        of an RBridge. 

         +----------------------------------------------------------+ 
         |                 Higher Layer Entities                    | 
         +--+--------------+----------------------+--------------+--+ 
         |  \ TRILL Layer  | RBridge Relay Entity | TRILL Layer  /  | 
         +---+-------------+----------------------+-------------+---+ 
         | Data Link Layer |                      | Data Link Layer | 
         +-----------------+                      +-----------------+ 
         | Physical Layer  |                      |  Physical Layer | 
         +--------+--------+                      +--------+--------+ 
                  |                                        | 
                 P 1                                      P 2 

              Figure 1:  Simplified Architecture of an RBridge 
         
        Figure 1 shows an RBridge that contains: 

        o  An RBridge Relay Entity connecting two RBridge ports  

        o  At least one physical port (two in this example) 

        o  Higher layer Entities, including at least the IS-IS protocol 

        o  At the TRILL Layer, an RBridge encapsulates incoming Ethernet 
           frames with a TRILL header to forward them to other RBridges. 

     3.1. RBridge Device 

        An RBridge is a device - having some of the characteristics of 
        both bridges and routers - that forwards frames on an Ethernet 
        link segment. It has one or more Ethernet ports which may be 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 12] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        wired or wireless; the particular physical layer is not 
        relevant. An RBridge is defined more by its behavior than its 
        structure, although it logically contains three tables, which 
        may be used to describe the externally visible behavior of an 
        RBridge relative to its peers and may also distinguish RBridges 
        from conventional bridges. 

        Conventional bridges contain a learned filtering (or forwarding) 
        database, and spanning tree port state information. The bridge 
        learns which nodes are accessible from a particular port by 
        assuming bi-directional consistency: the source addresses of 
        incoming frames indicate that the incoming port is to be used as 
        output for frames destined to that address. Incoming frames are 
        checked against the learned filtering (forwarding) database and 
        forwarded to the particular port if a match occurs, otherwise 
        they are flooded out all active ports (except the incoming 
        port). 

        Spanning tree port state information indicates the ports that 
        are active in the spanning tree. Details of STP operation are 
        out of scope for this document, however the result of STP is to 
        disable ports which would otherwise result in more than one path 
        traversal of the spanning tree. 

        RBridges, by comparison, have a TRILL forwarding database, used 
        for forwarding of RBridge encapsulated frames across the TRILL 
        Campus and by the ingress RBridge to determine the encapsulation 
        to use for frames received as un-encapsulated from non-RBridge 
        devices. The TRILL forwarding database is described in the 
        following sections. 

     3.2. RBridge Data Model 

        The following tables represent the logical model of the data 
        required by RBridges in forwarding unicast and multicast data 
        across a TRILL Campus. 

     3.2.1. Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database 

        The Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database is a forwarding table for 
        unicast traffic within the TRILL Campus, allowing tunneled 
        traffic to transit the TRILL Campus from ingress to egress. The 
        size of a fully populated Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database at 
        each RBridge is maximally bounded by the product of the number 
        of Adjacent RBridge peers and VLANs.  


      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 13] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        RBridges may have separate Unicast TRILL Forwarding Databases 
        for each VLAN, if this is supported by configuration. Note that 
        scaling concerns may dictate otherwise, either in specific of 
        RBridge protocol specification, or in deployment.  The Unicast 
        TRILL Forwarding Database is continually maintained by RBridge 
        routing protocols and/or MAC learning. (see Section 5.4). 

        The Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database contains data specific to 
        RBridge forwarding for unicast traffic. The specific fields 
        contained in this table are to be defined in RBridge protocol 
        specifications. In the abstract, however, the table should 
        contain forwarding direction and encapsulation associated with 
        an RBridge encapsulated frame received - determined by the TRILL 
        "shim" header destination and VLAN (if applicable). 

     3.2.2. Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database 

        The Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database consists of a 
        set of forwarding entries used for support of RBridge 
        Distribution Trees (RDT). Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding 
        Database entries are distinct from typical Unicast TRILL 
        Forwarding Database entries because there may be zero or more of 
        them that match for any incoming frame.  

        The Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database may overlap the 
        Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database, or be instantiated as a 
        separate table, in specific compliant implementations. 

        In discussing entries to be included in the Multi-destination 
        TRILL Forwarding Database, the following entities are 
        temporarily defined, or further qualified: 

        o  Root RBridge - the RBridge that is the head end of an RDT. 
           All RBridges within a TRILL Campus are potential Root 
           RBridges. 

        o  Egress RBridge - an RBridge that is the tail end of a path 
           corresponding to a specific Multi-destination TRILL 
           Forwarding Database entry. All RBridges within a TRILL Campus 
           are potential egress RBridges. Not all RBridges within a 
           TRILL Campus will be on the shortest path between any ingress 
           RBridge and any other egress RBridge. 





      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 14] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        o  Local RBridge - the RBridge that forms and maintains the 
           Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database entry (or 
           entries) under discussion. The local RBridge may be a root 
           RBridge, or an egress RBridge with respect to any set of 
           entries in the Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database. 

        o  RBridge TRILL Campus Egress Interface - an interface on any 
           RBridge where a transit RBridge encapsulated frame would be 
           decapsulated prior to forwarding. With respect to such an 
           interface, the local RBridge is the egress RBridge. 

        Each local RBridge will maintain - as a logical representation - 
        a set of entries for at least the following, corresponding to a 
        subset of all possible forwarding paths: 

        o  Zero or more entries grouped for each root RBridge - keyed by 
           some root RBridge identifier - used to determine forwarding 
           of broadcast, multicast, and flooded frames originally 
           RBridge encapsulated by that ingress within the TRILL Campus. 

        o  Corresponding to each of these entry groups, one entry for 
           each of zero or more egress RBridge - where the local RBridge 
           is on the shortest path toward that egress RBridge. 

        o  Corresponding to each of these entry groups, one entry for 
           each of zero or more TRILL Campus egress interfaces. 

        Each entry would contain an indication of which single interface 
        a broadcast, multicast or flooded frame would be forwarded for 
        each (root RBridge, egress RBridge) pair.  Entries would also 
        contain any required encapsulation information, etc. required 
        for forwarding on a given interface, and toward a corresponding 
        specific egress RBridge. 

        Note that the above information is one logical representation of 
        the information required to perform a reverse path forwarding 
        check (or RPFC) as is discussed in [3]. 

        A local RBridge could maintain a full set of entries from every 
        RBridge to every other RBridge, however - depending on topology 
        - only a subset of these entries would ever be used.  In 
        addition, a topology change that changed selection of shortest 
        paths would also very likely change other elements of the 
        entries, negating possible benefits from having pre-computed 
        Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database entries. 


      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 15] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database entries should also 
        include VLAN identification information relative to each set of 
        Root RBridges, to allow scoping of broadcast, multicast and 
        flooding forwarding by configured VLANs. 

        Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database entries may also 
        include Multicast-Group Address specific information relative to 
        each egress RBridge that is a member of a given well-known 
        multicast group, to allow scoping of multicast forwarding by 
        multicast group. 

        Implicit in this data model is the assumption that the TRILL 
        "shim" header encapsulation will contain information that 
        explicitly identifies the TRILL Campus ingress RBridge for any 
        broadcast, multicast or flooded frame. 

        Maintenance of this Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database 
        will be defined in appropriate protocol specifications used to 
        instantiate this architecture. Note that doing this does not 
        strictly require those specification to adopt this data model. 
        The protocol specification needs to include mechanisms and 
        procedures required to establish and maintain the Multi-
        destination TRILL Forwarding Database in consideration of 
        potential SPF recomputations resulting from network topology 
        changes. 

     3.2.3. Ingress TRILL Forwarding Database 

        The Ingress TRILL Forwarding Database determines how arriving 
        traffic will be encapsulated, for forwarding toward the egress 
        RBridge, via the TRILL Campus. It becomes configured in much the 
        same way that bridge learning occurs: by snooping incoming 
        traffic, and assuming bi-directional consistency.   

        This learned information at an egress RBridge may be propagated 
        to all other RBridges in the TRILL Campus via the RBridge 
        routing protocol, as an alternative to direct MAC learning from 
        data frames. However, the information propagated in this fashion 
        may be quite large and filtering to prevent overwhelming edge 
        RBridges would require extensive per-VLAN state information in 
        core RBridges.  Hence the current model is that the default mode 
        for learning L2 reachability information is via learning from 
        the data plane directly in a manner very analogous to bridge 
        learning. 



      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 16] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        Using this approach, the ingress TRILL Forwarding Database may 
        be as large as the number of nodes on the Ethernet LAN, for all 
        VLANs in which a specific ingress RBridge is a participant.  

        The Ingress TRILL Forwarding Database essentially determines the 
        tunnel encapsulation used to transport each specific frame 
        across the TRILL Campus, for frames entering at this ingress. 

     4. Functional Description 

        The RBridge Architecture is largely defined by RBridge behavior; 
        the logical components are minimal, as outlined in Section 3.  

     4.1. TRILL Campus Auto-configuration 

        Cooperating RBridges self-organize to compose a single TRILL 
        Campus system. The details for how this occurs are given in 
        protocol specification(s). 

        At an architectural level, it is sufficient to note that every 
        end station attached to a TRILL Campus is considered to have a 
        primary point of attachment to the TRILL Campus, as defined by 
        the Designated RBridge. Each TRILL Link attached to a TRILL 
        Campus has a single Designated RBridge; that RBridge is where 
        all traffic intended to transit a TRILL Campus enters and exits.  

        This rule applies strictly on a per-VLAN basis. 

        The high-level functional steps included in auto-configuration 
        are RBridge peer discovery, topology discovery, DRB election, 
        learning and forwarding (tunneling) TRILL encapsulated frames. 

     4.2. RBridge Peer Discovery 

        Proper operation of the TRILL solution using RBridges depends on 
        the existence of a mechanism for discovering peer RBridges. 
        Failure to discover all peer RBridges leads inevitably to an 
        incomplete discovery of the RBridge topology.   

        RBridge peer discovery can be accomplished in a relatively easy 
        re-use of well-known techniques based on broadcast - such as the 
        use of IS-IS "hello" messages. 

     4.3. Topology Discovery 

        Proper operation of RBridges also depends on the existence of a 
        mechanism for determining the RBridge topology. An accurate 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 17] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        determination of RBridge topology is required in order to 
        determine how traffic frames will flow in the topology and thus 
        avoid the establishment of persistent loops in frame forwarding, 
        or construction of a partitioned local LAN.  

        Fortunately, accurate topology determination is a fundamental 
        requirement of a functioning link-state routing protocol. The 
        complexity that applies in this architecture directly relates to 
        the existence of multiple VLANs on a TRILL Link. 

        For this reason, RBridges (in terms of protocol definition, 
        implementation and deployment) should avoid unnecessary use of 
        multiple VLANs - in particular on links that will be, or may be, 
        used for transit of TRILL encapsulated frames. 

     4.4. Designated RBridge (DRB) Election 

        The mechanisms and details of DRB election will be provided by 
        protocol specification(s). 

        Architecturally, it is important to note that the DRB election 
        must be based on an accurate view of the topology, including 
        availability of certain links in a given topology for traffic 
        associated with any given VLAN.  Otherwise, it is possible to 
        partition a local LAN (on the assumption that an RBridge is 
        deployed and configured to replace an existing 802.1Q bridge) as 
        a result of a failure - where such a partition would not have 
        occurred with the previously deployed 802.1Q bridge. 

        The protocol specification(s) needs to define how an accurate 
        VLAN topology is to be determined - and applied in the DRB 
        election - and the limitations that any chosen mechanisms may 
        impose on the solution (in terms of scalability and ease of 
        deployment, for example). 

     4.5. Learning 

        The protocol specifications need to define how learning of MAC-
        layer reachability information is expected to occur - at least 
        in the default case. 

        As described previously, a major consideration is the complexity 
        associated with receiving reachability information for a lot of 
        end-stations for which an ingress RBridge has no interest.  This 
        is the case, for example, where a large number of VLANs are in 
        use (see [8]).  This issue does not arise if learning is based 

      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 18] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        on the data plane (similar to bridge learning) - as is currently 
        described as a default learning mode in [3]. 

     4.6.Tunneling 

        RBridges pass encapsulated frame traffic to each other 
        effectively using tunnels. These tunnels use an Ethernet link 
        layer header, together with a TRILL header. 

        Specifics of encapsulation are to be defined in appropriate 
        protocol/encapsulation specifications.  

        It is the combination of the local MAC desitnation (which is for 
        a locally attached RBridge) and the TRILL encapsulation that 
        distinguishes RBridge to RBridge traffic from other traffic.  
        The link-layer header includes source and destination addresses, 
        which typically identify the local RBridges (the sending and 
        receiving RBridges relative to the local TRILL Link).  

        The TRILL header is required to support loop mitigation for (at 
        least) unicast traffic within the TRILL Campus; traffic loops in 
        forwarding between RBridges and non-RBridge devices, as well as 
        across non-RBridge devices between RBridges, is beyond the scope 
        of this document.  

        The TRILL header and encapsulation: 

        o  must clearly identify the traffic as RBridge traffic - the 
           outer Ethernet header may, for instance, use an Ethertype 
           number unique to RBridges;  

        o  should also identify a specific (egress) RBridge - the TRILL 
           header may, for example, include an identifier unique to the 
           egress RBridge, in the unicast case; 

        o  should include the RBridge transit route, a hopcount, or a 
           timestamp to prevent indefinite looping of a frame. 

     5. RBridge Operation 

        This section is intended primarily to serve as a tutorial for 
        RBridge operations. As such in any case where this section says 
        anything in diagrement with specific protocol specifications, 
        the protocol specification over-rides. 



      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 19] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     5.1. RBridge General Operation 

        As described in sections above, operations that apply to all 
        RBridges include peer and topology discovery (including hello 
        messaging, negotiation of RBridge identifiers and link-state 
        routing), Designated RBridge election, SPF computation and 
        learning or advertising reach-ability for specific L2 (MAC 
        Ethernet destination) addresses within a broadcast domain. 

        In addition, all RBridges will compute RBridge Distribution 
        Trees for delivery of (potentially VLAN scoped) broadcast, 
        multicast and flooded frames to each peer RBridge. Setting up 
        these trees early is important as there is otherwise no means 
        for frame delivery across the TRILL Campus during the learning 
        phase. Because it is very likely to be impossible (at an early 
        stage) for RBridges to determine which RBridges are edge 
        RBridges, it is preferable that each RBridge compute these trees 
        for all RBridges as early as possible - even if some entries 
        will not be used. 

        The specifics of each of these operational steps will be defined 
        in protocol specifications (such as [3]). 

     5.2.Ingress/Egress Operations 

        Operation specific to edge RBridges involves RBridge learning, 
        advertisement, encapsulation (at ingress RBridges) and 
        decapsulation (at egress RBridges). 

        As described previously, RBridge learning is similar to typical 
        bridge learning - i.e. - all RBridges listen promiscuously to L2 
        Frames on each local LAN and acquire end station location 
        information associated with source MAC addresses in L2 frames 
        they observe. 

        By convention, a Designated RBridge election always occurs. In 
        the degenerate case - where only one RBridge is connected to a 
        specific Ethernet segment - obviously that RBridge will "win" 
        the election and become the designated RBridge. 

        With this convention, only the Designated RBridge performs 
        RBridge learning for interface(s) connected to that LAN. 

        As each RBridge learns segment-local MAC source addresses, it 
        creates an entry in its learned filtering/forwarding database 
        that associates that MAC source address with the interface on 
        which it was learned. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 20] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        Similarly - to support ARP/ND optimization - IP-to-MAC mappings 
        may also be learned by snooping corresponding protocol messages.  
        Protocol specifications may include either optional or required 
        behaviors to support ARP/ND, or multicast, learning and 
        distribution methods. 

        Periodically, as determined by RBridge protocol specification, 
        each RBridge may advertise this learned information to its 
        RBridge peers.  These advertisements would propagate to all edge 
        RBridges (as potentially scoped by associated VLAN information 
        for each advertisement). Each edge RBridge would incorporate 
        this information in the form of a Unicast TRILL Forwarding 
        Database entry.  

        Note that currently, [3] specifies that this is not the default 
        mode, and that learning primarily occurs via the data plane at 
        ingress, as well as at egress.   

        The trade-off is between the complexity associated with flooding 
        data verses the complexity associated with flooding reachability 
        information.   

        For applications in which it is likely that most edge RBridges 
        will not want to receive most of the reachability information, 
        flooding avoidance requires either that the method is not used, 
        or that intermediate (core, in at least some cases) RBridges 
        need to keep VLAN specific state information to limit the scope 
        of advertisement flooding. 

        RBridges also discover that they are an edge RBridge as a result 
        of receiving un-encapsulated frames that require forwarding. If 
        an RBridge is the Designated RBridge for a segment, and it has 
        not previously learned that the MAC destination for a frame is 
        local (this will be the case - for instance - for the very first 
        frame it observes), then the RBridge would be required to 
        forward (or flood) the frame via the TRILL Campus to all other 
        RBridges (potentially within a VLAN scope).  

        The RBridge in this case would flood the frame unless it has 
        already created a Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database entry for 
        the frame's MAC destination address.  If it has a corresponding 
        Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database, then it would use that.  This 
        RBridge would be an ingress RBridge with respect to the frame 
        being forwarded. 

        The encapsulation used by this ingress RBridge would be 
        determined by the Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database - if one 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 21] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        exists - or the Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database-equivalent 
        entry for the RBridge Distribution Tree. 

        When the encapsulated frame arrives at egress RBridge(s), it is 
        decapsulated and forwarded via the egress interface(s) onto the 
        local segment. 

        In using the approach of learning from the data plane, the 
        egress RBridge stores information related to content of the 
        frame's TRILL encapsulation for use in subsequent reverse 
        traffic in a manner directly analogous to bridge learning. 

        Note that an egress RBridge will be the Designated RBridge on 
        the local segment accessed via its egress interface(s). If the 
        received frame does not correspond to a learned MAC destination 
        address at an egress interface, it will forward the frame on all 
        interfaces for which it is either the designated RBridge. If the 
        received frame does correspond to a learned MAC destination 
        address at an egress interface, the RBridge will forward the 
        frame via that interface only. 

     5.3. Transit Forwarding Operations 

        There are two models for transit forwarding within a TRILL 
        Campus: unicast frame forwarding for known destinations, and 
        everything else.  The difference between the two is in how the 
        encapsulation is determined. Exactly one of these models will be 
        selected - in any instantiation of this architecture- for each 
        of the following forwarding modes: 

        o  Unicast frame forwarding 
        o  Forwarding of non-unicast frames 
           o  Broadcast frame forwarding 
           o  Multicast frame forwarding 
           o  Frame flooding 

     5.3.1. Unicast 

        In unicast forwarding, the TRILL header is specific to the 
        egress RBridge and MAC destination in the outer Ethernet 
        encapsulation is specific to the next hop RBridge.  

        As the frame is prepared for transmission at each RBridge, the 
        next hop MAC destination information is determined at that local 
        RBridge using a corresponding Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database 
        entry based on the TRILL "shim" header.  

      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 22] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     5.3.2. Broadcast, Multicast and Flooding 

        RBridge Distribution Trees are used for forwarding of broadcast, 
        multicast and unknown destination frames across the TRILL 
        Campus. In a simple implementation, it is possible to use the 
        Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database entries for all 
        frames of these types.  

        However, this approach results in possibly severe inefficiencies 
        in at least the multicast case. 

        As a consequence, instantiations of this architecture should 
        allow for local optimizations on a hop by hop basis. 

        Examples of such optimizations are included in the sections 
        below. 

     5.3.2-1. Broadcast 

        The path followed in transit forwarding of broadcast frames will 
        have been established through actions initiated by each RBridge 
        (as any RBridge is eligible to subsequently become an ingress 
        RBridge) in the process of computing Multi-destination TRILL 
        Forwarding Database entries.  

        The protocol specification will most likely require each RBridge 
        to assume that it may be a transit as well as an ingress and 
        egress RBridge and establish forwarding information relative to 
        itself and each of its peer RBridges, and stored in the Multi-
        destination TRILL Forwarding Database.  At least one exception 
        case exists and that is when RBridges are configured to treat a 
        given link as a point to point link between two RBridges. 

        Forwarding information should logically exist in two forms: 
        transit encapsulation information for interfaces over which the 
        RBridge will forward a multipoint frame to one or more adjacent 
        RBridges and a decapsulation indication for each interface over 
        which the RBridge may egress frames from the TRILL Campus. In 
        each case, the Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database 
        includes some identification of the interface on which a frame 
        is forwarded toward any specific egress RBridge for frames 
        received from any specific ingress RBridge. 

        Note that an interface over which an RBridge may egress frames 
        is any interface for which the RBridge is a Designated RBridge. 
        RBridges must not wait to determine that one (or more) non-
        RBridge Ethernet nodes is present in an interface before 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 23] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        deciding to forward decapsulated broadcast frames on that 
        interface.  Again, an exception case would exist if RBridges 
        have been configured to treat a local link as a point to point 
        connection between two RBridges. 

        Forwarding information is selected for each broadcast frame 
        received by any RBridge (based on identifying the ingress 
        RBridge for the frame) for all corresponding Multi-destination 
        TRILL Forwarding Database entries. Each RBridge is thus required 
        to replicate one RBridge encapsulated broadcast frame for each 
        interface that is determined from Multi-destination TRILL 
        Forwarding Database entries corresponding to the frame's ingress 
        RBridge. This includes decapsulated broadcast frames for each 
        interface for which it is the designated RBridge. 

        Note that frame replication and forwarding should be scoped by 
        VLAN if VLAN support is provided. Also note that a Designated 
        RBridge (DRB) may be required to transmit a decapsulated frame 
        on the interface on which it received the RBridge encapsulated 
        frame.  

        This approach for broadcast forwarding might be considered to 
        add complexity because replication occurs at all RBridges along 
        the ingress RBridge tree, potentially for both RBridge 
        encapsulated and decapsulated broadcast frames. However, the 
        replication process is similar to replication of broadcast 
        traffic in 802.1D bridges with the exception that additional 
        replication may be required at each interface for egress from 
        the TRILL Campus. 

        Note that the additional replication associated with TRILL 
        Campus egress may be made to exactly conform to 802.1D bridge 
        broadcast replication in implementations that model a TRILL 
        Campus egress as a separate logical interface. 

        Using this approach results in one and only one copy of the 
        broadcast frame being delivered to each egress RBridge. 

     5.3.2-2. Multicast 

        Multicast forwarding is reducible to broadcast forwarding in the 
        simplest (default) case. However, protocol specifications may 
        require, or recommend and implementations may choose - using 
        mechanisms that are out of scope for this document - to optimize 
        multicast forwarding.  In order for this to work effectively, 
        however, support for awareness of multicast "interest" is 
        required for all RBridges. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 24] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        Without optimization, multicast frames are injected by the 
        ingress RBridge onto an RDT by - for instance - encapsulating 
        the frame with a MAC destination multicast address, and 
        forwarding it according to its local Multi-destination TRILL 
        Forwarding Database. Again, without optimization, each RBridge 
        along the path toward all egress RBridges will similarly forward 
        the frame according to their local Multi-destination TRILL 
        Forwarding Database. 

        Using this approach results in one and only one copy of the 
        multicast frame being delivered to appropriate egress RBridges. 
        However, using this approach, multicast delivery is identical to 
        broadcast delivery - hence very inefficient. 

        In any optimization approach, RBridge encapsulated multicast 
        frames will use either a broadcast or a group MAC destination 
        address. In either case, the recognizably distinct destination 
        addressing allows a frame forwarding decision to be made at each 
        RBridge hop. RBridges may thus be able to take advantage of 
        local knowledge of multicast distribution requirements to 
        eliminate the forwarding requirement on interfaces for which 
        there is no recipient interested in receiving frames associated 
        with any specific group address. 

        As stated earlier, in order for RBridges to be able to implement 
        multicast optimization, distribution of learned multicast group 
        "interest" information must be provided - and propagated - by 
        all RBridges.  Mechanisms for learning and propagating multicast 
        group participation by RBridges is out of scope in this document 
        but may be defined in RBridge protocol specification(s). 

        Note that, because the multicast optimization would - in 
        principle - further scope and reduce broadcast traffic, two 
        things may be said: 

        o  It is not necessary that all implementations in a deployment 
           implement the optimization (though all must support the data 
           required to implement it in RBridge peers) in order for any 
           local multicast optimization (consistent with the above 
           description) to work; 
        o  Introduction of a multicast optimization will not result in 
           potential forwarding loops where broadcast forwarding would 
           not do so. 

        In the simplest case, the ingress RBridge for a given multicast 
        frame will re-use the MAC destination group address of a 
        received multicast frame.  However this may not be required as 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 25] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        it is possible that the mechanisms specified to support 
        multicast will require examination of the decapsulated MAC 
        destination group address at each RBridge that implements the 
        optimization. 

        Specifics of multicast forwarding are to be defined in protocol 
        specifications. 

     5.3.2-3. Flooding 

        Flooding is similarly reducible to broadcast forwarding in the 
        simplest (default) case - with the exception that a frame being 
        flooded across the TRILL Campus is typically a unicast frame for 
        which no Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database entry exists at the 
        ingress RBridge. This is not a minor distinction, however, 
        because it impacts the way that addressing may be used to 
        accomplish flooding within the TRILL Campus. 

        An ingress RBridge that does not have a Unicast TRILL Forwarding 
        Database entry for a received frame MAC destination address, 
        will inject the frame onto the ingress RBridge Tree by - for 
        instance - encapsulating the frame with a MAC destination 
        broadcast address, and forwarding it according to its local 
        Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database. Without 
        optimization, each RBridge along the path toward all egress 
        RBridges will similarly forward the frame according to their 
        local Multi-destination TRILL Forwarding Database. 

        Using this approach results in one and only one copy of the 
        flooded frame being delivered to all egress RBridges. 

        However implementations may choose to optimize flooding. A 
        Flooding optimization will only work at any specific RBridge if 
        that RBridge re-evaluates the original (decapsulated) unicast 
        frame.   

        Any flooding optimization would operate similarly to the 
        multicast optimization described above, except that - instead of 
        requiring local information about multicast distribution - each 
        RBridge implementing the optimization will need only to lookup 
        the MAC destination address of the original (decapsulated) frame 
        in its local Unicast TRILL Forwarding Database. If an entry is 
        found, the frame could then be forwarded only if the specific 
        RBridge is on the shortest path between the originating ingress 
        RBridge and the appropriate egress RBridge.  This could be 
        implemented - for example - as a specialized Multi-destination 
        TRILL Forwarding Database entry. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 26] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        Note that, because a flooding optimization would - in principle 
        - further scope and reduce flooded traffic, two things may be 
        said: 

        o  It is not necessary that all implementations in a deployment 
           support the optimization in order for any local flooding 
           optimization (consistent with the above description) to work 
           (hence such an optimization is optional);  
        o  Introduction of the flooding optimization will not result in 
           potential forwarding loops where flooded forwarding would not 
           do so. 

        Because a forwarding decision can be made at each hop, it is 
        possible to terminate flooding early if a Unicast TRILL 
        Forwarding Database for the original MAC destination was in the 
        process of being propagated when flooding for the frame was 
        started.  It is therefore possible to reduce the amount of 
        flooding to some degree in this case.  

        Specifics of a flooding optimization - beyond the above proof of 
        the concept that such a thing could be done safely - is out of 
        scope for this document and should be out of scope generally in 
        all protocol specifications for which the above analysis holds. 

     5.4. Routing Protocol Operation 

        The details of routing protocol operation are determined by the 
        choice to use IS-IS routing.  These details would be defined in 
        appropriate protocol specification(s). Protocol specifications 
        in this case may include both RBridge protocols (such as [3]), 
        and specifications offering a generalized enhancement to IS-IS. 

        Protocol specifications should identify the means by which IS-IS 
        meets the peer and topology discovery, and path computation 
        needs of the specific protocol - including which IS-IS optional 
        features and enhancements (if any) are required for support of 
        specified RBridge operations.  

     5.5. Other Bridging and Ethernet Protocol Operations 

        In defining this architecture, several interaction models have 
        been considered for protocol interaction between RBridges and 
        other L2 forwarding devices - in particular, 802.1D bridges. 
        Whatever model we adopt for these interactions must allow for 
        the possibility of other types of L2 forwarding devices. Hence, 
        a minimal participation model is most likely to be successful 
        over the long term, assuming that RBridges are used in a L2 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 27] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        topology that would be functional if RBridges were replaced by 
        other types of L2 forwarding devices. 

        Toward this end, RBridges - and the TRILL Campus as a whole - 
        could (in theory) participate in Ethernet link protocols, 
        notably the spanning tree protocol (STP) on the ingress/egress 
        links using exactly one of the following interaction models: 

        o  Transparent Participation (Transparent-STP) 
        o  Active Participation (Participate-STP) 
        o  Blocking Participation (Block-STP) 

        Only one of these variants would be supported by an instance of 
        this architecture. All RBridges within a single TRILL Campus 
        must use the same model for interacting with non-RBridge 
        protocols. Furthermore, it is the explicit intent that only one 
        of these models is ultimately supported - at least as a default 
        mode of compliant implementations. 

        This architecture assumes RBridges block STP. 

     5.5.1. Wiring Closet Problem 

        There is at least one remaining issue with this assumption and 
        that has been referred to as the "wiring closet problem."  The 
        essential problem is described in this subsection. 

        Given this configuration of bridges in a wiring closet, and an 
        RBridge core: 

           -----> B-1 <----------------> RB-a <-----. 
                   |                                 \ 
                   /                                  > RBridge CORE 
                   |                                 / 
           -----> B-2 <----------------> RB-b <-----' 

        The link between (802.1D) bridges B-1 and B-2 is meant to be 
        disabled by STP.  In the RBridge case, however, there is no 
        indication (from STP) that this link is redundant.  Moreover, in 
        order to avoid breaking bridge learning, either RB-a or RB-b 
        will be the DR and - as a result, only one of the links (B-
        1<=>RB-a, B-2<=>RB-b) will get used. 

        One solution to this problem is to include - as a configuration 
        option, for instance - the ability to enable negotiation of (or 
        use of a pre-defined, or configurable) pseudo-bridge identifier 
        to be used in any of the variations of STP. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 28] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        One - (near) zero-configuration - option we've considered would 
        be to use a well-known bridge identifier that each RBridge would 
        use as a common pseudo-bridge identifier.  Such an ID, used in 
        combination with other STP configuration parameters, would most 
        likely have to be guaranteed to win the root bridge election 
        process in order to be a reasonable and useful default. 

        However, because this architecture assumes RBridges block STP, 
        participation in any form of STP is assumed to take place in an 
        in-line, co-located bridge function. Such a bridge function is 
        in addition to RBridge architectural functionality described in 
        this document.  Implementations may include such functionality 
        and will very likely require some minimal configuration to turn 
        it on, in vendor specific RBridge implementations.  An example 
        of a minimal configuration would be to assign a pseudo-bridge 
        identifier to (the local in-line co-located bridge associated 
        with) a specific RBridge port. 

        For reasons of interoperability, specific protocol proposals to 
        address the needs of this architecture may specify exactly how a 
        co-located bridge will operate in this case (if such co-located 
        bridge functionality is included in an implementation), as well 
        as whether or not inclusion of such co-location is required. 

        As a further note, one of the problems that should be addressed 
        - assuming that this problem is to be resolved - is how to make 
        certain the solution is robust against configuration error.  In 
        any solution that requires configuration of a pseudo-bridge ID 
        that is common across a TRILL Campus, for example, it is 
        possible to guard against configuration errors by using an 
        election process (based on the root bridge election process) to 
        determine which configured ID will be used by all RBridges in 
        common - assuming that multiple pseudo-bridge IDs are 
        inadvertently configured. 

        Finally, note that there is a chicken-and-egg problem associated 
        with RBridge participation in STP where RBridges may themselves 
        be connected by spanning trees. 

     6. How RBridges Address the TRILL Problem Space 

        The RBridge architecture addresses the following aspects of the 
        requirements identified in reference [2] through the use of a 
        link-state routing protocol and defined forwarding behaviors: 

        o  Inefficient Paths 

      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 29] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        o  Robustness to Link Interruption 

        In addition, using a logical model of "separation of functions" 
        this architecture allows specifications and implementations to 
        address existing and developing Ethernet extensions and 
        enhancements, and provides a background against which protocol 
        specifications may address: concerns about convergence under 
        dynamic network changes, and optimizations for VLAN, ARP/ND, 
        Multicast, etc. 

     7. Conclusions 

        This document discusses options considered and factors affecting 
        any protocol specific choices that may be made in instantiating 
        the TRILL architecture using RBridges. 

        Specific architectural and protocol instantiations should take 
        these into consideration. In particular, protocol, encapsulation 
        and procedure specifications should allow for potential 
        optimizations described in the architectural document to the 
        maximum extent possible. 

        Also, this document addresses considerations relative to 
        interaction with existing technology and "future-proofing" 
        solutions.  For both simplicity in description, and robust long 
        term implementation of the technology, this document recommends 
        the use of clear distinction - at all possible points - of 
        definitions, protocols, procedures, etc. from related (but not 
        identical) specifications and interactions. 

        In particular, this document recommends the use of a 
        "collocation model" in addressing issues with combining RBridge, 
        Router and 802.1D bridge behavior.  

     8. Security Considerations 

        As one stated requirement of this architecture is the need to be 
        able to provide an L2 delivery mechanism that is potentially 
        configuration free, the default operation mode for instances of 
        this architecture should assume a trust model that does not 
        require configuration of security information. This is - in fact 
        - an identical trust model to that used by Ethernet devices in 
        general. 

        In consequence, the default mode does not require - but also 
        does not preclude - the use of established security mechanisms 

      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 30] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        associated with the existing protocols that may be extended or 
        enhanced to satisfy this document's architectural definitions. 

        In general, this architecture suggest the use of a link-state 
        routing protocol - modified as required to support L2 reach-
        ability and link state between RBridges. Any mechanisms defined 
        to support secure protocol exchanges between link-state routing 
        peers may be extended to support this architecture as well. 

        This architecture also suggests use of additional encapsulation 
        mechanisms and - to the extent that any proposed mechanism may 
        include (or be extended to include) secure transmission - it may 
        be desirable to provide such (optional) extensions. 

        To the extent possible, any extensions of protocol or 
        encapsulation should allow for at least one mode of operation 
        that doesn't require configuration - if necessary, for limited 
        use in a physically secure deployment. 

     9. IANA Considerations 

        This document has no direct IANA considerations. It does 
        suggest, that protocols that instantiate the architecture use a 
        TRILL header as a wrapper on the payload for RBridge to RBridge 
        traffic, and this TRILL header may be identified by a new 
        Ethertype in the tunneled Ethernet link header. This Ethertype, 
        identified in an Ethernet header, could be allocated by the 
        IEEE. 

     10. Acknowledgments 

        The initial work for this document was largely done by Joe 
        Touch, based on work he and Radia Perlman completed earlier. 
        Subsequent changes are not to be blamed on either of them. 

        In addition, the current text has been helped substantially by 
        comments and suggestions from the TRILL working group, working 
        group chairs, and from Ron Bonica, Stewart Bryant, Joel Halpern, 
        Guillermo Ibanez and Russ White in particular.  Also, a great 
        deal of work was recently done - by Joe Touch, Radia Perlman, 
        Dinesh Dutt and Silvano Gai - in an effort to align terminology 
        and concepts used in this document with those also used in the 
        other TRILL documents. 




      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 31] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     11. References  

     11.1. Normative References 

        None. 

     11.2. Informative References 

        [1]   Perlman, R., "RBridges: Transparent Routing", Proc. 
              Infocom 2005, March 2004. 

        [2]   Touch, J., R. Perlman, (ed.) "Transparent Interconnection 
              of Lots of Links (TRILL): Problem and Applicability 
              Statement", work in progress, draft-touch-trill-prob-
              00.txt, November, 2005. 

        [3]   Perlman, R., S. Gai, D. Dutt, D. Eastlake III, "RBridges: 
              Base Protocol Specification", work in progress, draft-
              ietf-trill-rbridge-protocol-05.txt, July, 2007. 

        [4]   Postel, J., "INTERNET PROTOCOL", RFC 791, September, 1981. 

        [5]   802.1D-2004 IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area 
              Networks: Media Access Control (MAC) Bridges 

        [6]   Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for Routing in TCP/IP and 
              Dual Environments", RFC 1195, December, 1990. 

        [7]   Plummer, D., "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol -- 
              or -- Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit 
              Ethernet Address for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware", 
              RFC 826, November, 1982.  

        [8]   802.1Q-2005 IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area 
              Networks: Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks 
              (Incorporates IEEE Std 802.1Q-1998, IEEE Std 802.1uT-2001, 
              IEEE Std 802.1vT-2001, and IEEE 802.1sT-2002) 

     12. Author's Addresses 

        Editor: 






      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 32] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

        Eric Gray 
        Ericsson 
        900 Chelmsford Street 
        Lowell, MA, 01851 
        Phone: +1 (978) 275-7470 
        EMail: Eric.Gray@Ericsson.com 
         
        Contributors: 
         
        Joe Touch 
        USC/ISI 
        4676 Admiralty Way 
        Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695, U.S.A. 
        Phone: +1 (310) 448-9151 
        EMail: touch@isi.edu 
        URL:   http://www.isi.edu/touch 
         
        Radia Perlman 
        Sun Microsystems 
            
        EMail: Radia.Perlman@sun.com 
         

     Intellectual Property Statement 

        The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
        any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
        claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
        technology described in this document or the extent to which any 
        license under such rights might or might not be available; nor 
        does it represent that it has made any independent effort to 
        identify any such rights.  Information on the procedures with 
        respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and 
        BCP 79. 

        Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
        assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
        attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
        use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
        specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
        repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

        The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
        any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
        proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be 
        required to implement this standard.  Please address the 
        information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 33] 
         




     Internet-Draft           RBridge Architecture         November 2007 
         

     Disclaimer of Validity 

        This document and the information contained herein are provided 
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
        REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, 
        THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM 
        ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO 
        ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT 
        INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
        OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

     Copyright Statement 

        Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

        This document is subject to the rights, licenses and 
        restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth 
        therein, the authors retain all their rights. 

     Acknowledgment 

        Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
        Internet Society. 

         






















      
      
     Gray                      Expires May, 2008               [Page 34] 
         
