



HTTPBIS                                                       M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Standards Track                            July 4, 2014
Expires: January 5, 2015


             Client Authentication over New TLS Connection
                     draft-thomson-httpbis-cant-01

Abstract

   This document defines an HTTP authentication scheme that can be added
   to an error response to indicate to a client that a successful
   response will only be provided over a new TLS connection, and only if
   the client has provided a certificate on that connection.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Client Certificate Challenge  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Client Certificate Challenge Parameters . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Distinguished Name Parameter ("dn") . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Fingerprint Parameters ("sha-256", ...) . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.2.  Informational References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   Client authentication in HTTP sometimes relies on certificate-based
   authentication of clients in Transport Layer Security (TLS)
   ([RFC5246], [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13]).  Some existing uses of client
   authentication rely on TLS renegotiation, triggering renegotiation
   and a request for a client certificate in response to a request for a
   particular resource.

   HTTP/2 [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2] forbids the use of renegotiation,
   except for at the very beginning of a connection.  TLS 1.3
   [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] does not support renegotiation at all.  Both of
   these restrictions result in a server being unable to use
   renegotiation to conditionally request certificate-based
   authentication for clients in those protocol versions.

   This document defines a new authentication scheme,
   "ClientCertificate", for use in HTTP authentication challenges
   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth].  In combination with the 401
   (Unauthorized) status code, this indicates that client authentication
   at the TLS layer is required in order to access the resource.

1.1.  Conventions and Terminology

   At times, this document falls back on shorthands for establishing
   interoperability requirements on implementations: the capitalized
   words "MUST", "SHOULD" and "MAY".  These terms are defined in
   [RFC2119].






Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


2.  Client Certificate Challenge

   A new authentication scheme ([I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth]) for the
   "WWW-Authenticate" and "Proxy-Authenticate" header fields is defined
   with the name "ClientCertificate".

   This challenge cannot be satisfied by constructing an Authorization
   header field [I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth], it can only be satisfied by
   making the request on a TLS connection where an appropriate
   certificate has been provided by the client.

   This authentication scheme cannot be used for "http" URIs.

   To effectively use this authentication scheme, a new connection is
   needed for every protection space used by a given origin server.  A
   client can use the "ClientCertificate" challenge as a trigger to open
   a new connection and to use client authentication on that connection.

   For the new connection, a client can use the mechanism in
   [I-D.thomson-tls-care] to prompt the server to request a client
   certificate, to avoid the problem where the server doesn't know to
   make a CertificateRequest.

   [[TBD: In TLS 1.3 a client can unilaterally provide authentication
   information without a request from the server.]]

   [[TBD For versions of TLS prior to 1.3,]] a client can immediately
   request renegotiation immediately after the initial handshake.  A
   server that supports conditional client authentication MUST request a
   client certificate if it receives a renegotiation request prior to
   receiving any application data.

3.  Client Certificate Challenge Parameters

   In addition to the "realm" parameter, a challenge with this
   authentication scheme MAY include parameters that provide a client
   with information that assists with selecting an appropriate
   certificate to offer.  This can be necessary, since the necessary
   context that the server relies on is derived from the request and
   this is not available at the server when establishing a new
   connection.

3.1.  Distinguished Name Parameter ("dn")

   The "dn" attribute includes a distinguished name for the certificate
   authority.  This matches the "certificate_authorities" value sent in
   a TLS CertificateRequest handshake message.  The "dn" parameter is
   repeated for every distinguished name that is permitted.



Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


   A distinguished name is defined in Abstract Syntax Notation number 1
   (ASN.1) [X680] and encoded using Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER)
   [X690] when used in TLS.  The value of the "dn" parameter is a DER-
   encoded distinguished name that is further encoded using base 64
   [RFC4648] with the URL and filename safe alphabet.  Multiple
   alternative distinguished names are carried by repeating the "dn"
   parameter.

   dn-parameter = base64url
   base64url    = ALPHA / DIGIT / "_" / "~"

   [[ Issue: We could use the string encoding defined in RFC 4514, which
   could be friendlier for production and consumption.  That means that
   this would need to use quoted-string, RFC 4514 escaping would need to
   be escaped twice, and non-ASCII characters in the DN would need to be
   escaped.  Since the fingerprint parameters are strictly better
   anyway, and it's also highly likely that selection criteria are
   unnecessary due to clients rarely having more than one certificate
   for any given site, I'm not inclined to support that level of
   complication. ]]

3.2.  Fingerprint Parameters ("sha-256", ...)

   A server can instead include the fingerprint of a certificate that is
   on the certificate chain of an acceptable client certificate.  For
   instance, this might include the fingerprint of an acceptable end-
   entity certificate, though what is more likely is that this includes
   the fingerprint of a certificate issuer.

   The name of fingerprint parameters is taken from the hash function
   textual names registry defined in [RFC4572].  Clients MUST support a
   "sha-256" parameter, which indicates that the fingerprint is
   calculated using SHA-256 [RFC6234].  The value of a fingerprint
   parameter is encoded using base 64 [RFC4648] with the URL and
   filename safe alphabet.

   sha-256-parameter = base64url

   Like the "dn" parameter, fingerprint parameters can be repeated to
   provide clients with alternative values.











Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


   For example, a server could indicate that a set of permissible
   certificates based on a SHA-256 fingerprint, as follows:

   WWW-Authenticate: ClientCertificate realm="home",
                       sha-256=NjUwZjA0Mzcy..., sha-256=MzJiMTQ3ODF...

   These fingerprint values could be matched against an end-entity
   certificate or any issuer in the certificate chain.  Note that line
   breaks are added to this example for formatting reasons only.

   Where fingerprints are provided with multiple hash function names, a
   client can use any of the provided algorithms to determine which
   certificate to provide.

   Note that strong collision-resistance is not important for the hash
   function that is used for certificate fingerprints, since clients
   only use this value to select between available certificates.  The
   only consequence of a collision is that it becomes more difficult for
   the client to select the correct certificate.

4.  Security Considerations

   Clients that support this authentication scheme will create a new
   connection each time that they see a challenge.  This could be
   exploited in order to generate additional load from connections on
   both server and client.  This authentication scheme MUST only be used
   for "https" URIs.

   Using new connections for client authentication has additional
   processing costs to the client in proving access to the private keys
   associated with the client certificate; and to the server in proving
   access to the private keys associated with their certificate twice in
   the case that the client opts for confidentiality protection on the
   client certificate (though only for TLS versions prior to 1.3, see
   Section 5).

   HTTP/2 [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2] allows clients to use the same
   connection for multiple domains.  Certificate-based client
   authentication as defined by this specification is bound to a single
   canonical root URI (see [I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth]).  This could
   create issues where the security properties of a connection become
   unclear.  Clients MUST ensure that a client-authenticated connection
   is only used for the canonical root URI for which it was created.








Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


5.  Privacy Considerations

   TLS version 1.2 and prior do not provide confidentiality protection
   for client certificates in the initial handshake.  Confidentiality
   protection for handshake messages, including the client certificate,
   is provided only for renegotiation handshakes.

   Clients can initiate renegotiation immediately after the TLS
   connection is established to ensure that passive observers aren't
   able to view the selected certificate.

   Revealing that a certificate is in use could alert a passive observer
   to the fact that a client has requested particular resources, thereby
   aiding traffic analysis.  While renegotiation hides the contents of a
   client certificate, the presence of a new connection could reveal
   that some form of client authentication is being used.  This is an
   especially strong signal in HTTP/2, where new connections are
   discouraged and are therefore exceptional.

   Clients MUST avoid offering their client certificate if it will lack
   confidentiality protection, unless they are explicitly configured to
   send credentials in the clear.

6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to create an entry in the HTTP Authentication
   Scheme Registry with the following information:

   Authentication Scheme Name:  ClientCertificate

   Pointer to specification text:  This document

   Notes  This scheme does not rely on the Authorization header field.

7.  Acknowledgements

   Eric Rescorla helped identify the problem and formulate this
   mechanism.  Julian Reschke and Michael Koeller provided excellent
   feedback.  Andrei Popov observed that the information in the TLS
   CertificateRequest message is needed so that clients can select an
   appropriate certificate.

8.  References








Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth]
              Fielding, R. and J. Reschke, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol
              (HTTP/1.1): Authentication", draft-ietf-httpbis-p7-auth-26
              (work in progress), February 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13]
              Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3", draft-ietf-tls-tls13-01 (work
              in progress), April 2014.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4572]  Lennox, J., "Connection-Oriented Media Transport over the
              Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in the Session
              Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 4572, July 2006.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, October 2006.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC6234]  Eastlake, D. and T. Hansen, "US Secure Hash Algorithms
              (SHA and SHA-based HMAC and HKDF)", RFC 6234, May 2011.

   [X680]     ITU-T, "Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation
              One (ASN.1): Specification of basic notation", ISO/IEC
              8824-1:2002, 2002.

   [X690]     ITU-T, "Information technology - ASN.1 encoding Rules:
              Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical
              Encoding Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules
              (DER)", ISO/IEC 8825-1:2002, 2002.

8.2.  Informational References

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2]
              Belshe, M., Peon, R., and M. Thomson, "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol version 2", draft-ietf-httpbis-http2-13 (work in
              progress), June 2014.

   [I-D.thomson-tls-care]
              Thomson, M., "Client Authentication Request Extension for
              (D)TLS", draft-thomson-tls-care-00 (work in progress),
              March 2014.



Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CANT                         July 2014


Author's Address

   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla
   331 E Evelyn Street
   Mountain View, CA  94041
   US

   Email: martin.thomson@gmail.com










































Thomson                  Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 8]
