
INTERNET DRAFT
<draft-ietf-ipoib-architecture-03.txt>                 Vivek Kashyap
Expiration Date: April, 2004                                     IBM
                                                       October, 2003


                    IP over InfiniBand(IPoIB) Architecture

Status of this memo

        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
        with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
        groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
        documents as Internet- Drafts.

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use
        Internet-Drafts as Reference material or to cite them other
        than as ``work in progress''.

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed
        at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

        This memo provides information for the Internet community.
        This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
        Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

        InfiniBand is a high speed, channel based interconnect between
        systems and devices.

        This document presents an overview of the InfiniBand
        architecture. It further describes the requirements and
        guidelines for the transmission of IP over InfiniBand.
        Discussions in this document are applicable to both IPv4 and
        IPv6 unless explicitly specified. The encapsulation of IP over



Kashyap                                                         [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        InfiniBand and the mechanism for IP address resolution on IB
        fabrics are covered in [IPOIB_ENCAP] and [IPOIB_DHCP].

Table of Contents

        1.0         Introduction to InfiniBand
        1.1         InfiniBand Architecture Specification
        1.2         Overview of InfiniBand Architecture
        1.2.1       InfiniBand Addresses
        1.2.1.1     Unicast GIDs
        1.2.1.2     Multicast GIDs
        1.3         InfiniBand Multicast Group Management
        1.3.1       Multicast Member Record
        1.3.1.1     JoinState
        1.3.2       Join and Leave operations
        1.3.2.1     Creating a Multicast Group
        1.3.2.3     Deleting a Multicast Group
        1.3.2.4     Multicast Group Create/Delete Traps
        2.0         Management of InfiniBand Subnet
        3.0         IP over IB
        3.1         InfiniBand as Datalink
        3.2         Multicast Support
        3.2.1       Mapping IP Multicast to IB Multicast
        3.2.2       Transient Flag in IB MGIDs
        3.3         IP Subnet Across IB Subnets ?
        4.0         IP Subnets in InfiniBand Fabrics
        4.1         IPoIB VLANs
        4.2         Multicast in IPoIB Subnets
        4.2.1       Sending IP Multicast Datagrams
        4.2.2       Receiving Multicast Packets
        4.2.3       Forwarding Multicast Packets
        4.2.4       Impact of InfiniBand Architecture Limits
        4.2.5       Leaving/Deleting a Multicast Group
        5.0         QoS and Related Issues
        6.0         Security Considerations
        7.0         Acknowledgements
        8.0         References
        9.0         Author's Address

1.0 Introduction to InfiniBand

        The InfiniBand Trade Association(IBTA) was formed to develop
        an I/O specification to deliver a channel based, switched
        fabric technology. The InfiniBand standard is aimed at meeting
        the requirements of scalability, reliability, availability and
        performance of servers in data centers.





Kashyap                                                         [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


1.1 InfiniBand Architecture Specification

        The InfiniBand Trade Association specification is available
        for download from http://www.infinibandta.org.

1.2 Overview of InfiniBand Architecture

        For a more complete overview the reader is referred to
        chapter 3 of the InfiniBand specification.

        InfiniBand Architecture (IBA) defines a System Area
        Network(SAN) for connecting multiple independent processor
        platforms, I/O platforms and I/O devices. The IBA SAN is a
        communications and management infrastructure supporting both
        I/O and inter-processor communications for one or more
        computer systems.

        An IBA SAN consists of processor nodes and I/O units connected
        through an IBA fabric made up of cascaded switches and IB
        routers (connecting IB subnets). I/O units can range in
        complexity from single ASIC IBA attached devices such as a LAN
        adapter to a large memory rich RAID subsystem.

        An IBA network may be subdivided into subnets interconnected
        by routers. These are IB routers and IB subnets and not IP
        routers or IP subnets. This document will refer to InfiniBand
        routers and subnets as 'IB routers' and 'IB subnets'
        respectively. The IP routers and IP subnets will be referred
        to as 'routers' and 'subnets' respectively.

        Each IB node or switch may attach to a single or multiple
        switches or directly with each other. Each IB unit interfaces
        with the link by way of channel adapters (CAs). The
        architecture supports multiple CAs per unit with each CA
        providing one or more ports that connect to the fabric. Each
        CA appears as a node to the fabric.

        The ports are the endpoints to which the data is sent.
        However, each of the ports may include multiple QPs (queue
        pairs) that may be directly addressed from a remote peer. From
        the point of view of data transfer the QP number (QPN) is part
        of the address.

        IBA supports both connection oriented and datagram service
        between the ports. The peers are identified by QPN and the
        port identifier. There are a two exceptions. QPNs are not used
        when packets are multicast. QPNs are also not used in the raw
        datagram mode.



Kashyap                                                         [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        A port, in a data packet, is identified by a local ID (LID)
        and optionally a Global ID (GID). The GID in the packet is
        needed only when communicating across an IB subnet though it
        may always be included.

        The GID is 128 bits long and is formed by the concatenation of
        a 64 bit IB subnet prefix and a 64 bit EUI-64 compliant
        portion (GUID). The LID is a 16 bit value that is assigned
        when the port becomes active. Note that the GUID is the only
        persistent identifier of a port. However, it cannot be used as
        an address in a packet. If the prefix is modified then the GID
        may change. The subnet manager may attempt to keep the LID
        values constant across reboots but that is not a requirement.

        The assignment of the GID and the LID is done by the subnet
        manager. Every IB subnet has at least one subnet manager
        component that controls the fabric. It assigns the LIDs and
        GIDs. The subnet manager also programs the switches so that
        they route packets between destinations. The subnet manager
        and a related component, the subnet administrator (SA) are the
        central repository of all information that is required to
        setup and bring up the fabric.

        IB routers are components that route packets between IB
        subnets based on the GIDs. Thus within an IB subnet a packet
        may or may not include a GID but when going across an IB
        subnet the GID must be included. A LID is always needed in a
        packet since the destination within a subnet is determined by
        it.

        A CA and a switch may have multiple ports. Each CA port is
        assigned its own LID or a range of LIDs. The ports of a switch
        are not addressable by LIDs/GIDs or in other words, are
        transparent to other end nodes. Each port has its own set of
        buffers. The buffering is channeled through virtual lanes(VL)
        where each VL has its own flow control. There may be up to 16
        VLs.

        VLs provide a mechanism for creating multiple virtual links
        within a single physical link. All ports must support VL15
        which is reserved exclusively for subnet management datagrams
        and hence doesn't concern the IPoIB discussions. The actual VL
        that a packet uses is configured by the SM in the
        switch/channel adapter tables and is determined based on the
        Service Level (SL) specified in every packet. There are 16
        possible SLs.





Kashyap                                                         [Page 4]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        In addition to the features described above viz. Queue
        Pairs(QPs), Service Levels(SLs) and addressing(GID/LID), IBA
        also defines the following:

        Partitioning:

                Every packet, but for the raw datagrams, carries the
                partition key (P_key). These values are used for
                isolation in the fabric. A switch (this is an optional
                feature) may be programmed by the SM to drop packets
                not having a certain key. The CA ports always check
                for the P_Keys. A CA port may belong to multiple
                partitions. P_Key checking is optional at IB routers.

                A P_Key may be described as having 'limited
                membership' or 'full membership'. For a packet to be
                accepted at least one of the P_Keys i.e. the P_Key in
                the packet or the P_Key in the port, must be 'full
                membership' P_Keys.

        Q_Keys:

                Q_Keys are used to enforce access rights for reliable
                and unreliable IB datagram services. Raw datagram
                services don't use Q_Keys. At communication
                establishment the endpoints exchange the Q_Keys and
                must always use the relevant Q_Keys when communicating
                with one another. Multicast packets use the Q_Key
                associated with the multicast group.

                Q_Keys with the most significant bit set are
                considered controlled Q_Keys (such as the GSI Q_Key)
                and a HCA does not allow a consumer to arbitrarily
                specify a controlled Q_Key. An attempt to send a
                controlled Q_Key results in using the Q_Key in the QP
                context. Thus the OS maintains control since it can
                configure the QP context for the controlled Q_Key for
                privileged consumers. It must be noted that though the
                notion of a 'controlled Q_Key' is suggested by IB
                specification it does not require its use or
                implementation.

        Multicast support:

                A switch may support multicasting i.e. replication of
                packets across multiple output ports. This is an
                optional feature. Similarly, support for
                sending/receiving multicast packets is optional in



Kashyap                                                         [Page 5]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


                CAs. A multicast group is identified by a GID. The GID
                format is as defined in [RFC2373] on IPv6 addressing.
                Thus from an IPv6 over InfiniBand's point of view the
                data link multicast address looks like the network
                address. An IB port must explicitly join a multicast
                group by sending a request to the SM to receive
                multicast packets. A port may send packets to any
                multicast group. In both cases the multicast LID to be
                used in the packets is received from the SM.

        There are 6 methods for data transfer in IB architecture.
        These are :

          1. Unreliable Datagram (unacknowledged - connectionless)

                The UD service is connectionless and unacknowledged.
                It allows the QP to communicate with any unreliable
                datagram QP on any node.

                The switches and hence each link can support only a
                certain MTU. The MTU ranges are 256 bytes, 512 bytes,
                1024 bytes, 2048 bytes, 4096 bytes. A UD packet cannot
                be larger than the smallest link MTU between the two
                peers.

          2. Reliable Datagram    (acknowledged - multiplexed)

                The RD service is multiplexed over connections between
                nodes called End to end contexts (EEC) which allows
                each RD QP to communicate with any RD QP on any node
                with an established EEC. Multiple QPs can use the same
                EEC and a single QP can use multiple EECs (one for
                each remote node per reliable datagram domain).

          3. Reliable Connected (acknowledged - connection oriented)

                The RC service associates a local QP with one and only
                one remote QP. The message sizes maybe as large as
                2^31 bytes in length. The CA implementation takes care
                of segmentation and assembly.

          4. Unreliable Connected (unacknowledged - connection oriented)

                The UC service associates one local QP with one and
                only one remote QP. There is no acknowledgment and
                hence no resend of lost or corrupted packets. Such
                packets are therefore simply dropped. It is similar to
                RC otherwise.



Kashyap                                                         [Page 6]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


          5. Raw Ethertype (unacknowledged - connectionless)

                The Ethertype raw datagram packet contains a generic
                transport header that is not interpreted by the CA but
                it specifies the protocol type. The values for
                ethertype are the same as defined in RFC1700 for
                ethertype.

          6. Raw IPv6 ( unacknowledged - connectionless)

                Using IPv6 raw datagram service, the IBA CA can
                support standard protocol layers atop IPv6 (such as
                TCP/UDP). Thus native IPv6 packets can be bridged into
                the IBA SAN and delivered directly to a port and to
                its IPv6 raw datagram QP.

        The first 4 types are referred to as IB transports. The latter
        two are classified as Raw datagrams. There is no indication of
        the QP number in the raw datagram packets. The raw datagram
        packets are limited by the link MTU in size.

        The two connected modes and the reliable datagram mode may
        also support 'Automatic Path Migration(APM)'. This is an
        optional facility that provides for a hardware based path
        failover. An alternate path is associated with the QP when the
        connection/EE context is first created. If unrecoverable
        errors are encountered the connection switches to using the
        alternate path.

1.2.1 InfiniBand Addresses

        The InfiniBand architecture borrows heavily from the IPv6
        architecture in terms of the InfiniBand subnet structure and
        global identifiers (GIDs).

        The InfiniBand architecture defines the global identifier
        associated with a port as follows:

                GID (Global Identifier): A 128-bit unicast or
                multicast identifier used to identify a port on a
                channel adapter, a port on a router, a switch, or a
                multicast group. A GID is a valid 128-bit IPv6
                address(per RFC 2373) with additional
                properties/restrictions defined within IBA to
                facilitate efficient discovery, communication, and
                routing.

                Note: These rules apply only to IBA operation and do



Kashyap                                                         [Page 7]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


                not apply to raw IPv6 operation unless specifically
                called out.

        The raw IPv6 operation referred to in the note
        above is the IPv6 mode of InfiniBand's raw datagram
        service. It does not mean IPv6 itself. The routers and
        switches referred to in the above definition are the
        InfiniBand routers and switches.

        The InfiniBand(IB) specification defines two types of GIDs:
        unicast and multicast.

1.2.1.1 Unicast GIDs

        The unicast GIDs are defined, as in IPv6, with three scopes.
        The IB specification states:

        a. link local: This is defined to be FE80/10.

                       The IB routers will not forward packets with a
                       link local address in source or destination
                       beyond the IB subnet.

        b. site local: FEC0/10

                       A unicast GID used within a collection of
                       subnets which is unique within that collection
                       (e.g. a data center or campus) but is not
                       necessarily globally unique. IB routers must
                       not forward any packets with either a
                       site-local Source GID or a site-local
                       Destination GID outside of the site.

        c. global:
                       A unicast GID with a global prefix, i.e. an IB
                       router may use this GID to route packets
                       throughout an enterprise or internet.

1.2.1.2  Multicast GIDs

        The multicast GIDs also parallel the IPv6 multicast addresses.
        The IB specification defines the multicast GIDs as follows:

               FFxy:<112 bits>

          Flag bits:

            The nibble, denoted by x above, are the 4 flag bits: 000T.



Kashyap                                                         [Page 8]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


            The first three bits are reserved and are set to zero. The
            last bit is defined as follows:

               T=0: denotes a permanently assigned i.e. well known GID
               T=1: denotes a transient group

          Scope bits:

            The 4 bits, denoted by y in the GID above, are the scope
            bits. These scope values are described in Table 1.

               scope value        Address value

                    0                        Reserved
                    1                        Unassigned
                    2                        Link-local
                    3                        Unassigned
                    4                        Unassigned
                    5                        Site-local
                    6                        Unassigned
                    7                        Unassigned
                    8                        Organization-local
                    9                        Unassigned
                    0xA                      Unassigned
                    0xB                      Unassigned
                    0xC                      Unassigned
                    0xD                      Unassigned
                    0xE                      Global
                    0xF                      Reserved

                                   Table 1

        The IB specification further refers to [RFC_2373] and
        [RFC_2375] while defining the well known multicast addresses.
        However, it then states that the well known addresses apply to
        IB raw IPv6 datagrams only. It must be noted though that a
        multicast group can be associated with only a single MGID.
        Thus the same MGID cannot be associated with the UD mode and
        the raw datagram mode.

1.3   InfiniBand Multicast Group Management

        IB multicast groups, identified by Multicast Global
        Identifiers (MGIDs), are managed by the subnet manager(SM).
        The SM explicitly programs the IB switches in the fabric to
        ensure that the packets are received by all the members of the
        multicast group that request the reception of packets. SM also
        needs to program the switches such that packets transmitted to



Kashyap                                                         [Page 9]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        the group by any group member reach all receivers in the
        multicast group.

        IBA distinguishes between multicast senders and receivers.
        Though all members of a multicast group can transmit to the
        group (and expect their packets to be correctly forwarded) not
        all members of the group are receivers. A port needs to
        explicitly request that multicast packets addressed to the
        group be forwarded to it.

        A multicast group is created by sending a join request to the
        SM. As will be explained later, IBA defines multiple modes for
        joining a multicast group. The subnet manager records the
        group's multicast GID and the associated characteristics. The
        group characteristics are defined by the group path MTU,
        whether the group will be used for raw datagrams or unreliable
        datagrams, the service level, the partition key associated
        with the group, the Local Identifier(LID) associated with the
        group etc. These characteristics are defined at the time of
        the group creation. The interested reader may lookup the
        'MCMemberRecord' attribute in the IB architecture
        specification[IB_ARCH] for the complete list of
        characteristics that define a group.

        A LID is associated with the multicast group by the subnet
        manager(SM) at the time of the multicast group creation. The
        SM determines the multicast tree based on all the group
        members and programs the relevant switches. The Multicast
        LID(MLID) is used by the switches to route the packets.

        Any member IB port wanting to participate in the multicast
        group must join the group. As part of the join operation the
        port receives the group characteristics from the SM. At the
        same time the subnet manager ensures that the requester can
        indeed participate in the group by verifying that it can
        support the group MTU, and accessibility to the rest of the
        group members. Other group characteristics may need
        verification too.

        The SM, for groups that span IB subnet boundaries, must
        interact with IB routers to determine the presence of this
        group in other IB subnets. If present the MTU must match
        across the IB subnets.

        P_Key is another characteristic that must match across IB
        subnets since the P_Key inserted into a packet is not modified
        by the IB switches or IB routers. Thus if the P_Keys didn't
        match the IB router(s) itself might drop the packets or



Kashyap                                                        [Page 10]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        destinations on other subnets might drop the packets.

        A join operation may cause the SM to reprogram the fabric so
        that the new member can participate in the multicast group. By
        the same token a leave may cause the SM to reprogram the
        fabric to stop forwarding the packets to the requester.

1.3.1 Multicast Member Record

        The multicast group is maintained by the SM with each of the
        group members represented by an MCMemberRecord[IB_ARCH]. Some
        of its components are:

        MGID      - Multicast GID for this multicast group
        PortGID   - Valid GID of the port joining this multicast group
        Q_Key     - Q_Key to be used by this multicast group
        MLID      - Multicast LID for this multicast group
        MTU       - MTU for this multicast group
        P_Key     - Partition key for this multicast group
        SL        - Service Level for this multicast group
        Scope     - Same as MGID address scope
        JoinState - Join/Leave status requested by the port:
                    bit 0: FullMemeber
                    bit 1: NonMember
                    bit 2: SendOnlyNonMember

1.3.1.1 JoinState

        The JoinState indicates the membership qualities a port wishes
        to add while joining/creating a group or delete when leaving a
        group. The meaning of the JoinState bits are:

            FullMember:
                Messages destined for the group are routed to and from
                the port. A group may be deleted by the SM if there
                are no FullMembers in the group.

            NonMember:
                Messages destined for the group are routed to and from
                the port. The port is not considered a member for
                purposes of group creation/deletion.

            SendOnlyNonMember:
                Group messages are only routed from the port but not
                to the port. The port is not considered a member for
                purposes of group creation/deletion.

        A port may have multiple bits set in its record. In such case



Kashyap                                                        [Page 11]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        the membership qualities are a union of the JoinStates. A port
        may leave the multicast group for each of the JoinStates
        individually or in any combination of JoinState
        bits[IB_ARCH].

1.3.2 Join and Leave Operations

        An IB port joins a multicast group by sending a join
        request(SubnAdmSet() method) and leaves a multicast group by
        sending a leave message (SubnAdmDelete() method) to the SM.
        The IBA specification[IB_ARCH] describes the methods and
        attributes to be used when sending these messages.

1.3.2.1 Creating a Multicast Group

        There is no 'create' command to form a new multicast group.
        The FullMember bit in the JoinState must be set to create a
        multicast group. In other words, the first FullMember join
        request will cause the group to be created as a side effect of
        the join request. Subsequent join or leave requests may
        contain any combination of the JoinState bits.

        The creator of the group specifies the Q_Key, MTU, P_Key, SL,
        FlowLabel, TClass and the Scope value. A creator may request
        that a suitable MGID be created for it. Alternatively, the
        request can specify the desired MGID. In both cases the MLID
        is assigned by the SM.

        Thus a group will be created with the specified values when
        the requester sets the FullMember bit and no such group
        already exists in the subnet.

1.3.2.3 Deleting a Multicast Group

        When the last FullMember leaves the multicast group the SM may
        delete the multicast group releasing all resources, including
        those that might exist in the fabric itself, associated with
        the group.

        Note that a special 'delete' message does not exist. It is a
        side effect of the last FullMember 'leave' operation.

1.3.2.4 Multicast Group Create/Delete Traps

        The SA may be requested by the ports to generate a report
        whenever a multicast group is created or deleted. The port can
        specify the multicast group it is interested in i.e. use a
        specific MGID or use a wildcard request. The SA will report



Kashyap                                                        [Page 12]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        these events using traps 66 (for creates) and 67 (for
        deletes)[IB_ARCH].

        Therefore, a port wishing to join a group but not create it by
        itself may request a create notification or a port might even
        request a notification for all groups that are created(a
        wildcarded request). The SA will diligently inform them of the
        creation utilising the aforementioned traps. The requestor can
        then join the multicast group indicated. Similarly, a
        SendOnlyNonMember or a NonMember might request the SA to
        inform it of group deletions. The endnode, on receiving a
        delete report, can safely release the resources associated
        with the group. The associated MLID is no longer valid for the
        group and may be reassigned to a new multicast group by the
        SM.

2.0 Management of InfiniBand Subnet

        To aid in the monitoring and configuration of InfiniBand
        subnet components a set of MIBs need to be defined. MIBs are
        needed for the channel adapters, InfiniBand interfaces,
        InfiniBand subnet manager, InfiniBand subnet management agents
        and to allow the management of specific device properties. It
        must be noted that the management objects addressed in the
        IPoIB documents are for all of the IB subnet components and
        are not limited to IP(over IB). The relevant MIBs are
        described in separate documents and are not covered here.

3.0 IP over IB

        As described in section 1.0, the InfiniBand architecture
        provides a broad set of capabilities to choose from when
        implementing IP over InfiniBand networks.

        The IPoIB specification must not, and does not, require
        changes in IP and higher layer protocols. Nor does it mandate
        requirements on IP stacks to implement special user level
        programs. It is an aim of IPoIB specification that the IPoIB
        changes be amenable to modularisation and incorporation into
        existing implementations at the same level as other media
        types.










Kashyap                                                        [Page 13]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


3.1 InfiniBand as Datalink

        InfiniBand architecture provides multiple methods of data
        exchange between two endpoints as was noted above. These are:

                Reliable Connected (RC)
                Reliable Datagram  (RD)
                Unreliable Connected (UC)
                Unreliable Datagram (UD)
                Raw Datagram : Raw IPv6 (R6)
                             : Raw Ethertype (RE)

        IPoIB can be implemented over any, multiple or all of these
        services. A case can be made for support on any of the
        transport methods depending on the desired features.

        The IB specification requires Unreliable Datagram mode to be
        supported by all the IB nodes. The host channel adapters(HCAs)
        are specifically required to support Reliable connected(RC)
        and Unreliable connected(UC) modes but the same is not the
        case with target channel adapters(TCAs). Support for the two
        Raw Datagram modes is entirely optional. The Raw Datagram mode
        supports a 16-bit CRC as against the better protection
        provided by the use of a 32-bit CRC in other modes.

        For the sake of simplicity, ease of implementation and
        integration with existing stacks, it is desirable that the
        fabric support multicasting. This is possible only in
        Unreliable datagram (UD) and IB's Raw datagram modes.

        Thus it is only the UD mode that is universal, supports
        multicast, and a robust CRC. Given these conditions it is the
        obvious choice for IP over InfiniBand [IPOIB_ENCAP].

        Future documents might consider the connected modes. In
        contrast to the limited link MTU offered by UD mode, the
        connected modes can offer significant benefit in terms of
        performance by utilising a larger MTU. Reliability is also
        enhanced if the underlying feature of automatic path migration
        of connected modes is utilised.











Kashyap                                                        [Page 14]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


3.2 Multicast Support

        InfiniBand specification makes support of multicasting in the
        switches optional. Multicast however, is a basic requirement
        in IP networks. Therefore, IPoIB requires that multicast
        capable InfiniBand fabrics be used to implement IPoIB
        subnets.

3.2.1 Mapping IP Multicast to IB Multicast

        Well known IP multicast groups are defined for both IPv4 and
        IPv6 (RFC_1700, RFC_2373). Multicast groups may also be
        dynamically created at any time. To avoid creating unnecessary
        duplicates of multicast packets in the fabric, and to avoid
        unnecessary handling of such packets at the hosts each of the
        IP multicast groups needs to be associated with a different IB
        multicast group as far as possible. A process is defined in
        [IPOIB_ENCAP] for mapping the IP multicast addresses to unique
        IB multicast addresses.

3.2.2 Transient Flag in IB MGIDs

        The IB specification describes the flag bits as discussed in
        section 1.3. The IB specification also defines some well known
        IB multicast GIDs(MGIDs). The MGIDs are reserved for the IB's
        Raw datagram mode which is incompatible with the other
        transports of IB. Any mapping that is defined from IP
        multicast addresses therefore must not fall into IB's
        definition of a well-known address.

        Therefore all IPoIB related multicast GIDs always set the
        transient bit.

3.3 IP Subnets Across IB Subnets ?

        Some implementations may wish to support multiple clusters of
        machines in their own IB subnets but otherwise be part of a
        common IP subnet. For such a solution the IB specification
        needs multiple upgrades. Some of the required enhancements
        are:

        1) A method for creating IB multicast GIDs that span multiple
           IB subnets. The partition keys and other parameters need to
           be consistent across IB subnets.

        2) Develop IB routing protocol to determine the IB topology
           across IB subnets.




Kashyap                                                        [Page 15]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        3) Define the process and protocols needed between IB nodes
           and IB routers

        Until the above conditions are met it is not possible to
        implement IPoIB subnets that span IB subnets. The IPoIB
        standards have however been defined with this possibility in
        mind.

4.0 IP Subnets in InfiniBand Fabrics

        The IPoIB subnet is overlaid over the IB subnet. The IPoIB
        subnet is brought up in the following steps:

        Note: the join/leave operation at the IP level will be
              referred to as IP_join/IP_leave and the join/leave
              operations at the IB level will be referred to as
              IB_join in this document.

    1. The all-IPoIB nodes IB multicast group is created

        The fabric administrator creates an IB multicast
        group(henceforth called 'broadcast group') when the IP subnet
        is setup. The 'broadcast group' is defined in [IPOIB_ENCAP].
        The method by which the broadcast group is setup is not
        defined by IPoIB. The group may be setup at the SM by the
        administrator or by the first IB_join.

        As noted earlier, at the time of creating an IB multicast
        group, multiple values such as the P_Key, Q_Key, Service
        Level, Hop Limit, Flow ID, TClass, MTU etc., have to be
        specified. These values should be such that all potential
        members of the IB multicast group are be able to communicate
        with one another when using them. In the future, as the IB
        specification associates more meaning with the various
        parameters and defines IB QoS, different values for IP
        multicast traffic may be possible. All unicast packets also
        need to use the P_Key and Q_Key specified in the broadcast
        group [IPOIB_ENCAP]. It is obvious that a thought out
        configuration is required for a successful setup of the IPoIB
        subnet.

    2. All IPoIB interfaces IB_join the broadcast group

        The broadcast group defines the span and the members of the
        IPoIB link. This link gets built up as IPoIB nodes IB_join the
        broadcast group.

        The IB_join to the broadcast group has the additional benefit



Kashyap                                                        [Page 16]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        of distributing the above mentioned multicast group parameters
        to all the members of the subnet.

        Note that this IB_join to the broadcast group is a FullMember
        join. If any of the ports or the switches linking the port to
        the rest of the IPoIB subnet cannot support the
        parameters(e.g. path MTU or P_Key) associated with the
        broadcast group, then the IB_join request will fail and the
        requesting port will not become part of the IPoIB subnet.

    3. Configuration Parameters

        As noted above, parameters such as, Q_Key, Path MTU, needed
        for all IPoIB communication are returned to the IPoIB node on
        IB_joining the 'broadcast group'. [IPOIB_ENCAP] also notes
        that the parameters used in the broadcast group are used when
        creating other multicast groups.

        However, the P_Key must still be known to the IPoIB endnode
        before it can join the broadcast-group. The P_Key is included
        in the mapping of the broadcast group[IPOIB_ENCAP]. Another
        parameter, the scope of the broadcast group, also needs to be
        known to the endnode before it can join the broadcast group.

        It is an implementation choice on how the P_Key and the scope
        bits related to the IPoIB subnet are determined by the
        implementation. These could be configuration parameters
        initialised by some means by the administrator.

        The methods employed by an implementation to determine the
        P_Key and scope bits are not specified by IPoIB.

4.1 IPoIB VLANs

        The endpoints in an IB subnet must have compatible P_Keys to
        communicate with one another. Thus the administrator when
        setting up an IP subnet over an IB subnet must ensure that all
        the members have compatible P_Keys. An IP subnet can have only
        one P_Key associated with it to ensure that all IP nodes in it
        can talk to one another. An endpoint may however have multiple
        P_Keys.

        The IB architecture specifies that there can be only one MGID
        associated with a multicast group in the IB subnet. The P_Key
        is included in the MGID mappings from the IP multicast
        addresses[IPOIB_ENCAP]. Since the P_Key is unique in the IB
        subnet the inclusion of the P_Key in the IB MGIDs ensures that
        unique MGID mappings are created. Every unique broadcast group



Kashyap                                                        [Page 17]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        MGID so formed creates a separate abstract IPoIB link and
        hence an IPoIB VLAN.

4.2 Multicast in IPoIB subnets

        IP multicast on InfiniBand subnets follows the same concepts
        and rules as on any other media. However, unlike most other
        media multicast over InfiniBand requires interaction with
        another entity, the IB subnet manager. This section describes
        the outline of the process and suggests some guidelines.

        IB architecture specifies the following format for IB
        multicast packets when used over unreliable datagram(UD)
        mode:

          +--------+-------+---------+---------+-------+---------+---------+
        |Local   |Global |Base     |Datagram |Packet |Invariant| Variant |
        |Routing |Routing|Transport|Extended |Payload| CRC     |  CRC    |
        |Header  |Header |Header   |Transport| (IP)  |         |         |
        |        |       |         |Header   |       |         |         |
        +--------+-------+---------+---------+-------+---------+---------+

        For details about the various headers please refer to
        InfiniBand Architecture Specification[IB_ARCH].

        The Global routing header (GRH) includes the IB multicast
        group GID. The Local routing header (LRH) includes the local
        identifier (LID). The IB switches in the fabric route the
        packet based on the LID.

        The GID is made available to the receiving IB user (the IPoIB
        interface driver for example). The driver can therefore
        determine the IB group the packet belongs to.

        IPv4 defines three levels of multicast compliance. These are:

               Level 0: No support for IP multicasting

            Level 1: Support for sending but not receiving multicasts

               Level 2: Full support for IP multicasting

        In IPv6 there is no such distinction. Full multicast support
        is mandatory. Additionally, all IPv4 subnets support
        broadcast(255.255.255.255). IPv4 broadcast can always be
        sent/received by all IPv4 interfaces.

        Every IPoIB subnet requires the broadcast GID to be defined.



Kashyap                                                        [Page 18]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        Thus a packet can always be broadcast.

4.2.1 Sending IP Multicast Datagrams

        An IP host may send a multicast packet at any time to any
        multicast address.

        The IP layer conveys the multicast packet to the IPoIB
        interface driver/module. This module attempts to IB_join the
        relevant IB multicast group. This is required since otherwise
        InfiniBand architecture does not guarantee that the packet
        will reach its destinations.

        A pure sender may choose to join the multicast group as a
        FullMember. In such a case the sender will receive all the
        multicast packets transmitted to the IB group. Additionally,
        the IB group will not be deleted until the sender leaves the
        group.

        Alternatively, a sender might IB_join as a SendOnlyNonMember.
        In such a case the packets are not routed to the sender though
        packets transmitted by it can reach the other group members.
        Additionally, the group can be deleted when all FullMembers
        have left the group. The sender can further request delete
        updates from the SM.

        If the sender does not find the group in existence it is
        recommended in [IPOIB_ENCAP] that the packets be sent to the
        MGID corresponding to the all-IP routers address. A sender
        could also send the packets to the broadcast group. The
        sender might also choose to request 'creation' reports from
        the SM.

4.2.2 Receiving Multicast Packets

        The IP host must join the IB multicast group corresponding to
        the IP address. This follows from the IBA requirement that the
        receiver must join the relevant IB multicast group.  The group
        is automatically created if it does not exist [IB_ARCH].

        The IP receivers must IB_leave the IB group when the IP layer
        stops listening of the corresponding IP address. The SM can
        then choose to delete the group.

4.2.3 Router considerations for IPoIB

        IP routers know of the new IP groups created in the subnet by
        the use of protocols such as IGMP/MLD. However, this is not



Kashyap                                                        [Page 19]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        enough for IPoIB since the router needs to IB_join the
        relevant IB groups to be able to receive and transmit the
        packets. There is no promiscuous mode for listening to all
        packets.

        The IPoIB routers therefore need to request the SM to report
        all creations of IB groups in the fabric. The IPoIB router can
        then IB_join the reported group. It is not desirable that the
        router's IB_joining of a multicast group be considered the
        same as the IB_join from a receiver - the router's IB_join
        shouldn't disallow the group's deletion when all receivers
        leave. To overcome just this type of situations, IBA provides
        the NonMember IB_join mode.

        The NonMember IB_join mode can be used by IP routers when they
        join in response to the create reports. A router should
        ideally request the delete reports too so that it can release
        all the resources associated with the group. The MLID
        associated with a deleted MGID can be reassigned by the SM and
        therefore there is a possibility of erroneous transmissions if
        the MLID is cached. A router that does not request delete
        reports will still work correctly since it will receive the
        correct MLID , and purge any old cached value, when it
        IB_joins the IB group in response to a create report.

        It is reasonable for a router to IB_join as a FullMember if it
        is joining the IB group in response to an application/routing
        daemon request. In such a case the router might end up
        controlling the existence of the IB group (since it is a
        FullMember of the group).

4.2.4 Impact of InfiniBand Architecture Limits

        An HCA or TCA may have a limit on the number of MGIDs it can
        support. Thus, even though the groups may not be limited at
        the subnet manager and in the subnet as such, they may be
        limited at a particular interface. It is advisable to choose
        an adequately provisioned HCA/TCA when setting up an IPoIB
        subnet.

4.2.5 Leaving/Deleting a Multicast Group

        An IPv4 sender (level 1 compliance) IB_joins the IB multicast
        group only because that is the only way to guarantee reception
        of the packets by all the group recipients. The sender must
        however IB_leave the group at some time. A sender could, when
        not a receiver on the group, start a timer per multicast group
        sent to. The sender leaves the IB group when the timer goes



Kashyap                                                        [Page 20]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        off. It restarts the timer if another message is sent.

        This suggestion doesn't apply to the IB broadcast group. It
        also doesn't apply to the IB group corresponding to the
        all-hosts multicast group. An IPv4 host must always remain a
        member of the broadcast group.

        An IP multicast receiver IB_leaves the corresponding IB
        multicast group when it IP_leaves the IP multicast group. In
        the case of IPv4 implementation the receiver may choose to
        continue to be a sender (level 1 compliance). In which case it
        may choose not to IB_leave the IB group but start a timer as
        explained above.

        As noted elsewhere, the SM can choose to free up the
        resources(e.g. routing entries in the switches) associated
        with the IB group when the last FullMember IB_leave the group.
        The MLID therefore becomes invalid for the group. The MLID can
        be reassigned when a new group is created.

        SendOnlyNonMember/NonMember ports caching the MLID need to
        avoid this possibility. The way out is for them to request
        group delete reports. An IP router requesting reports for all
        groups need not request the delete report since an IB_join in
        response to a create report will return the new MLID
        association to it.

        A router might prefer to IB_leave the IB multicast group when
        there are no members of the IP multicast address in the subnet
        and it has no explicit knowledge of any need to forward such
        packets.

4.3 Transmission of IPoIB packets

        The encapsulation of IP packets in InfiniBand is described
        in[IPOIB_ENCAP].

        It specifies the use of an 'Ethertype' value [IANA] in all
        IPoIB communication packets. The link-layer address is
        comprised of the Global Identifier(GID) and the Queue Pair
        Number(QPN) [IPOIB_ENCAP].

        To allow for multiple IB subnet based IPoIB subnets, the
        specification utilises the Global Identifier(GID) as part of
        the link-layer address. Since all packets in IB have to use
        the Local Identifier(LID) the address resolution process has
        the additional step of resolving the destination GID, returned
        in response to ARP/ND request, to the LID[IPOIB_ENCAP]. This



Kashyap                                                        [Page 21]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        phase of address resolution might also be used to determine
        other essential parameters (e.g. the SL, path rate etc.)for
        successful IB communication between two peers.

        As noted earlier, all communication in the IPoIB subnet
        derives the Q_Key to use from the Q_Key specified in the
        broadcast group.

4.4 RARP and Static ARP entries

        RARP entries or static ARP entries are based on invariant
        link-addresses. In the case of IPoIB, the link-address
        includes the QPN which might not be constant across reboots or
        even across network interface resets. Therefore, static ARP
        entries or RARP server entries will only work if the
        implementation(s) using these options can ensure that the QPN
        associated with an interface is invariant across
        reboots/network resets[IPOIB_ENCAP].

4.5 DHCPv4 and IPoIB

        DHCPv4 [RFC_2131] utilises a 'client identifier' field
        (expected to hold the link-layer address) of 16 bytes. The
        address in the case of IPoIB is 20-bytes. To get around this
        problem IPoIB specifies [IPOIB_DHCP] that the 'broadcast flag'
        be used by the client when requesting an IP address.

5.0 QoS and Related Issues

        The IB specification suggests the use of service levels for
        load balancing, QoS and deadlock avoidance within an IB
        subnet. But the IB specification leaves the usage and mode of
        determination of the SL for the application to decide. The SL
        and list of SLs are available in the SA but it is up to the
        endnode's application to choose the 'right' value.

        Every IPoIB implementation will determine the relevant SL
        value based on its own policy. No method or process for
        choosing the SL has been defined by the IPoIB standards.

6.0 Security Considerations

        This document describes the IB architecture as relevant to
        IPoIB. It further restates issues specified in other
        documents. It does not itself specify any requirements. There
        are no security issues introduced by this document. IPoIB
        related security issues are described in
        [IPOIB_ENCAP] and [IPOIB_DHCP].



Kashyap                                                        [Page 22]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


7.0 Acknowledgements

        This document has benefited from the comments and suggestion
        of the members of the IPoIB working group and the members of
        the InfiniBand(SM) Trade Association.

8.0 References

[IB_ARCH]     InfiniBand Architecture Specification, Volume 1.1

[RFC_2373]    IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture

[RFC_2375]    IPv6 Multicast Address Assignments

[RFC_1700]    Assigned Numbers

[RFC_1112]    Host extensions for IP multicasting

[RFC_2236]    Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2

[RFC_2710]    Multicast Listener Discovery

[IPOIB_ENCAP] draft-ietf-ipoib-ip-over-infiniband-05.txt

[IPOIB_DHCP]  draft-ietf-ipoib-dhcp-over-infiniband-05.txt

9.0 Author's Address

Vivek Kashyap

IBM
15450, SW Koll Parkway
Beaverton, OR 97006

Phone: +1 503 578 3422
Email: vivk@us.ibm.com

Full Copyright Statement

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

        This document and translations of it may be copied and
        furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
        otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be
        prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
        part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
        copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such
        copies and derivative works. However, this document itself may



Kashyap                                                        [Page 23]





INTERNET-DRAFT             IPoIB architecture              October, 2003


        not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright
        notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
        organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
        Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
        defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
        as required to translate it into languages other than
        English.

        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
        not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
        assigns.

        This document and the information contained herein is provided
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
        ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
        IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE
        USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
        ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
































Kashyap                                                        [Page 24]


