


MEXT Working Group                                          C. Bernardos
Internet-Draft                                                      UC3M
Intended status: Informational                          October 27, 2008
Expires: April 30, 2009


   Analysis on how to address NEMO RO for Aeronautics Mobile Networks
           draft-bernardos-mext-aero-nemo-ro-sol-analysis-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2009.

Abstract

   The Network Mobility Basic Support protocol enables networks to roam
   and attach to different access networks without disrupting the
   ongoing sessions that nodes of the network may have.  By extending
   the Mobile IPv6 support to Mobile Routers, nodes of the network are
   not required to support any kind of mobility, since packets must go
   through the Mobile Router-Home Agent (MRHA) bi-directional tunnel.
   Communications from/to a mobile network have to traverse the Home
   Agent, and therefore better paths may be available.  Additionally,
   this solution adds packet overhead, due to the encapsulation.

   There are currently a set of well defined NEMO Route Optimization
   requirements for Operational Use in Aeronautics and Space



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   Exploration, from which solutions should be based on.  This document
   analyses how the problem of NEMO RO for Aeronautics Mobile Networks
   might be tackled, in a way as generic as possible, trying to identify
   those open questions and deployment considerations that need to be
   addressed.

   The main goal of this document is to foster the discussion about
   aeronautics NEMO RO solution space within the MEXT WG.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Solution Space analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Design issues/questions/trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Where are the correspondent entities located?  . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Who administratively manages the correspondent
           entities?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Which kind of addresses are gonna be used and who own
           them?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  How many correspondent entities are needed to globally
           perform NEMO RO? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  What trust relationships are needed? . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.6.  Is the solution flexible enough to allow the
           participation of the end-nodes (CNs and/or MNNs)?  . . . . 11
     3.7.  Does the solution allow for a hierarchical scheme? . . . . 11
     3.8.  What is the target protocol complexity?  . . . . . . . . . 12
     3.9.  How is routing performed within the ATN? . . . . . . . . . 12
     3.10. Does the solution allow for implementing
           legal/political/economical requirements? . . . . . . . . . 13
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16







Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document assumes that the reader is familiar with the
   terminology related to Network Mobility [4] and [5], and with the
   Mobile IPv6 [2] and NEMO Basic Support [3] protocols.

   The MEXT WG is currently chartered to work on three use cases for
   route optimization of network mobility, namely aeronautics [6],
   vehicular [7] and consumer electronics [8].  The work on the
   requirements for the aeronautics use case seems to be mature enough
   at this point to start discussing about solutions.  This document is
   an initial attempt aimed at fostering discussion on solutions, by
   presenting a general framework of how a solution for the aeronautics
   use case could look like, and identifying and highlighting relevant
   questions, issues and deployment models that need to be taken care of
   during the solution definition process.

   The requirements for the aeronautics use case [6] differentiate among
   three different domains of interest: Air Traffic Services (ATS), Air
   Operational Services (AOS) and Passenger Information and
   Entertainment Services (PIES).  Besides, two kind of requirements are
   identified: required (minimal properties that a solution must
   possess) and desirable (difficult to quantify or not immediately
   needed requirements) characteristics.  Since the PIES domain is not
   critical to safety-of-life, but mostly involves added comfort and
   business services to passengers, this domain has not been taken into
   account as input for the required characteristics.

   Due to the very different nature of the required and desirable
   characteristics, and the importance of the former ones, this document
   only analyzes how a solution for ATS/AOS would look like.


2.  Solution Space analysis

   In this section we try to outline the general lines of a NEMO Route
   Optimization solution for the aeronautics use case (ATS/AOS domains),
   based on the set of requirements described in [6], which we summarize
   next:
   o  Separability: an RO solution MUST support configuration by using a
      dynamic RO policy database, so RO for certain flows can be
      disabled/enabled.  A granularity level similar to the one of IPsec
      security policy databases is expected to be supported.
   o  Multihoming: an RO solution MUST support multi-interfaced MRs, and
      it MUST allow the use of different interfaces (and also different
      MNPs) for different domains.





Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   o  Latency: an RO solution MUST allow packets to use the MRHA tunnel
      while setting up or reconfiguring the RO path.
   o  Availability: an RO solution MUST NOT prevent to fall-back using
      the default MRHA tunnel if the RO path fails for whatever reason.
      This basically also means that an RO solution MUST NOT introduce
      any new single point of failure for the communications.
   o  Packet Loss: an RO solution SHOULD NOT cause either additional
      loss or duplication of data packets due to the use of RO, above
      that caused in the NEMO basic default solution.
   o  Scalability: an RO solution MUST be simultaneously usable by
      hundreds of thousands of crafts without overloading the ground
      network or the routing system.
   o  Efficient Signaling: an RO solution MUST be efficient in terms of
      the number of required signaling messages, and avoid signaling
      storms as a result of providing multiple ongoing flows with RO
      following a handover.
   o  Security: an RO solution MUST NOT expose MNPs on the wireless
      egress link, MUST allow the receiver of BUs to validate CoA
      ownership, and MUST ensure that only explicitly authorized MRNs
      are able to send a BU for a specific MNP.
   o  Adaptability: an RO solution MUST NOT prevent applications from
      using transport protocols, IPsec or new IP options.
   o  Although it is not explicitly listed as a required characteristic
      -- but only suggested in [6] --, it seems to be widely accepted
      that modifications to CNs MUST NOT be required by an RO solution.

   From this list of requirements, a first conclusion that can be
   obtained is that a solution for the aeronautics NEMO RO use case MUST
   NOT require changes on the CNs in order to correctly operate, that
   is, a solution MUST provide certain level of RO with legacy IPv6 CNs.
   This means that the solution would likely rely on a set of entities
   at the infrastructure, performing the RO function between them or/and
   also the MR.

   In a glimpse, a solution along the lines mentioned before would
   operate as follows (Figure 1): an optimized route between a mobile
   network deployed in a craft and a CN (or set of CNs) is set-up (upon
   some sort of trigger/policy) between two (or more in general terms)
   NEMO RO correspondent entities.  These correspondent entities should
   be located -- in order to provide an optimized route as shorter as
   possible -- close to the mobile network and/or the CN.  It should be
   noted that one of these correspondent entities may be collocated
   within the MR.  A tunnel between the correspondent entities (or a
   chain/nesting of tunnels, in case several correspondent entities are
   involved in the same optimized route) is established, so data traffic
   between the mobile network and the CN (or set of CNs) can be routed
   through this shorter route (compared with the default MRHA one).  It
   might be the case that certain additional operations are needed in



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   order to ensure that traffic sent/received by the CN (or by the
   mobile network) is routed through the correspondent entities, so they
   can forward packets using the optimized route.

                  ---------
                  | HA_MR |
                  ---------
                      |
                      |
             (-*-*-*-*+*-*-*-*-)
          -*-                   -*-
         (                         )
      -*-            ATN            -*-            ------
     (                                 )           | CN |
    (                   ---------       )          ------
   (                    | NROCE |........)--+          |
    (                  /./-------       )   |====?=====?==
     (                /./              )         |
      -*-            /./            -*-        ------
         (        ---------        )           | CN |
          -*-     | NROCE |     -*-            ------
             (    ---------    )
              -*-     .     -*-
                 (    .    )
                  -*- . -*-
                    -*+*-
                      |
                      |
                    ------       ---------------------------------------
                    | AR |       | AR: Access Router                   |
                    ------       | CN: Correspondent Node              |
                       |         | MR: Mobile Router                   |
             ===?==========      | HA_MR: MR's Home Agent              |
                |                | MNP: Mobile Network Prefix          |
              ------             | MNN: Mobile Network Node            |
              | MR |             | NROCE: NEMO RO Correspondent Entity |
              ------             ---------------------------------------
                |
         ===?========?====(MNP)
            |        |
         -------  -------
         | MNN |  | MNN |
         -------  -------

        Figure 1: Correspondent entity-based solution architecture

   This approach, based on the use of correspondent network entities
   that are in charge of performing the NEMO RO, seems to be the



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   solution that has received more positive feedback from the MEXT WG so
   far.  This solution -- as described in this document -- is very
   general and leaves (on purpose) many aspects open/undefined.
   Depending on the particular design decisions that can be taken,
   completely different solutions might be the outcome.  For example,
   there are currently two proposed solutions that implement the
   correspondent entity-based concept in different ways: the global Home
   Agent to Home Agent (HAHA) [9], [10], and the Correspondent Router
   based RO for NEMO (CRON) [11].

   Since different design decisions might result into completely
   different solutions, each of them meeting different requirements and
   providing different features, it is very important to understand the
   impact of the related design decisions, as well as the involved
   trade-offs, when designing a NEMO RO solution for the aeronautics use
   case.  It is also important to look at the deployment issues derived
   from the particular characteristics of the Aeronautical
   Telecommunications Networks (ATNs) [12].  The next section of this
   document is aimed at identifying the different important design
   aspects, deployment issues and resulting trade-offs when considering
   a correspondent entity-based NEMO RO solution.  The goal of such an
   exercise is to help the MEXT WG in the design of the NEMO RO solution
   for the aeronautics use case.


3.  Design issues/questions/trade-offs

   In this section, we attempt to identify relevant design issues,
   questions and involved trade-offs when considering a correspondent
   entity-based NEMO RO solution, by asking the following questions:

   1.  Where are the correspondent entities located?

   2.  Who administratively manages the correspondent entities?

   3.  Which kind of addresses are gonna be used and who own them?

   4.  How many correspondent entities are needed to globally perform
   NEMO RO?

   5.  What trust relationships are needed?

   6.  Is the solution flexible enough to allow the participation of the
   end-nodes (CNs and/or MNNs)?

   7.  Does the solution allow for a hierarchical scheme?

   8.  What is the target protocol complexity?



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   9.  How is routing performed within the ATN?

   10.  Does the solution allow for implementing legal/political/
   economical requirements?

3.1.  Where are the correspondent entities located?

   A first important question is where the correspondent entities are
   located.

   One option is to place the correspondent entities at the gACSPs.  In
   this case the optimized path would have at least one end-point
   (depending on whether the solution involves two correspondent
   entities at the infrastructure or one entity at the infrastructure
   and the MR) at the gACSP.  This may be not good enough from a
   performance point of view, since the farther the correspondent
   entities are from the communication end-points (i.e., the mobile
   network and the CNs) the more likely the resulting path would be less
   optimal.

   There are some potentially relevant questions related to placing
   entities at the gACSPs:
   o  can an MR get connectivity from two different gACSPs?
   o  is it possible that the same MR needs to make use of correspondent
      entities placed at different gACSPs?
   o  would it be possible/required that an RO path is set-up between
      correspondent entities belonging to two different gACSPs?  If so,
      the different routing policies that gACSPs might implement are
      relevant, as we analyze later.

   Another potential configuration is to place the correspondent
   entities at the ANSPs.  This configuration would allow to have one
   end-point of the optimization close to the CNs (for the ATS scenario)
   and therefore would result in paths that in general would be closer
   to the optimal case.  On the other hand, this approach would require
   more correspondent entities to be deployed, therefore eventually
   increasing the complexity of the solution.  Besides, a solution that
   only places the infrastructure correspondent entities at the ANSPs
   would require the MR being the other correspondent entity in the NEMO
   RO process, since an MR might get connectivity through a gACSP, or
   through an lACSP that is not an ANSP.  In the AOS scenario, this
   configuration might not work, since AOS CNs might not get
   connectivity through an ANSP, and therefore a correspondent entity
   should be deployed somewhere else.

   In those communication scenarios in which the MR is attached to an
   ANSP access network and it is communicating with a CN also attached
   to the same ANSP, placing the correspondent entities at the ANSP (or



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   collocated within the MR) provides the additional advantage that
   these communications would survive failures on the gACSPs to which
   the ANSP gets connectivity from.  This brings the following question:
   o  if a craft attached to an ANSP access network is communicating
      with a CN attached to the same ANSP, is it required for the NEMO
      RO solution to survive when the link of the ANSP to its gACSP goes
      down? or put in a different way, would it be OK for such a
      communication to be broken?  It should be noted that the default
      MRHA path used by the NEMO Basic Support protocol would likely
      fail in this scenario.

   Another approach is to deploy infrastructure correspondent entities
   at the networks where CN are attached (these networks might be ANSPs
   in some scenarios) and at MRs.  This would provide shorter paths, at
   the cost of higher complexity.

   Last, a solution might not assume any particular placement of the
   correspondent entities, i.e. they can be located anywhere.  This
   assumption, however, might not hold, depending on different aspects
   -- such as security and addressing (for example if prefixes used in
   ATS cannot leak to the Internet, leading to ATS traffic traversing
   the public Internet).

3.2.  Who administratively manages the correspondent entities?

   It is also important to analyze who will be the players than manage
   the correspondent entities, since this might have a critical impact
   on the trust relationships that can be assumed among the different
   correspondent entities.

   One first scenario is the one in which all the correspondent entities
   are managed by the same administrative entity.  This compresses both
   the case of correspondent entities deployed and managed by the
   airline company, and the case of a global ACSP providing the
   correspondent entities for airlines with an agreement with the ACSP.
   The obvious advantage of this scenario is that it makes security and
   authentication easier, since all the correspondent entities belong to
   the same administrative domain.  However, this does not mean that
   this scenario is excluded from having trust issues, since a
   particular solution might require to inject routes in some parts of
   the network (e.g., correspondent entities owned by an airline and
   placed in networks not managed by the airline, anycast routing,
   etc.), and this could require additional trust relationships.

   A second scenario is that in which correspondent entities are managed
   by different administrative domains.  This approach has the advantage
   that it provides additional flexibility, but it has the drawback of
   requiring additional trust agreements in order to enable NEMO RO to



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   be provided in a secure way.  Depending on the particular solution,
   these additional trust relationships may include those that are
   necessary to enable anycast routing, route injection or strong state
   synchronization, among others.  These are examples of functions that
   are usually not easy to achieve across different domains.

   For AOS, it seems assumable to deploy a correspondent entity close
   the the CNs, and then perform RO between this entity and the MR,
   since both entities are operated by the same organization (therefore,
   existence of certificates between these nodes could be expected).
   The ATS case is different, and should be analyzed carefully.
   Although some trust may exist between a correspondent entity
   belonging to an ANSP and another correspondent entity (e.g., one
   deployed at the aircraft, or one deployed at one gACSP), assuming the
   existence of certificates or strong trust relationships is not clear
   at this point [12].  This brings the following question:
   o  which trust relationships are expected? this will be analyzed in
      further detail in another subsection.

3.3.  Which kind of addresses are gonna be used and who own them?

   Addressing aspects might be relevant for the design of a NEMO RO
   solution.  Some related questions are the following:
   o  are there gonna be reserved blocks of addresses for aeronautical
      use (i.e. addressing used to derive MNPs from)?
   o  can prefixes used to derive the MNPs configured at the crafts leak
      on the routing tables of the public Internet? can ATS/AOS traffic
      traverse the public Internet?
   o  what kind of addressing is gonna be used for ATS and AOS? would it
      be the same kind of addressing?
   o  is it fine to use PA addresses to derive the MNPs configured at
      the crafts or is it a requirement to use PI addresses (delegated
      to the airline, to enable provider independency)?  One possible
      solution design is that MNPs are derived from the addressing of a
      gACSP which deploy several correspondent entities to perform NEMO
      RO, but this scenario would tie the airline to keep using the same
      provider.

3.4.  How many correspondent entities are needed to globally perform
      NEMO RO?

   Another important aspect that should be taken into account is the
   number of correspondent entities that would be required to perform
   NEMO RO efficiently.  There are many aspects that may have an impact
   on the number of required correspondent entities, such as:
   o  Location of the correspondent entities.  If a solution is based on
      placing correspondent entities very close to the CNs this might
      require an entity per CN network (e.g., per ANSP).  Solutions



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


      relying on correspondent entities located at gACSPs may require
      less entities to be deployed.
   o  Who owns/manages the correspondent entities.  Depending on the
      particular solution, it could happen that each airline has to
      deploy its own correspondent entities, thus requiring a set of
      correspondent entities per airline.
   o  Required level of RO.  Of course, depending on the optimization
      levels that are required to be achieved, the location and number
      of correspondent entities would change.  If certain amount of
      additional delay are allowed, it is expected that less entities
      would be needed, since there is usually a trade-off between the
      number and location of correspondent entities, and the reduction
      of the delay due to the optimized path.

3.5.  What trust relationships are needed?

   Trust relationships are a quite important aspect to be analyzed.  As
   it has been described in this document, a solution based on the
   deployment of correspondent entities may take many different forms,
   depending on the design decisions and the deployment assumptions that
   are followed.  Most of the design decisions would have an impact or
   would be constrained by the trust relationships that are in place
   among the different players involved in the NEMO RO.

   A solution based on the establishment of an optimized path between
   two or more correspondent entities inherently requires those entities
   to have strong trust relationships with the end-points of the
   communications, since they are providing an alternative -- over the
   MRHA default path -- route for their communication.  Therefore, both
   MNNs and CNs MUST have some form of trust relationship with the
   correspondent entities, to allow the latter set-up an optimized route
   for their traffic (on their behalf).  As an example, both the MR and
   the HA of a particular mobile network clearly have the required trust
   relationship with the MNNs of the mobile network, and therefore they
   could take part of an optimization mechanism.  Other entities but the
   MR and its HA would need additional trust relationships in place in
   order to take part of a NEMO RO solution.

   The correspondent entities involved in a NEMO RO solution MUST also
   have some trust relationship between them, allowing them to
   authenticate each other.

   Additionally, correspondent entities involved in an RO attempt MUST
   be able to show each other that they are authorized to send and
   receive packets originated/destined to the nodes (MNNs or CNs) they
   are providing RO with.  As an example, let's assume a particular
   solution in which there are two correspondent entities, one placed
   close to the mobile network, and the other placed close to the CN.



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   In this example, the entity close to the mobile network should be
   able to show to the one close to the CN that it is authorized to
   send/received packets originated/destined to the MNNs of that
   particular mobile network.  It should be noted that the same kind of
   authorization is required and provided when the NEMO Basic Support
   protocol is used (i.e. the MR has to be authorized to set-up a tunnel
   with its HA to exchange packets, and both MR and HA have to
   authenticate each other before setting up the tunnel).

   Correspondent entities MUST also be authorized to inject the routes
   (if any) required to get the packets that are subject of being route
   optimized.  The simpler case is that in which a correspondent entity
   is the default router of the MNNs (i.e. the MR) or the CNs, since in
   this scenario nothing is required to make MNNs/CNs forward to the
   correspondent entity their traffic, and therefore this entity is
   inherently authorized to forward that traffic.  Other kind of
   solutions, in which the correspondent entities are not collocated
   with the MR and the default router of the CN might require the
   correspondent entities to inject routes within a certain portion of
   the network.  This might be hard to achieve across different domains.

   The location and ownership of the correspondent entities would likely
   have a great impact on the potentially required trust relationships.
   Therefore, trust and location issues have to be simultaneously
   considered.

3.6.  Is the solution flexible enough to allow the participation of the
      end-nodes (CNs and/or MNNs)?

   Supporting legacy end-nodes (MNNs and CNs) seems to be a required
   characteristic, although it is not explicitly listed as that in [6].
   That means that a solution MUST NOT require changes neither at the
   MNNs nor at the CNs to operate.  However, that does necessary imply
   that a particular solution cannot benefit from inserting changes on
   some specific MNNs and/or CNs.  In other words, a solution could
   provide the option of collocating the correspondent entity function
   within some MNNs and/or CNs -- in those scenarios in which these
   modifications can be done.  This brings the following question:
   o  is it permitted for a solution to collocate the correspondent
      entity function within certain MNNs and/or CNs in case their
      software upgrade is possible and that change brings operation
      benefits?

3.7.  Does the solution allow for a hierarchical scheme?

   Solutions based on the deployment of correspondent entities that
   perform the required route optimization operations may benefit from
   adopting hierarchical schemes.  This, for example, may help to reduce



Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


   signaling and produce faster handovers.  Therefore, a consideration
   that could also be taken into account when designing a solution is if
   it would support a hierarchical mode of operation.

   Another somehow related design consideration is the following: a
   particular solution might benefit from deploying NetLMM-alike access
   networks and collocating the functionality of the NEMO RO
   correspondent entity with that of the LMA.  This could improve the
   overall performance, although at the prize of increasing the global
   complexity and requiring ACSPs to be NetLMM-alike.

3.8.  What is the target protocol complexity?

   It is obvious that a solution should be as less complex as possible,
   but there is always a trade-off involved: less complex solutions
   usually provide less features/performance gains/etc., and the other
   way around.  There are some particular requirements of the
   aeronautical NEMO RO scenario that would likely impact on the
   solution complexity, and that should be taken into account.

   For example, in order to meet the separability requirement [12],
   correspondent entities in charge of performing the RO would have to
   be able to decide whether a certain flow has to be optimized or not.
   This could be done by local policies or explicit signaling.  Even in
   the case of local policies, some mechanisms would be needed to
   support the update/modification of the policies.  It seems likely
   that it would be up to the mobile networks to decide what flows are
   to be optimized and which not.  Therefore, the costs associated to
   meet the separability requirement would likely involve some sort of
   signaling between the mobile networks and the correspondent entities
   (at least to trigger the NEMO RO of a particular flow).  This cost
   should be evaluated and taken into account when designing a
   correspondent entity-based solution.

3.9.  How is routing performed within the ATN?

   Routing policies and related issues within the ATN are an important
   input to be considered when designing a correspondent entity-based
   solution.  Therefore, we should address the following questions:
   o  is it OK to have asymmetrical optimized routes? depending on the
      design of the solution, it might be possible that some sort of
      asymmetric routing appears.
   o  what are the routing policies followed by the ACSPs (especially
      gACSPs)? do they do cold or hot-potato routing? cold-potato
      routing may lead to very suboptimal routes under some particular
      scenarios, even when a NEMO RO solution is used.





Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


3.10.  Does the solution allow for implementing legal/political/
       economical requirements?

   In some Internet scenarios, it is preferred that data traffic does
   not traverse certain networks because of different reasons, such as
   legal, political or economical ones.  Is that also the case for the
   aeronautics use case?.  If so, it might be important to provide NEMO
   RO solutions with the required mechanisms to implement the policies
   that translate those potential legal/political/economical
   requirements.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document analyzes a general approach to perform NEMO RO for the
   aeronautics use case.  As such, it identifies some security issues
   that should be taken into account in the design of a concrete
   solution.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


6.  Acknowledgments

   the author would like to thank Marcelo Bagnulo for his valuable
   comments and support.

   The work of Carlos J. Bernardos has been partly supported by the
   Spanish Government under the POSEIDON (TSI2006-12507-C03-01) project.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [3]   Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
         "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
         January 2005.




Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


7.2.  Informative References

   [4]   Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
         RFC 3753, June 2004.

   [5]   Ernst, T. and H-Y. Lach, "Network Mobility Support
         Terminology", RFC 4885, July 2007.

   [6]   Eddy, W., Ivancic, W., and T. Davis, "NEMO Route Optimization
         Requirements for Operational Use in Aeronautics and  Space
         Exploration Mobile Networks", draft-ietf-mext-aero-reqs-02
         (work in progress), May 2008.

   [7]   Baldessari, R., Ernst, T., Festag, A., and M. Lenardi,
         "Automotive Industry Requirements for NEMO Route Optimization",
         draft-ietf-mext-nemo-ro-automotive-req-01 (work in progress),
         July 2008.

   [8]   Ng, C., Hirano, J., Petrescu, A., and E. Paik, "Consumer
         Electronics Requirements for Network Mobility Route
         Optimization", draft-ng-nemo-ce-req-02 (work in progress),
         February 2008.

   [9]   Thubert, P., Wakikawa, R., and V. Devarapalli, "Global HA to HA
         protocol", draft-thubert-mext-global-haha-00 (work in
         progress), March 2008.

   [10]  Wakikawa, R., Shima, K., and N. Shigechika, "The Global HAHA
         Operation at the Interop Tokyo 2008",
         draft-wakikawa-mext-haha-interop2008-00 (work in progress),
         July 2008.

   [11]  Bernardos, C., Calderon, M., and I. Soto, "Correspondent Router
         based Route Optimisation for NEMO (CRON)",
         draft-bernardos-mext-nemo-ro-cr-00 (work in progress),
         July 2008.

   [12]  Bauer, C. and S. Ayaz, "ATN Topology Considerations for
         Aeronautical NEMO RO", draft-bauer-mext-aero-topology-00 (work
         in progress), July 2008.











Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


Author's Address

   Carlos J. Bernardos
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Phone: +34 91624 6236
   Email: cjbc@it.uc3m.es









































Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Aeronautics NEMO RO solution analysis     October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Bernardos                Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 16]

