
Internet-Draft                                       H. Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                                       
                                                     Cisco Systems 
Target Category: Informational                                     
                                                        April 2001 
                                             Expires: October 2001 
 
 
 
 

Definitions for talking about directories 
 

Status of this Memo 
The following text is food for the I-D machinery. 
     The file name of this memo is draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-
     02.txt 
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
     in progress." 
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
The intended place to discuss this memo is the open mailing list 
directory@apps.ietf.org - subscribe by sending mail to directory-
request@apps.ietf.org. 

Abstract 
When discussing systems for making information accessible through the 
Internet in standardized ways, it may be useful if the people 
discussing have a common understanding of the terms they use. 
One group of such systems is known under the term "directories". 
This document is not intended to be either comprehensive or definitive, 
but is intended to give some aid in mutual comprehension when 
discussing information access methods to be incorporated into Internet 
Standards-Track documents. 
Reference to this document would, for instance, give one the power to 
agree that the Domain Name Service is a global lookup repository with 
perimeter integrity and loose, converging consistency, while an LDAP 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
directory server is a local, centralized repository with both lookup 
and search capability. 

1. Introduction and basic terms 
We suggest using the following terms for the remainder of this 
document: 
- Information: Facts and ideas which can be represented (encoded) as 
  data in various forms. 
- Data: Information in a specific physical representation, usually a 
  sequence of symbols that have meaning; especially a representation of 
  information that can be processed or produced by a computer. (from 
  [SEC]) 
- Repository: An amount of data that is accessible through one or more 
  access methods. 
  Again, this term is deliberately not defined more strictly. 
- Requester: Entity that may (try to) access data in a repository. Note 
  that no assumption is made that the requester is animal, vegetable or 
  mineral. 
- Maintainer: Entity that causes changes to the data in the repository. 
  Usually, all maintainers are requesters, since they need to look at 
  the data too, but the roles are distinct. 
- Access method: Well-defined series of operations that will cause data 
  available from a repository to be obtained by the requester. 
- Site: Entity that hosts all or part of a repository, and makes it 
  available through one or more access methods. A site may in various 
  contexts be a machine, a datacenter, a network of datacenters, or a 
  single device. 
 

2. Dimensions of classification 

2.1 Uniqueness and scope 
Some information systems are global, in the sense that only one can 
sensibly exist in the world. 
Others are inherently local, in that each locality, site or even box 
will run its own information store, independent of all others. 
 
The following terms are suggested: 
- Global repository: A repository that there can be only one of in the 
  world. The world itself is a prime example; the public telephone 
  system's number assignments according to E.164 is another.  


 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 2] 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
- Local repository: A class of repository of which multiple instances 
  can exist, each with information relevant to that particular 
  repository, with no need for coordination between them. 
- Centralized repository: A repository where all access to data has to 
  pass through some single site. 
- Distributed repository: A repository that is not centralized; that 
  is, access to data can occur through multiple sites. 
- Replicated repository: A distributed repository where all sites have 
  the same information 
- Cooperative repository: A distributed repository where not all sites 
  have all the information, but where mechanisms exist to get the info 
  to the requester, even when it is not available to the site 
  originally asked 
   
Note: The term "global" is often a matter of social or legal context; 
for instance, the E.164 telephone numbering system is global by 
international treaty, while the debate about whether the Domain Name 
System is global in fact or just a local repository with ambitions has 
proved bait for too many discussions to enumerate. 
Some claim that globality is in the eye of the beholder; "everything is 
local to some context". When discussing technology, it may be wise to 
use "very widely deployed" instead. 
Note: Locating the repositories changes with the scale of 
consideration. For instance, the global DNS service is considered a 
distributed cooperative repository, built out of zone repositories that 
themselves may be distributed, and are always replicated when 
distributed. 
 

2.2 Search, Lookup, Query and Notify 
A different consideration when describing repositories is the types of 
method they offer to find information. 
The chief classifications are: 
- Lookup repositories require the user to know or guess some exact 
  value before asking for information, sometimes called a "lookup key" 
  and sometimes called a "name". 
  The response to a successful lookup is a single group of information, 
  often called "information about the named entity". 
- Search repositories require the user to know some approximate value 
  of some information. They usually return zero, one or more responses 
  that match the information supplied according to some algorithm. 
  Where the repository is structured around "entities", the information 
  can be about zero, one or many entities. 
An orthogonal dimension has to do with time: 

 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 3] 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
- Query repositories will answer a request with a response, and once 
  that is over with, will do nothing more. 
- Notify repositories will get a request from an user to have 
  information returned at some later time when it becomes available, 
  current or whatever, and will respond at that time with a 
  notification that information is available. 
- Subscription repositories are like notify repositories, but will 
  transfer the actual information when available. 
 

2.3 Consistency models 
Consistency (or the lack thereof) is a property of distributed 
repositories; for this particular discussion, we ignore the subject of 
semantically inconsistent data (such as an assertion that a man is 
blind and has a valid driver's license), and focus on the problem of 
consistency where inconsistency is defined as having the same request, 
using the same credentials, be answered with different data at 
different sites. 
Distributed repositories may have: 
- Strict consistency, where the problem above never arises. This is 
  quite expensive. 
- Strict internal consistency, where the replies always reflect a 
  consistent picture of the total repository, but some sites may 
  reflect an earlier version of the repository than others 
- Loose, converging consistency, where different parts of the 
  repository may be updated at different times as seen from a single 
  site, but the process is designed in such a way that if one stops 
  making changes to the repository, all sites will sooner or later 
  present the same information 
- Inconsistency, where no guarantee can be made whatsoever 
One interesting variant is subset consistency, where the system is 
consistent (according to one of the definitions above), but not all 
questions will be answered at all sites; possibly because different 
sites have different policies on what they make available (NetNews), or 
because different sites only need different subsets of the "whole 
picture" (BGP). 

2.4 Security models 
It's harder to describe security models in a few sentences than other 
properties of information systems. There also exists a large 
specialized literature on terminology for security, including [SEC]. 
Some thoughts, though: 
On trust in information: Why do we trust a piece of information to be 
correct? 

 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 4] 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
- Because it's in the repository (and therefore must have been 
  authorized). 
  This is perimeter (or Eggshell) integrity. 
- Because it contains internal integrity checks, usually involving 
  digital signatures by verifiable identities 
  This is item integrity; the granularity of the integrity and the 
  ability to do integrity checks on the relationships between objects 
  is extremely important and extremely hard to get right, as is 
  establishing the roots of the trust chains. 
- Because it fits other available information, and causes the right 
  things to happen when I use it. 
  This is hopeful integrity. 
Which integrity model to choose is a matter of evaluating the cost of 
implementing the integrity, the cost of having the integrity break on 
you, and the impact of cost on doing business. 
On access to information, the usual categories apply: 
- Open access: Anyone can get the information. 
- Property-based access: Access because of what you are, or where you 
  are. For example limited to "same network", "physically present" or 
  "resolvable DNS name" 
- Identity-based access: Access because of who you are (or successfully 
  claim to be). username/password, certificatesà.. 
  These are then backed up by a layer specifying what the identity you 
  have proven yourself to be has access to 
- Token-based access: Access because of what you have. Hardware tokens, 
  smartcards, certificates, capability keysà. 
  In this case, access is given to all who can present that credential, 
  without caring about their identity. 
The most common approaches are identity-based and open access; however, 
"what you have" access is commonly used informally in, for example, 
password-protected FTP or Web sites where the password is shared 
between all members of a group. 
 

2.5 Update models 
A few examples: 
- Read-only repositories have no standard means of changing the 
  information in them. This is usually accomplished through some other 
  interface than the standard interface. 
- Read-mostly repositories are designed based on a theory that reads 
  will greatly outnumber updates; this may, for instance, be reflected 
  in relatively slow consistency-updating protocols. 
- Read-write repositories assume that the updates and the read 
  operations are of the same order of magnitude. 
 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 5] 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
2.6 The term "Directory" 
The definitions above never used the term "Directory". 
In most common usages, the properties that a repository must have in 
order to be worthy of being called a directory are: 
- Search 
- Convergent consistency 
All the other terms above may vary across the set of things that are 
called "directories". 
 

3. Classification of some real systems 

3.1 The Domain Name System 
The DNS [DNS] is a global cooperative lookup repository with loose, 
converging consistency and query capability only. 
It is either strictly read-only or read-mostly (with Dynamic DNS), has 
an open access model, and mainy perimeter integrity (some would say 
hopeful integrity). DNSSEC aims to give it item integrity. 
The DNS is built out of zone repositories that themselves may be 
distributed, and are always replicated when distributed. 
Note that like many other systems, the DNS has some features that do 
not fit neatly in the classification; for instance, there is a 
(deprecated and not widely used) function called IQUERY, which allows a 
very limited query capability. 
If one opens up the box and looks at the relationship between primary 
and secondary nameservers, that can be seen as a limited form of notify 
capability, but this is not available to end-users of the total system. 
 

3.2 The (imagined) X.500 Global Directory 
X.500 [X500] was intended to be a global search repository with loose, 
converging consistency. 
It was intended to be read-mostly, perimeter secure and query-capable. 

3.3 The Global BGP Routing Information Database 
The Global or top-level BGP routing information database [BGP1] is 
often viewed as a global read-write repository with loose, converging 
subset consistency (not all routes are carried everywhere) and very 
limited integrity control, mostly intended to be perimeter integrity 
based on "access control based on what you are". 
One can argue that BGP [BGP2] is better viewed as a global mechanism 
for updating a set of local read/write repositories, since far from all 

 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 6] 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
routing information is carried everywhere, and the decision on what 
routes to accept is always considered a local policy matter. But from a 
security model perspective, a lot of the controls are applied at the 
periphery of the routing system, not at each local repository; this 
still makes it interesting to consider properties that apply to the BGP 
system as a whole. 

3.4 The NetNews system 
NetNews [NEWS] is a global read-write repository with loose (non-
converging) subset consistency (not all sites carry all articles, and 
article retention times differ). Between sites it offers subscription 
capability; to users it offers both search and lookup functionality. 

3.5 SNMP MIBs 
An SNMP [SNMP] agent can be thought of as a local, centralized 
repository offering lookup functionalty. 
With SNMPv3, it offers all kinds of access models, but mostly "access 
because of what you have" seems popular. 
 

4. Security Considerations 
Security is a very relevant question when considering information 
access systems. 
Some issues to consider are: 
- Controlled access to information 
- Controlled rights to update information 
- Protection of the information path from provider to consumer 
- With personal information, privacy issues 
- Interactions between multiple ways to access the same information 
 
It is proably a Good Thing to consider carefully the security models 
from section 2.4 when designing repositories or repository access 
protocols. 

5. Acknowledgement 
The author wishes to thank all who contributed to this document, 
including Patrik Faltstrom, Eric A. Hall, James Benedict, Ted Hardie, 
Urs Eppenberger and many others. 

6. References 
[SEC]     Internet Security Glossary. R. Shirey. May 2000 
 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 7] 
Definitions for talking about directories        Harald Alvestrand 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt        Expires October 2001 
 
[DNS]     RFC 1034 "Domain names - concepts and facilities". P.V. 
Mockapetris. Nov-01-1987 
[E164]    ITU-T Recommendation E.164/I.331 (05/97): The International 
Public Telecommunication Numbering Plan. 1997. 
[BGP1]    "Analyzing the Internet's BGP Routing Table", published in 
"The Internet Protocol Journal", Volume 4, No 1, April 2001. At the 
time of writing, available at http://www.telstra.net/gih/papers/ipj/4-
1-bgp.pdf 
[BGP2]    RFC 1771, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)". RFC 1771. Y. 
Rekhter, T. Li. March 1995.  
[NEWS] RFC 977, "Network News Transfer Protocol". B. Kantor, P. 
Lapsley,  February 1986 
[SNMP] RFC 2570, "Introduction to Version 3 of the Internet-standard 
Network Management Framework" J. Case, R. Mundy, D. Partain, B. 
Stewart. April 1999. 
[X500] RFC 1308, "Executive Introduction to Directory Services Using 
the X.500 Protocol". C. Weider, J. Reynolds. March 1992 
 

7. Author's Address 
Harald Tveit Alvestrand 
Cisco Systems 
Weidemanns vei 27 
N-7043 Trondheim 
NORWAY 
EMail: Harald@alvestrand.no 
Phone: +41 44 29 94 
  

















 
draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-02.txt                   [Page 8] 