





Internet Engineering Task Force                            Juha Heinanen
INTERNET DRAFT                                             Song Networks
Expires June  2003                                        December, 2002


                Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery
              <draft-heinanen-radius-pe-discovery-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document describes how in PE-based VPNs a PE of a VPN can use
   Radius [1-2] to authenticate its CEs and discover the other PEs of
   the VPN.

1. Introduction

   This document describes how in PE-based VPNs a PE of a VPN can use
   Radius [1-2] to authenticate its CEs and discover the other PEs of
   the VPN.  In Radius terms, the CEs are users and PEs are Network
   Access Servers (NAS) implementing Radius client function.

   A VPN can span multiple Autonomous Systems (AS) and multiple
   providers.  Each PE, however, only needs to be a Radius client to
   Radius of the "local" provider.  In case of a CE belongs to a
   "foreign" VPN, Radius of the local provider act as a proxy client to
   Radius of the foreign provider.



Heinanen         Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery        [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            December, 2002


   A companion document will describe how Radius can be used by the CEs
   of a CE-based VPN to discover the other CEs of the VPN.

2. Site Identification

   Each CE (a VPN site) is identified by a "user name" of the form

       [realm/]user@domain

   "realm", if present, denotes a provider that is the administrative
   owner of the VPN.  It is needed only if a CE connects to a VPN at a
   "foreign" PE.  It is then used by the local Radius of the PE to proxy
   requests to the correct foreign Radius.

   "user" identifies a site in a VPN identified by "domain".  As an
   example,

       providerX/atlanta@vpnY.domainZ.net

   could identify a CE called "atlanta" in a VPN called
   "vpnY.domainZ.net", which belongs to an administratively owner
   providerX.

3. Radius Configuration

   Each realm has a single Radius that stores all information regarding
   VPNs that belong to the realm.  For reliable operation of this
   protocol, each Radius should consist of more than one physical Radius
   server.  For correct operation of this protocol, all these physical
   servers MUST at all times share the same database content.

   For each VPN, Radius of the realm to which the VPN belongs to MUST be
   configured with a set of "users" that correspond to the CEs of the
   VPN.  User information includes user name, password, and VPN
   identifier:

       <CE user name, password, VPN identifier>

   User information MAY also include a list of PEs, to which the CE is
   allowed to connect to, and QoS information regarding the CE's
   connection to the VPN.

   In addition to the above static information, Radius keeps dynamically
   track of the PEs of the VPN as described below (Protocol Operation).
   The PEs MAY also have pre-configured attributes telling, for example,
   that a PE is a hub of a VPN.

   If dynamic PE discovery capability of this protocol is not used,



Heinanen         Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery        [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            December, 2002


   Radius MUST be configured for each VPN with a list of its PEs.  Such
   a degenerate use of this protocol does is not discussed further in
   this memo.

   In order to allow local PEs and Radius servers in foreign realms to
   make CE related queries to Radius of the local realm, potential local
   PEs and Radius servers of foreign realms MUST be configured in local
   Radius as clients.

4. PE Configuration

   Each PE MUST be configured with the information about the Radius
   servers of local Radius to which to send requests to.  For
   reliability reasons, each PE SHOULD have available more than one
   physical Radius server.

5. Protocol Operation

   Radius keeps track of the PEs and CEs of a VPN in a database table
   that has the following fields:

       <VPN identifier, PE IP address, CE user name>

   In addition, Radius records for each active PE the time when it has
   last received from the PE any Radius request:

       <PE IP address, timestamp>

   This information is used by Radius to detect if a PE has failed for a
   longer period of time or has been taken improperly out of use, and if
   so, to clean up its database.

   When a CE wants to join a VPN, the PE to which the CE is attached to
   issues a Radius Access-Request using the user name and password of
   the CE.  The PE has either learned this information from the CE via
   an authentication protocol, for example, 802.1x/EAP, or it has been
   configured in the PE.

   If authentication succeeds, Radius responds with Access-Accept that
   tells to the PE the VPN to which the CE belongs to and possibly other
   CE specific information, e.g., QoS parameters.  If authentication
   fails or if some other preconditions are not met, e.g. the CE is not
   allowed to connect to the particular PE, Radius responds with Access-
   Reject.

   After receiving an Access-Accept response, the PE issues a Start
   Accounting-Request. When Radius receives the request, it inserts <VPN
   identifier, PE IP address, CE user name> record in its database



Heinanen         Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery        [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            December, 2002


   replacing a possible earlier <VPN identifier, *, CE user name>
   record.  Then it responds with an Accounting-Response, which includes
   an attribute that contains all unique PE IP addresses in the set <VPN
   identifier, *, *>.  The PE considers the CE as connected to the VPN
   after it has received the Accounting-Response.

   Whenever N minutes has elapsed from the last Radius request that the
   PE has sent for any CE in a realm, it issues an Interim-Update
   Accounting-Request for any one of its CEs that belong to the realm.
   In order to keep this keep-alive mechanism as light weight as
   possible, Radius' response to the Interim-Update Accounting-Request
   does not contain any VPN related attributes.

   If a PE wants for some reason to get from Radius an up-to-date list
   of PEs in a particular VPN, it can at any time issue a new Start
   Accounting request for any one of its CEs that belongs to the VPN.
   Similarly, the PE can at any time issue a new Access-Request for any
   one of its CEs.

   If Radius doesn't receive from a PE any request during a period of M
   * N minutes, Radius considers that the PE is not anymore operational
   and removes from its database all <*, PE IP address, *> records and
   the <PE IP address, *> record.

   When a CE is to be disconnected from the VPN, the PE issues a Stop
   Accounting-Request.  After receiving the request, Radius removes the
   <VPN identifier, PE IP address, CE user name> record from its
   database and responds with an Accounting-Response that does not
   contain any VPN related attributes. The PE considers the CE as
   disconnected from the VPN when it has received the Accounting-
   Response.

6. PE Failure Recovery

   If a PE fails and the failure has lasted longer than M * N minutes,
   Radius has removed all <*, PE IP address, *> records from its
   database.  No matter how long the failure has lasted, upon recovery,
   the PE re-authenticates all CEs connected to it in all VPNs and thus
   re-discovers all other PEs in all those VPNs.

7. Scaling Limits

   Since Radius protocol operates over UDP, the maximum UDP payload size
   available for Radius attributes is limited to about 1500 - 40 = 1480
   octets assuming that UDP fragmentation is not supported.  The most
   space consuming message is Accounting-Response to Start Accounting-
   Request, which contains a list of IP addresses of the PEs of a VPN.
   This limits the number of PEs in a VPN to about 370, which is large



Heinanen         Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery        [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            December, 2002


   enough for a fully meshed VPN.

   Larger VPNs can be easily supported by configuring some of the PEs as
   hubs, since only the hubs of a VPN need to be advertised in the
   Accounting-Response.  This provides a way to increase the maximum
   number of PEs in a VPN to thousands.

   Besides the packet size, another factor limiting scalability of this
   protocol might be the keep-alive mechanism implemented by Interim-
   Update Accounting-Request.  However, since a PE needs to send only
   one keep-alive message per N minutes per realm in which it has at
   least one VPN site, scalability of keep-alives it is not an issue.

8. Security Considerations

   Security of Radius based VPN discovery depends on the security of
   Radius, that is covered in [1] and [2].

9. Further Work

   Protocol details of Radius based VPN discovery will be specified in a
   future version of this memo, provided that there is enough IETF
   interest in Radius based discovery.

Acknowledgements

   I would like to thank Mark Duffy and Joel Halpern for their
   constructive comments on earlier versions of this memo.

References

   [1] C. Rigney, et al., "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service
   (RADIUS)". RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [2] C. Rigney, "RADIUS Accounting". RFC 2866, June 2000.

Author's Address

   Juha Heinanen
   Song Networks, Inc.
   Hallituskatu 16
   33200 Tampere, Finland
   Email: jh@song.fi

Full Copyright

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.




Heinanen         Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery        [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT                                            December, 2002


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
   assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
   on all such copies and derivative works. However, this document itself
   may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
   or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations,
   except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in
   which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
   Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
   languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT
   INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR
   FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





























Heinanen         Using Radius for PE-Based VPN Discovery        [Page 6]
