Service Location Working Group                              Mikael Pahmp
INTERNET DRAFT                                       Axis Communications
28 June 1999

   Definition of printer:raw-tcp:  URLs for use with Service Location
             draft-ietf-svrloc-rawtcp-printer-scheme-01.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Service Location Working Group
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be
   submitted to the srvloc@srvloc.org mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document defines the 'printer:raw-tcp' service type and the
   attributes associated with it.  It is a concrete service type of the
   abstract printer service type defined in [1] for the Service Location
   Procotocol, Version 2 [2].












Mikael Pahmp             Expires 28 December 1999               [Page i]

Internet Draft      'printer:raw-tcp' Service Template      28 June 1999


1. Introduction

   Service Type templates are used to describe in a standard way those
   services which use the service: URL. The template described in this
   document extends the abstract service type described in [1], called
   printer, with another concrete service type, called raw-tcp.


2. Raw TCP printing

   Printing using TCP for transparent communication between a client
   and a print service is common today. How print data, status,
   messages, etc is formatted when exchanged across the TCP connection
   varies. It is up to the printing client to determine how data should
   be formatted and interpreted. This may be determined based on the
   information available in the service attributes.
   
   For example, a client without any prior configuration may
   use the 'ieee-1284-device-id' attribute, described below, to select a
   printer driver for the advertised printer. The client can then let
   the printer driver communicate transparently with the printer service
   by opening a TCP connection to the host and port indicated by the
   advertised URL.

2.1. Service Attributes

   Attributes of the raw-tcp print service includes those defined
   in [1] and a new optional attribute 'ieee-1284-device-id' defined
   in this service template. This attribute is the Device ID string
   of the advertised printer as defined in IEEE 1284 [3].






















Mikael Pahmp             Expires 28 December 1999               [Page 1]

Internet Draft      'printer:raw-tcp' Service Template      28 June 1999


3. 'printer:raw-tcp' Service Template

   The service template defined below, conforms to the grammar
   described in "Service Templates and service:  Schemes".  Please refer
   to [4] for detailed explaination of the syntax.

   Name of submitter: Mikael Pahmp <Mikael.Pahmp@axis.com>
   
   Language of service template: en
   
   Security Considerations:
     This service neither adds nor detracts from the security of the
     opaque raw-tcp data stream itself. See also the security
     considerations of the 'printer:' template [1].
     
   Template Text:
   -------------------------template begins here-----------------------
   template-type = printer:raw-tcp

   template-version = 0.1

   template-description =
     The printer:raw-tcp: URL describes a transparent bidirectional
     communication channel for printing. Print data, status, messages,
     etc is written or read by opening a TCP connection to the port in 
     the service URL. How data is formatted and sent across the
     connection is decided by the printing client and the printer
     service and is not defined by this template.

   template-url-syntax=
     url-path    = ippurl / lprurl / raw-tcp-url
                   ; This template adds 'raw-tcp-url' to the url-path
                   ; definition in [1].
                   ; 'ippurl' and 'lprurl' as defined in [1].
     raw-tcp-url = "raw-tcp://" hostport
                   ; raw-tcp URLs don't have a path section.
     hostport    = host ":" port
                   ; raw-tcp doesn't have a well-known port assigned by
                   ; IANA. The port must therefor be specified in all
                   ; raw-tcp URLs.
                   ; 'host' and 'port' as defined in [1].

   ieee-1284-device-id = STRING L O
     # The Device ID string of this printer as defined in IEEE 1284 [3]
     # which identifies the printer type, model, etc.

   --------------------------template ends here------------------------





Mikael Pahmp             Expires 28 December 1999               [Page 2]

Internet Draft      'printer:raw-tcp' Service Template      28 June 1999


4. References

  [1] St. Pierre, P., Isaccson., S. and I. McDonald,
      "Definition of printer:  URLs for use with Service Location",
      <draft-ietf-svrloc-printer-scheme-03.txt> (work in progress),
      February 1999.

  [2] Guttman, E., Perkins, C., Veizades, J. and M. Day, "Service
      Location Protocol Version 2", RFC 2608, June 1999.

  [3] "IEEE Std.1284-1994 Standard Signaling Method for a
      Bi-directional Parallel Peripheral Interface for Personal
      Computers", 1994.

  [4] Guttman, E., Perkins, C. and J. Kempf, "Service Templates and
      service: Schemes", RFC 2609, June 1999.




































Mikael Pahmp             Expires 28 December 1999               [Page 3]

Internet Draft      'printer:raw-tcp' Service Template      28 June 1999


5. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.  
   
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.  
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
   
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 


6. Author's Address

   Questions about this memo can be directed to:

   Mikael Pahmp
   Axis Communications
   Scheelev. 16
   S - 223 70  Lund
   Sweden
   Phone: +46 46 270 1881
   email: Mikael.Pahmp@axis.com












Mikael Pahmp            Expires 28 December 1999                [Page 3]
