MPLS Working Group                                    Monica Lazer, AT&T
Internet Draft                               Curtis Brownmiller, Worlcom
Expiration Date: May 2001                            Zhi-Wei Lin, Lucent
                                               Vijaya Poudyal, Telcordia
                                                     Philip Walch, TyCom
                                                      Mark Jones, Sprint
                                                Olivier Duroyon, Alcatel
                                                    Jen-Wei Kuo, Fujitsu
                                                      Yang Cao, Sycamore
                                               Hirokazu Ishimatsu, Japan
                                                                 Telecom
                                                Yong Xue, UUNET/Worldcom
 
                                                           November 2000
 
 
                      Requirements on the ASON UNI 
                                     
                   draft-lin-mpls-ipo-ason-uni-00.txt 

 
 
 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Work already done on the automatic switched optical network (ASON) 
   has identified several requirements and architectural features. In 
   particular several interfaces have been identified, however there 
   are no detailed requirements for these interfaces. This document 
   presents our understanding of requirements from the point of view of 
   what an ASON customer can be expected to do with ASON. These are 

 
Lin, et al.                                                          1 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   mainly requirements at the Client Application Programming Interface 
   (API). Note that the Client API is the logical interface between a 
   network client (user domain) and the network server (service 
   provider domain). 
    
    













































 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          2 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



    
   Table of Contents 
    
    
   1. Introduction....................................................4 
   2. Terminology.....................................................5 
   3. Business/Commercial Models......................................6 
   3.1 ISP owning all layer 1 infrastructure..........................7 
   3.2 ISP owning partial or leasing layer 1 infrastructure...........7 
   3.3 Retailer or wholesaler for multi-services......................7 
   3.4 Carriers carrier, or bandwidth broker..........................8 
   4. ASON 'Dial-up' Service Requirements.............................8 
   4.1 Connection Operations..........................................9 
   4.2 Connection Resilience.........................................10 
   4.3 Signaling Network Resilience..................................11 
   4.4 Connection Parameters.........................................11 
   4.5 Scheduled Connection..........................................12 
   4.6 ASON Service Level Agreements.................................12 
   4.7 Naming and Addressing.........................................14 
   5. Set-up of ASON Network.........................................18 
   5.1 Operations Phases.............................................18 
   5.2 Connection Phases.............................................19 
   5.2.1 Set-up (Create) Connection..................................19 
   5.2.2 Modify Connection...........................................21 
   5.2.3 Release (Delete) Connection.................................21 
   5.2.4 Query Connection............................................22 
    
    
    






















 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          3 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



    
    
1. Introduction  
    
   Work already done on the automatic switched optical network (ASON) 
   has identified several requirements and architectural features. In 
   particular several interfaces have been identified, however there 
   are no detailed requirements for these interfaces. This document 
   presents our understanding of requirements from the point of view of 
   what an ASON customer can be expected to do with ASON. These are 
   mainly requirements at the Client Application Programming Interface 
   (API). Note that the Client API is the logical interface between a 
   network client (user domain) and the network server (service 
   provider domain). Requirements on the ASON NNI are out of the scope 
   of this document.  
    
   The contribution limits itself to customer control aspects, and 
   makes no statements about what may or may not be supported using 
   conventional provisioning protocols. Several high level aspects of 
   the ASON Client API requirements need to be highlighted: 
    
     ?
        Several aspects of the ASON network related to the use of 
        naming and addressing are discussed in more detail in later 
        sections of this document. However, it should be noted that the 
        name and address schemes used in the ASON are orthogonal to the 
        signaling or routing protocol, and should be viewed as 
        independently defined, e.g., addressing is used in support of 
        routing and specific implementations of routing protocol. Two 
        perspectives may be applied to the name and address: that of 
        layer separation and that of domain separation. Layer 
        separation refers to the independence of the client layer name 
        from the server layer name, while domain separation refers to 
        the independence of user domain name from the service provider 
        domain name. Requirements for the name and address will be 
        discussed in greater detail in later sections.   
    
     ?
        In discussing the naming and addressing for the ASON network, 
        two aspects need to be considered: that of the layer network 
        naming (client/server name relationship) and that of the 
        administrative domain naming (user/service provider name 
        relationship).   
    
     ?
        There are multiple methods to provide signaling for ASON 
        connection set-up. In this document, we assume that ASON 
        signaling may be initiated by user signaling agents or by third 
        party signaling agents (proxy signaling agents). It must be 
        possible for both participants and third parties to set-up 
        calls, and it must be possible to have a control plane that is 
        not associated with the connection being set-up. This 
        contribution assumes that wherever user signaling agents are 
        used, third party signaling agents may also be applied.  
 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          4 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



    
2. Terminology  
    
   For the purposes of discussion, the following terms are used in this 
   document. Note that there are two terms used in the context of this 
   document, that relate to the IETF and the OIF terminology and that 
   relate to the ITU-T terminology (in parenthesis). This document 
   attempts to map these terminologies, with a note that in many cases 
   the terms do not map directly to each other, and only provide a 
   loose correlation. Definitions given below are those associated with 
   the current understanding of the OIF definitions. An alignment of 
   these terminology with that of the ITU terminology will be needed:  
    
      
     ?
        Client link connection (lightpath) _ Entity formed by the two 
        connection points (IP-capable end-points), which may be 
        realized as a trail across the service provider network.  
     ?
        Connection request (lightpath request) _ A request issued by 
        either (a) user signaling agent, or (b) third party signaling 
        agent, on behalf of the user network element. This can use, 
        e.g., extended RSVP or CR-LDP.  
     ?
        Optical NNI (O-NNI) _ Provides the logical transport interface 
        for interconnecting network elements within a single domain.  
     ?
        Optical UNI (O-UNI) _ Provides the logical transport interface 
        for interconnecting network elements between two logical 
        domains.  
     ?
        Service provider domain - The collection of hosts, 
        applications, and interconnecting network(s) that are managed 
        by the service provider(s).  
     ?
        Service provider network element (boundary ONE) _ NE within the 
        service provider's domain that is providing connection to a NE 
        within the user's domain.  
     ?
        Service provider signaling agent (ONE-Controller, ONE-C) _ 
        Device processing any kind of signaling channel messages and 
        controls the connection request set-up. The signaling agent may 
        be integrated with the service provider NE or as a separate 
        device that remotely control one or more service provider NEs, 
        i.e., no requirement is placed regarding the packaging of the 
        signaling agent.  
     ?
        Signaling NNI (S-NNI) _ Provides the logical signaling 
        interface for interconnecting network elements within a single 
        domain. The S-NNI does not place requirements on methods for 
        transport of the signaling channel.  
     ?
        Signaling UNI (S-UNI) _ Provides the logical signaling 
        interface for interconnecting network elements between two 
        logical domains. The S-UNI does not place requirements on 
        methods for transport of the signaling channel (i.e., in-band 
        or out-of-band).  
     ?
        User domain - The collection of hosts, applications, and 
        interconnecting network(s) that are managed by the user(s).  

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          5 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



     ?
        User domain connection point (IP-capable end-point) _ The 
        connection point within the user's domain involved with 
        creating a link connection across the service provider network 
        (Boundary router's physical ports, interconnecting with the 
        boundary ONE).  
     ?
        User network element (boundary router) _ NE within the user's 
        domain that is providing a connection to a NE within the 
        service provider's domain.  
     ?
        User signaling agent (decision point/TE tool) _ Device 
        processing any kind of signaling channel messages and 
        determines need for a link connection on the basis of SLA and 
        related information.  
    
    
    









                   Figure 1.  General ASON Architecture 

    
    
3. Business/Commercial Models  
    
   Before we can consider requirements for the automatic switched 
   optical network services, we must briefly consider the business 
   models that may be applicable and which must be supported. The focus 
   of this section is on business rather than technical issues.  
    





 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          6 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   It is clear that all four models are reasonable and exist today. 
   Indeed, a network might be used in all four ways by various 
   organizations within the same network operator. The most stringent 
   requirements are placed by cases 3 and 4 as both these cases have 
   trust (or security) issues between the service provider and its 
   customer's business, although case 1 also presents trust issues. 
   This need for multiple instances indicates that there is a greater 
   need for partitioning than by technology alone. For this reason 
   there must be support for any desired general partitioning of the 
   network resources, and cases 1 and 2 is handled as a special case 
   where the only partitions are driven by technology and layer 
   boundaries. We note that while ASON is directed primarily to new 
   networks, there is nothing to preclude its use to control existing 
   networks.  
    
   These potential business models make it clear that support for all 
   types of protocol and carried services is required. We re-affirm 
   that ASON must not assume a single client type and instance. Because 
   of potential trust issues, the ASON network needs to enable 
   segregation of certain information between the user and service 
   provider networks. This for example, may include the topology of the 
   service provider network.  
    
3.1 ISP owning all layer 1 infrastructure  
    
   The delivered service is transported over the ISP's own layer 1 
   infrastructure. As the infrastructure is fully owned, there are no 
   trust issues between the infrastructure and service layers (these 
   may be, e.g., different organizations within the same company). The 
   service provider's layer 1 network may support multiple instances 
   and multiple types of user networks.  
    
3.2 ISP owning partial or leasing layer 1 infrastructure  
    
   The delivered service is transported over part of the ISP's own 
   layer 1 infrastructure or over leased layer 1 infrastructure (e.g., 
   leased from a retailer or wholesaler). As the infrastructure may be 
   leased, there is a trust issue between the infrastructure and the 
   service layers. As the infrastructure may be leased, it may be 
   leased from multiple carriers. Multiple instances of layer 1 
   networks, owned by more than one player, support multiple instances 
   and multiple types of user networks.  
    
3.3 Retailer or wholesaler for multi-services  
    
   In this case the business owns the layer 1 infrastructure and sells 
   services to customers who may themselves resell to others. There is 
   a definite trust issue between this business and the client 
   businesses. As this business cannot make any assumptions about the 
   business of the customers, it is highly likely that several 
   customers may be engaged in the same business. This business offers 
 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          7 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   many different services to many different customers. If the 
   customers are engaged in the IP business there will be several 
   instances of IP networks running over this network, and each 
   instance will have its own control plane. Layer 1 network supports 
   multiple instances of the user network.  
    
3.4 Carriers carrier, or bandwidth broker  
    
   Potential users of such an application are other network operators, 
   once removed from delivering service to an end user. In this case 
   there is again a major trust issue. The customer network is likely 
   to be a circuit network, potentially in the same layer as this 
   network (OCh taking part in another operators network) and again 
   there will be several instances of user networks in the same layer 
   each with its own control plane. In this model the provider has no 
   idea what services are being eventually offered by the user network. 
   Layer 1 network may be part of a customer's layer 1 network. This 
   introduces a potential recursion in the business model.  
    
4. ASON 'Dial-up' Service Requirements  
    
   Prior to the ability to set-up a connection (or lightpath), contract 
   negotiations must be completed and the service level agreements 
   (SLAs) must be in place. These agreements can include, e.g., 
   allowable range of requests for availability (and any associated 
   additional parameters to constrain availability such as MTTR, avoid 
   city X, etc.), ability to set up VPNs, allowable range of signal 
   types and/or bandwidth constraints (e.g., SDH at 2.5 Gbps or MS16), 
   allowable types of traffic priority, etc. As an example, an IP 
   router may request a connection with 'gold' service only if that 
   service was included as part of the contract. Alternatively a client 
   may request the ability to request the entire range of services, 
   e.g., from lowest priority to highest priority.  
    
   Depending on a particular service provider's policy, all, some, or 
   none of these additional connection set-up attributes may be 
   specified by the customer. For example, instead of specifying some 
   of the distinct attributes, a service provider may offer three 
   classes of services (gold, silver, bronze) that offer specific 
   availability requirements, where each service class may provide 
   different bandwidths. Alternatively, a service provider may only 
   offer basic ASON dial-up service, i.e., set-up (create) connection 
   and release (delete) connection.  
    
   In addition to specifying attributes of the connection, there needs 
   to be policy control on connection requests. This implies that an 
   enforcement mechanism is needed to ensure compliance of the requests 
   with the service contracts agreed to by the client. This may 
   include, e.g., call acceptance agent (or connection admission 
   control or policy control). An essential part of connection oriented 
   networks is call acceptance. It must be possible to control the 
 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          8 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   types of connection requests that are accepted by the network. This 
   allows the traffic intensity to be matched to the available network 
   resources as well as allowing various forms of restricted network 
   access.  
    
   The switched optical network has been described in terms of 
   connection management, connection set up, service discovery, 
   resilience against server faults, address resolution, and 
   addressing. An approach for defining the requirements for the "dial-
   up" service is to first define a basic service that sets up 
   connections and then think of features that may be added to the 
   basic service. This allows us to separate the various features, 
   enabling them to be implemented or offered separately. In this 
   regard, one service provider may offer only basic dial-up services, 
   while another operator may offer additional services (such as 
   scheduled connection). Some key service features are enumerated 
   below.  
    
4.1 Connection Operations  
    
   This service sets up a link connection (lightpath) between a user 
   domain's connection point (IP-capable end-point), and may be 
   triggered by either the user signaling agent (decision point or TE 
   tool) or a third party signaling agent. The trigger point may be 
   located anywhere, based on the specific location of the signaling 
   agent. The service provider signaling agent (ONE-C) receives the 
   connection request and handles set-up of the link connection across 
   the service provider domain. There are three essential/basic 
   operations needed for the service: set-up/create, modify and 
   release/delete a connection. Responses to the three requests may be 
   successful connection or failed connection attempt. In addition, 
   there is a need for the destination entity to be able to accept or 
   reject an incoming connection request. 
    
    
     ?
        Set-up (create): The ASON provides its users with the necessary 
        mechanisms to signal to the network its desire to create a new 
        connection between two connection points. Certain attributes 
        are associated with the requested connections. Those attributes 
        are contained in the signaling message handled by the signaling 
        agent, and may contain various basic attributes (such as signal 
        type) as well as optional attributes (such as connection 
        constraints, scheduled connection).  
     ?
        Modify: This action results in modifying one or more of the 
        attributes associated with a user's connection. This action 
        allows ASON users to adjust connection attributes. It is still 
        unclear what attributes may be modifiable and the effects of 
        modification to the complexity requirements of the control 
        plane.  
     ?
        Release (delete): Upon signaling of a connection release by 
        ASON user, the network eliminates all the transport resources 

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                          9 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



        associated with this connection, though a record of the 
        connection should be maintained for administrative (e.g., 
        billing) purposes. It is expected that the network will 
        acknowledge the release of the connection back to the user.  
    
   There are several types of requests that can be made to change the 
   characteristics of a connection, of which several are identified 
   here as examples:  
    
   These requests allow users to make changes to their existing 
   connections without violating any existing  
   SLAs. These changes may be disruptive to user traffic or non-
   disruptive to user traffic, and may be effected via different 
   methods. For example, changing the bandwidth of a connection may be 
   realized by means of two requests: delete existing connection and 
   create new connection (make before break approach). This specific 
   realization interrupts user traffic flow.  
    
   However, it may also be conceivable in certain cases that changing a 
   connection's characteristics will not disrupt existing traffic. For 
   example a service provider offers an Nx2.5 Gbps as a single service 
   (i.e., from the user's perspective this is a single connection), and 
   a user initially requests 3x2.5 Gbps connection (as a single request 
   from the user). If the user expects lower use of the connection, the 
   user may request modification of the bandwidth, i.e., 2x2.5 Gbps. 
   From the user's perspective, the bandwidth of the requested 
   connection has been reduced without disrupting existing traffic on 
   the two remaining 2.5 Gbps connection.  
    
   Additionally, a query request should be provided. The query request 
   can be initiated by the user signaling agent or a third party 
   signaling agent to obtain information regarding the connection. 
   These information may include the attributes of the connection, 
   health of the connection, etc.  
    
4.2 Connection Resilience  
    
   This service is so named to distinguish it from the protection and 
   restoration mechanisms that are used to provide fault tolerance to 
   the connection. The service adds the ability to tolerate faults to 
   the basic connection set-up service itself. Any parameters to this 
   service must be in terms meaningful to the client, e.g., 
   availability, MTTR, and may not specify server layer architectural 
   solutions, e.g., diversity, specific route (these parameters are 
   associated with, e.g., a carrier's network engineering to achieve 
   the specified availability). In this service we must recognize that 
   various faults may be protected against, and the most important 
   characteristic of the fault is how much physical space it affects. 
   It is likely that such parameters are in terms of fault radius, as 
   well as availability. This is important as the degree of diversity 
   required depends on the size of the fault. Earthquakes, for example, 

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         10 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   affect a wide area yet a service request may well want resilience in 
   the face of an earthquake. Consequently, although availability may 
   be sufficient for specifying resilience, ASON signaling should also 
   consider optional additional attributes to allow connection 
   constraints (discussed in later sections).  
      
4.3 Signaling Network Resilience  
    
   A Signaling Network (SN) is necessary to serve as the transport 
   network for all the signaling messages necessary for connection 
   setup and teardown within the server layer network (SLN). The SN is 
   the network interconnecting the ASON signaling agents (ONE-Cs). The 
   SLN is the network interconnecting the service provider domain's 
   network elements. It is extremely desirable that the SN topology be 
   independent of the SLN topology (they may use some common physical 
   routes but we do not require or exclude it) and further that it 
   itself be built on top of any SLN technology such as optical, SONET 
   or Ethernet. This makes the SN portable and applicable to any 
   automatic switched network. However, this flexibility creates some 
   challenges. First, note that the SN can have some failures of its 
   own such as cable cuts. These may or may not be coupled with SLN 
   failures depending on the SN and SLN topologies and the packaging of 
   various control plane functions. When the SN has an independent 
   failure, it may impact new connection setup in the SLN as no 
   signaling paths may be available in the SN. When the SN has a 
   failure coupled with a SLN failure, it may not be possible to 
   restore existing connections in the SLN even though alternate paths 
   are available in the SLN.  
    
   Clearly, this implies that the SN has to be as reliable as the SLN 
   itself (and possibly more reliable than the SLN) and one needs fast 
   restoration in the SN itself in order to carry out the same for the 
   SLN. 
    
4.4 Connection Parameters  
    
   This section provides additional connection attributes that allow a 
   user of the ASON network to specify additional criteria above and 
   beyond what is sufficient (e.g., availability is sufficient for 
   connection set-up; however, users may demand attributes for 
   additional flexibility). There needs to be a means of attaching 
   attributes to a particular connection request.  
    
     ?
        Route diversity - It is conceivable that there is a need for 
        multiple connections to be set up in one operation. An obvious 
        application is the provision of two diverse connections so that 
        a user link connection can provide fault resilience. This can 
        only be provided by specifying constraints on the connections, 
        and these constraints will be comparable with those needed in 
        the resilience service. It is not possible to specify these 
        needs in terms of a potential solution (e.g., explicit route 

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         11 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



        across the service provider domain), as the user network has no 
        view of the service provider network's name space and 
        connectivity. A user signaling agent may request an 
        availability value that will necessitate the service provider 
        signaling agent to, e.g., provide a diverse route against 
        faults in the service provider domain, or additional optional 
        attributes to avoid a geographic location due to high 
        occurrence of faults.  
     ?
        Priority level - Indicates both the set-up and the holding 
        priorities of the connection. A higher set-up priority 
        connection could pre-empt a lower holding priority connection 
        if network resources are scarce during the connection 
        establishment time. Again, the capability (and constraints) of 
        the user to request certain priorities are assumed specified 
        during the contract negotiation phase.  
    
4.5 Scheduled Connection 
    
   Scheduled connection request provides the user with the capability 
   to set-up connections at a pre-determined time for a pre-determined 
   duration. This document does not describe how this feature may be 
   implemented or what policies to choose from a service provider's 
   perspective (e.g., to provide schedule service, partition the 
   switched network into non-scheduled partition and scheduled 
   partition whereby the latter does not depend on the former).  
    
   Although this service may be provided as part of the user's own 
   management of the connection request (e.g., user initiates the 
   connection request at the time that is needed), applications of this 
   service may be routine/repetitive automatic operations that occur at 
   specific times (e.g., database back-up every Saturday at 2am) and 
   may be handled by the service provider. It is highly desirable that 
   support for scheduling is in the O-UNI independent of whether the 
   service functionality resides in the control plane or the management 
   plane. Otherwise there will be a need for two separate control 
   channels to the same user and this would be very undesirable. 
    
   The ability for scheduled services may be provided by the user 
   themselves (via automatic or manual provisioning) or by the service 
   provider. If provided directly by the user, the UNI does not require 
   specific attributes. If provided by the service provider, the UNI 
   may require specific attributes to signal the scheduled connection 
   service.  
    
4.6 ASON Service Level Agreements  
    
   As mentioned above, connection requests issued by a user signaling 
   agent are only accepted within the constraints of a SLA. In the 
   following text, we discuss the technical aspects of an SLA. A SLA is 
   considered to be unidirectional and to specify performance 


 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         12 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   expectations for the user network as well as imposed reachability 
   constraints, e.g., closed user group (CUG).  
    
   SLA parameters could, e.g., include:  
    
     ?
        Capacity parameters 
        A source connection point may contain limits on the maximum 
        number of connections that can be established from a specific 
        ingress point, possibly as a function of time of day, as well 
        as bandwidth constraints (e.g., due to limitations of the fiber 
        facility). A sink connection point may put capacity constraints 
        on the connections that the receiving user network is willing 
        to terminate (e.g., source-end user requests an STM-64; 
        however, destination-end user can only support up to STM-16).  
     ?
        Service performance parameters  
        Examples of service performance parameters include: 
        reliability/availability (which may be used by the service 
        provider network to determine routing constraints), 
        protection/restoration options, priority (e.g., specifying the 
        pre-emptibility of the traffic), etc.  
     ?
        Constraints on the 'scope' of connection requests (call 
        acceptance agent, VPN) 
        This may be viewed as an extension to the concept of CUGs, 
        which by nature already exhibit reachability limitations. Scope 
        constraints are intended to additionally restrict the 
        topological extent of connections. In its simplest form, the 
        SLA offers to accept any connection request issued by the user 
        signaling agent up to a maximum capacity without any scope 
        constraint within the CUG, e.g., within a company's VPN. 
        Conversely, the agreement may be constrained by the egress 
        point of a connection. For example, the switched optical 
        network might agree to the setup of connections, up to a 
        certain maximum capacity, but only if these connections are 
        destined to a specific set of egress points within the CUG that 
        supports these connections.  
    
   Part of the purpose of SLAs is to protect resources in the service 
   provider network by validation of submitted connection requests. If 
   the service provider network and the user network are under control 
   of the same administrative authority, then there is likely to be a 
   trusted peering relationship between both domains. Conversely, in 
   case of an untrusted peering relationship, the ASON service provider 
   validates incoming connection requests via the call acceptance agent 
   as per the pre-negotiated SLA. Alternatively, the SLA enforcement 
   may be outsourced to another policy entity.  
    
   The call acceptance agent offers to accept connection requests at 
   the service level agreed with the user. The service provider will 
   provision the switched optical network accordingly. A broad range of 
   optical services could be envisioned. As an example, services could 
   be defined with different levels of accessibility, depending on the 

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         13 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   probability that a connection establishment request is blocked. 
   Moreover, services could also be categorized as protected or non-
   protected, depending on the offered protection level. All of these 
   service level characteristics influence the resource provisioning 
   process in the switched network.  
    
   For each connection request, the ASON service provider may also need 
   to identify the SLA for which the request is submitted. Some 
   authentication may be included in the request in order to verify 
   that the rightful user issued the request. In some cases, this 
   authentication information might be implicitly derived from the 
   signaling channel on which the connection request was received. The 
   security mechanism must be specified in the SLA. This security 
   mechanism may include only user authentication, or may include 
   tighter security measures such as confidentiality and non-
   repudiation (e.g., public key distribution and certification).  
    
   Although it can be assumed that SLAs will be static for the 
   foreseeable future, this document does not preclude dynamic SLAs. 
   These would necessitate some automated form of interaction between 
   the user and the service provider. In case of a SLA at the O-UNI, 
   this may for instance require the interaction between a Bandwidth 
   Broker (BB) in the user domain and a Lambda Broker (LB) in the 
   service provider domain. At the level of an O-NNI, this would be 
   between different LBs, acting on behalf of the different transport 
   subnetworks. This automated (re-)negotiation of SLAs would in turn 
   call for an automated call acceptance agent function. Note that this 
   call acceptance agent function is different from the validation of 
   connection requests as per the negotiated SLA, referred to as SLA 
   enforcement, since it provides for automated negotiation of the 
   acceptance parameters.  
    
4.7 Naming and Addressing  
    
   Naming and addressing requirements involve creating the bindings 
   between: (a) the user domain names and service provider domain names 
   (e.g., service provider identification), and (b) layer network names 
   (e.g., ODUk). These two scenarios are depicted in the following 
   diagram: 
    
    
    










 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         14 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 












                                                            
 Figure 2. User-Service provider, Client-Server Layer name Translation 

    
    
    
   An example of the layer network name translation is as follows: 
   layerN represents the SDH layer network, where layerN-n is the OSn. 
   LayerM represents the OTN layer network, where layerM-m is the OTSn. 
   In this case, the semantics of the name associated with the user 
   domain's layerN-n is specific to the user's layer network.  
    
   A differentiation between a name and an address may be viewed as 
   follows:  
    
          Name - an opaque string with no semantics other than 
          sufficient uniqueness.  
    
          Address - a structure that is used for routing, and so may 
          include additional semantics such as the ability to be 
          compared for "closeness".  
    
          Value (of name or address) - may be both an address and a 
          name to different parties, e.g. a string that is an address 
          to a server layer could be used as a name by a client layer 
          (and vice versa), but to do so may expose some 
          privacy/security issues, and may well prevent the client from 
          choosing a name that is useful to it.  
    
   Separation of server layer name and client layer name, as well as 
   user domain name and service provider domain name, provides an 
   abstraction barrier between name processing and connection 
   operations. Some properties of the naming and addressing in the 
   switched network are: name independence, name uniqueness, and name 
   translation. These properties apply to both the client-server as 
   well as the user-service provider relationship. 
    
     ?
        Name independence - The client (user) name should not make 
        assumptions on what capabilities are offered by the server 
        (service provider) name, and thus the semantics of the two name 
        spaces should be separate and distinct. This does not place any 


 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         15 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



        constraints on the syntax of client and server layer name 
        spaces, or of the user and service provider name spaces.  
     ?
        Name uniqueness - In order to uniquely identify user requests 
        and subsequent identification of the connection set-up, it is 
        desirable for names associated with a user request to be unique 
        within the service provider network. Note that a pair of user 
        nodes may have multiple connections between them, thus user 
        name pair is not sufficient to identify a connection. In cases 
        where user name uniqueness is not possible, specific  actions 
        needs to be described, e.g., the service provider will choose 
        them sequentially in some fixed sequence decided by the service 
        provider, the distribution will be uniform.  
     ?
        Client handle - To uniquely identify a connection in the server 
        layer, a client handle is transmitted to the client as a result 
        of successful completion of a connection request. Because the 
        server layer is circuit-switched, this client handle is only 
        identified and used at the ingress and egress of the server 
        network to map specific client traffic onto an established 
        connection, and no congruence is assumed between the server 
        layer access point and the client layer connection point. The 
        client handle should be unique for all connections in the 
        client name space. As an example, a client handle can be formed 
        from concatenation of the A-client-endpoint-name:Z-client-
        endpoint-name:timestamp.  
     ?
        Server (service provider) name space - The server layer and the 
        service provider name spaces provide identification of the node 
        and the resources available for connection operations and is a 
        NNI issue. Server names are applicable at the server layer 
        only, and should not be communicated to the client layer.  
     ?
        Name translation - Name translation serves multiple purposes. 
        The translation function may provide mapping of the client 
        layer name to server layer name (used for routing decision 
        through the server layer), user domain name to service provider 
        domain name, or provide mapping of client handle to a 
        connection in the server layer. These translation functions 
        will likely be performed via a (or more) directory service(s).  
         
        The directory function must respect and enforce the privacy of 
        the technology layer namespaces from each other.  Each 
        technology layer instance will have its own namespace that is 
        independent of all others. The directory function must also 
        respect and enforce the privacy of different user domain name 
        spaces from each other (e.g., used in CUG or VPN services).  
         
        Ownership of the directory service may be an issue, i.e., 
        service provider owned or user owned. This is outside the scope 
        of the UNI requirement.  
    
   The following table shows the applicability of these properties to 
   the client-server and user-service provider name/address 
   requirements:  

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         16 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



    
    
    Table 1.  Properties of Client-Server and User-Service provider 
                             Relationships 

          +----------------+----------------+----------------+ 
          |                | Client-server  |  User-service  | 
          |                |                |    provider    | 
          +----------------+----------------+----------------+ 
          | Name           | Independence   | Independence   | 
          | Independence   | needed         | needed         | 
          +----------------+----------------+----------------+ 
          | Name           | Uniqueness     | Uniqueness     | 
          | Uniqueness     | needed         | needed         | 
          +----------------+----------------+----------------+ 
          | Name space     | No sharing     | No sharing     | 
          | sharing        |                |                | 
          +----------------+----------------+----------------+ 
    
    
   It is also possible that a client (user) may wish to register more 
   than one name as an alias (equivalent to having several directory 
   entries for the same telephone number), as it is possible that the 
   client (user) will wish to register the same name for several end 
   points (to create access groups). This feature need not be available 
   on all infrastructures. Example applications involve clients that 
   want names in several name spaces or simple aliases in the same name 
   space. The service must therefore provide primitives to: Register, 
   Modify, and Remove name bindings:  
    
     ?
        The client API shall provide a service to register the client 
        name with the network. This service may be provided as either a 
        client or a server initiated operation. It shall have been used 
        before the connection set-up service can be used, and may be 
        used at any later time to register new client names (aliases).  
     ?
        The client API shall provide a service to modify a registered 
        client name. This may be used at any later time to change the 
        client name and shall have no affect on any connections that 
        are established to or from this client at the time that the 
        name is changed.  
     ?
        The client API shall provide a service to remove a registered 
        client name.  
    
   At the same time that the names are being bound, the service shall 
   verify the connectivity between the client and the server. A 
   mechanism to accomplish this is required. Note that this operation 
   does not of itself enable the connection service.  
    
   It is necessary that the user be able to connect to an appropriate 
   service provider before the ASON dial-up service has been 
   established. It is expected that this will be accomplished by a 

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         17 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   well-known service provider address (possibly a URL) with security 
   established (manually or automatically) as part of the contract. 
   This model is widely used today, as many contracts supply unique 
   information allowing the user to access online services after the 
   contract has been established.  
    
5. Set-up of ASON Network  
    
   The main operations supported by the client layer API are associated 
   with the setting up and tearing down of Optical Channel 'calls'. In 
   addition to the Set-up and Release operations, there may be a need 
   for a 'dial-tone' operation. This is to signal to client equipment 
   that there is a connection service available. This covers the case 
   where hardware is installed and the client is connected to ASON but 
   there is no contract established. It seems reasonable that the 
   client can discover the availability of the service without having 
   to make a test call.  
    
   As previously mentioned, calls are made between two user network 
   elements, traditionally called the A end and the Z end. It must be 
   possible for both participants and third parties to set-up calls, 
   and it must be possible to have a control plane that is not 
   associated with the connection being set-up. These requirements mean 
   that the set-up operation must have both the A and Z end user 
   network element name in the set-up request.  
      
5.1 Operations Phases  
    
   There are several phases in the operation of a switched optical 
   network and it is important to understand to which phase a 
   particular requirement applies. These phases are 1) Contract 
   Negotiation, 2) Equipment Installation and 3) Connection Service 
   usage. Each phase requires interaction between the user and the ASON 
   service provider and both one and two must be completed before the 
   connection service is available. There is no constraint on the order 
   of step 1 and step 2, which means that it is quite feasible to have 
   a user connected to the service provider network who does not yet 
   have a contract, and who therefore cannot make connection requests.   
    
   It is obvious that the client API cannot provide any meaningful 
   functionality during equipment installation (software after all 
   cannot install hardware), and it is not necessary that the API 
   provide any of the functions required during contract negotiation. 
   ASON is about the automation of connection set-up, and not about 
   contract automation. However it is expected that the vast majority 
   of clients will be machines, not people, so some degree of 
   automation could be applied.  
    
   An important part of configuring a user for automatic switched 
   service is name binding, the process by which the user name is bound 
   to the corresponding network name, and entered into a directory. 

 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         18 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 


   This directory may be owned by the service provider to preserve the 
   security of the names and addresses. Suffice it to say here that the 
   directory services should accept user defined names on the 
   connection set-up interface (the main service of the Client API) and 
   the directory service is responsible for mapping those names into 
   the names of server layer ports between which connections are 
   actually made. A further requirement is to automatically check the 
   client-server connectivity and the user to service provider 
   connectivity at the same time that these names are bound.  
    
   Note that successfully binding the names does not imply that the 
   connection service is available. This depends on all aspects of the 
   contract being completed.  
    
5.2 Connection Phases  
    
   As mentioned above, connection set-up undergoes three steps: set-up 
   (create), modify (optional), and release (delete). Also included as 
   part of this phase is a query request.  
    
   The following figure provides a high-level state diagram of the 
   state transition of the ASON service. Note that the state diagram 
   may be expanded to include more detailed transitions, e.g., the 
   _create connection_ link may be expanded to include the detailed 
   transitions of the create request (verify policy controls such as 
   security, verify successful mapping of user parameters to service 
   offerings, etc.).  
    
    



                                                         

             Figure 3.  General State Diagram of ASON Network
                                                              






    
5.2.1 Set-up (Create) Connection  
    





 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         19 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   Several attributes may be associated with a connection set-up. 
   Depending on the offered service, several of these attributes may be 
   optionally provided as part of the request. The user signaling agent 
   or a third party signaling agent may initiate the connection set-up 
   request. The user signaling agent is not required to be in tha same 
   physical location with the end-point for which it signals. This is 
   especially important in supporting third party signaling. 
    
     ?
        Contract SLA 
        It should be possible to request the specific pre-negotiated 
        (or dynamically negotiated) contract SLA for the specified 
        connection set-up request. The SLA may include the specific 
        availability, MTTR, ability to specify avoiding areas of 
        failure (or SRLGs), etc. Some or none of these additional 
        attributes may be included, as determined by negotiation 
        between user and service provider (e.g., service provider may 
        only offer three grades of SLAs: gold, silver and bronze 
        service) 
     ?
        Service type/bandwidth or service name 
        It should be possible to request the specific pre-negotiated 
        (or dynamically negotiated) service type and bandwidth (e.g., 
        SDH at 2.5 Gbps) or service name (e.g., MS16) for the specified 
        connection. The service name may embed other information 
        regarding the possible attributes of the connection, e.g., 
        possibility to modify certain attributes associated with the 
        service, the directionality of the service (uni or bi), etc. 
        These additional attributes may or may not be required.  
     ?
        VPN Service 
        It should be possible to request the specific pre-negotiated 
        (or dynamically negotiated) connection within a certain closed 
        user group/VPN. Associated with this request are security 
        measures needed to ensure that the request does in fact have 
        authorization to make the request. This is especially true for 
        third party signaling, which may require authentication, 
        confidentiality and non-repudiation for the request.  
    
   Generic procedures need to be defined to realize the connection set-
   up process, taking into account the above requirements. Assuming 
   that physical resources have been discovered (either by auto-
   discovery or manual provisioning):  
    
     ?
        Connection set-up request is received containing a client/user 
        name, along with connection-specific constraints relevant to 
        the client's SLA (capacity/bandwidth, availability/radius of 
        failure/area to avoid, pre-emptibility/priority, connection 
        start time, connection duration).  
     ?
        Call acceptance agent and security measures are needed to 
        ensure that the client request remains within the bounds of the 
        pre-agreed contract services.  



 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         20 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



     ?
        Connection request name mapping is performed to establish name 
        bindings (client/user name mapping, area constraint name 
        mapping).  
     ?
        Based on connection start time, routing procedure (e.g., 
        optical BGP) may be initiated to establish a connection, or 
        processes are initiated to handle scheduled services. Note that 
        for scheduled service requests, several options may be 
        available, again based on business model and contract 
        negotiations, e.g., establish/reserve connection immediately or 
        establish connection at the scheduled time in the network 
        partitioned to support scheduled connection.  
     ?
        Based on connection duration, a connection release request may 
        be automatically generated and placed in release queue for 
        specific release time.  
     ?
        Results of the routing procedure determines whether a 
        connection request is satisfied (in which case a client handle 
        is created), or whether request re-tries may be made (in which 
        case the connection request may be placed back in the request 
        queue with necessary back-off mechanisms)  
     ?
        A status message is passed to the user domain (or third party) 
        upon successful or failed connection attempt.  
    
5.2.2 Modify Connection  
    
   A modify connection request may be needed for networks where certain 
   connection attributes may be changed. The user signaling agent or a 
   third party signaling agent may initiate the connection modify 
   request.  
    
   The modify request should not violate any existing SLAs, i.e., 
   policy control. As it may not be possible to satisfy these 
   modification requests, status messages are needed to signal success 
   or failure of the request.  
    
     ?
        Connection name (client handle) 
        The connection to be modified shall be indicated by the client 
        handle obtained from a previous set-up operation. Optional 
        attributes should be provided to indicate the desired 
        modifications. Agreements on the extent of traffic 
        interruptions (if any) should be made clear between the user 
        and service provider (either via automated negotiation or 
        during contract set-up). Note that the user may _view_ the 
        modify request as a change of the connection characteristic, 
        however the client handle may not be changed.  
     ?
        Return values - Connection status  
        It must be possible to signal successful or failed modification 
        request.  
    
5.2.3 Release (Delete) Connection  
    


 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         21 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



   Certain attributes are needed to affect the release of a connection. 
   The user signaling agent or a third party signaling agent may 
   initiate the connection release request. 
    
     ?
        Connection name (client handle) 
        The connection to be torn down shall be indicated by the client 
        handle obtained from a previous set-up operation.  
     ?
        Return values - Connection status  
        It must be possible to signal successful disconnection. 
        Capabilities should be specified to allow for automated 
        connection release upon failure of the release request.  
    
5.2.4 Query Connection 
    
   Related to the connection request is the querying a connection. The 
   user signaling agent or a third party signaling agent may initiate 
   the connection query request. 
    
     ?
        Connection name (client handle) 
        The queried connection shall be indicated by the client handle 
        obtained from a previous set-up operation. Associated with the 
        query request are information/attributes that are being 
        queried. These may include a list of the desired attributes, or 
        default the entire list of attributes associated with the 
        queried connection 
     ?
        Return values - Connection status  
        A message is passed to the user domain (or third party) 
        containing the queried information.   
    
    
    
    
    
 
References 
    
   1 Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
   9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 














 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         22 




    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Monica Lazer, AT&T 
   Tel: 908-234-8462 
   Email: mlazer@att.com 
    
   Curtis Brownmiller, Worldcom 
   Tel: 972-729-7171 
   Email: curtis.brownmiller@wcom.com 
    
   Zhi-Wei Lin, Lucent 
   Tel: 732-949-5141 
   Email: zwlin@lucent.com 
    
   Vijaya Poudyal, Telcordia 
   Tel: 732-758-3192 
   Email: vpoudyal@telcordia.com 
    
   Philip Walch, TyCom 
   Tel: 732-578-7150 
   Email: Pwalch@tycomltd.com 
    
   Mark Jones, Sprint 
   Tel: 913-534-5247 
   Email: mark.jones@mail.sprint.com 
    
   Olivier Duroyon, Alcatel 
   Tel: 703-654-8605 
   Email: oduroyon@adn.alcatel.com 
    
   Jen-Wei Kuo, Fujitsu 
   Tel: 919-790-2033 
   Email: jen-wei.kuo@fnc.fujitsu.com 
    
   Yang Cao, Sycamore 
   Tel: 978-367-7173 
   Email: yang.cao@sycamorenet.com 
    
   Hirokazu Ishimatsu, Japan Telecom 
   Tel: +81 3 5540 8493 
   Email: hirokazu@japan-telecom.co.jp 
    
   Yong Xue, UUNET/Worldcom 
   Tel: 703-886-5358 
   Email: yxue@uu.net 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 

 
Lin, et al.                                                         23 

                     Requirements on the ASON UNI       November, 2000 



    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
    




































 
Lin, et al.                Expires May 2001                         24 

