Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                          November 4, 2004
Expires: May 5, 2005


   National and Local Characters for DNS Top Level Domain (TLD) Names
                     draft-klensin-idn-tld-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 5, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   In the context of work on internationalizing the Domain Name System
   (DNS), there have been extensive discussions about "multilingual" or
   "internationalized" top level domain names (TLDs), especially for
   countries whose predominant language is not written in a Roman-based
   script.  This document reviews some of the motivations for such
   domains and the constraints that the DNS imposes.  It then suggests
   an alternative, local translation, that may solve a superset of the
   problem while avoiding protocol changes, serious deployment delays,



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   and other difficulties.  The suggestion utilizes a localization
   technique in applications to permit any TLD to be accessed using the
   vocabulary and characters of any language.  It is not restricted to
   language- or country-specific "multilingual" TLDs in the language(s)
   and script(s) of that country.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2   Background on the "Multilingual Name" Problem  . . . . . .  3
       1.2.1   Approaches to the Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
       1.2.2   Writing the Name of One's Country in its Own
               Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       1.2.3   Countries with Multiple Languages and Countries
               with Multiple Names  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       1.2.4   Availability of Non-ASCII Characters in Programs . . .  5
     1.3   Domain Name System Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       1.3.1   Administrative Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       1.3.2   Aliases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.4   Internationalization and Localization  . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Client-side Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1   IDNA and the Client  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2   Local Translation Tables for TLD Names . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Advantages and Disadvantages of Local Translation  . . . . . .  8
     3.1   Every TLD Appears in the Local Language and Character
           Set  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2   Unification of Country Code Domains  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3   User Understanding of Local and Global References  . . . . 10
     3.4   Limits on Expansion of the Number of TLDs  . . . . . . . . 10
     3.5   Standardization of the Translations  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.6   Implications for Future New Domain Names . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.7   Mapping for TLDs, Not Domain Names or Keywords . . . . . . 12
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 16













Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


1.  Introduction

1.1  Terminology

   This document assumes the conventional terminology used to discuss
   the domain name system (DNS) and its hierarchical arrangements.
   Terms such as "top level domain" (or just "TLD"), "subdomain",
   "subtree", and "zone file" are used without further explanation.  In
   addition, the term "ccTLD" is used to denote a "country code top
   level domain" and "gTLD" is used to denote a "generic top level
   domain" as described in [RFC1591] and in common usage.

1.2  Background on the "Multilingual Name" Problem

   People who share a language usually prefer to communicate in it,
   using whatever characters are normally used to write that language,
   rather than in some "foreign" one.  There have been standards for
   using mutually-agreed characters and languages in electronic mail
   message bodies and selected headers since the introduction of MIME in
   1992 [MIME] and the Web has permitted multilingual text since its
   inception, also using MIME.  However, domain names are exposed to
   users in email addresses and URLs.  Corresponding arrangements,
   typically also exposing domain names, are made for other application
   protocols).  The combination of exposed domain names with
   internationalization requirements led rapidly to demands to permit
   domain names in applications that used characters other than those of
   the very restrictive, ASCII-subset, "hostname" or
   "letter-digit-hyphen" ("LDH") conventions recommended in the DNS
   specifications [RFC1035].  The effort to do this soon became known as
   "multilingual domain names".  That was actually a misnomer, since the
   DNS deals only with characters and identifier strings, and not,
   except by accident, with what people usually think of as "names".
   There has also been little actual interest in what would actually be
   a "multilingual name", i.e., a name that contains components from
   more than one language.  Instead, interest has focused on the use, in
   the context of the DNS, of strings that conform to specific
   individual languages.

1.2.1  Approaches to the Requirement

   If the requirement is seen, not as "modifying the DNS", but as
   "providing users with access to the DNS from a variety of languages
   and character sets", three sets of proposals emerged in the IETF and
   elsewhere.  They were:

   1.  Perform processing in client software that recodes a user-visible
       string into an ASCII-compatible form that can safely be passed
       through the DNS protocols and stored in the DNS.  This is the



Klensin                   Expires M
ay 5, 2005                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


       approach used, for example, in the IETF's "IDNA" protocol
       [RFC3490].
   2.  Modify the DNS to be more hospitable to non-ASCII names and
       strings.  There have been a variety of proposals to do this,
       using several different techniques.  Some of these have been
       implemented on a proprietary basis by various vendors.  None of
       them have gained acceptance in the IETF community, primarily
       because they would take a long time to deploy, would leave many
       problems unsolved, and have been shown to cause problems with
       deployed solutions that had not yet been upgraded.
   3.  Move the problem out of the DNS entirely, relying instead on a
       "directory" or "presentation" layer to handle
       internationalization.  The rationale for this approach is
       discussed in [RFC3467].

   This document proposes a fourth approach, applicable to the top level
   domains (TLDs) only (see Section 1.3.1 for a discussion of the
   special issues that make TLDs problematic).  That approach involves
   having applications map non-ASCII names for TLDs to existing TLDs and
   could be used as an alternate or supplement to the strategies
   summarized above.

1.2.2  Writing the Name of One's Country in its Own Characters

   An early focus of the "multilingual domain name" efforts was
   expressed in statements such as "users in my country, in which ASCII
   is rarely used, should be able to write an entire domain name in
   their own character set".  In particular, since all top-level domain
   names, at present, follow the LDH rules, the modified naming rules
   discussed in [RFC1123], and the coding conventions specified in
   [RFC1591], all fully-qualified DNS names were effectively required to
   contain at least one ASCII label (the TLD name).  The presence of any
   ASCII labels has been considered inappropriate in internationalized
   contexts.  One should, instead, be able to write the name of the
   ccTLD for China in Chinese, the name of the ccTLD for Saudi Arabia in
   Arabic, the name for Spain in Spanish, and so on.

   That much could be accomplished, given updated applications, by using
   a new TLD name with IDNA encoding.  But, if one examines (or even
   thinks about) user behavior and preferences, it is almost as
   important that one be able to write the name of the ccTLD for China
   in Arabic and that of Saudi Arabia in Chinese: true
   internationalization implies that, at least to the extent to which
   ambiguity and conflicts can be avoided, people should be able to use
   the languages and character sets they prefer.  For the same reasons
   that one would like to have all-Chinese domain names available in
   China, it is important to have the capability to have an apparent
   Chinese-language TLD for a domain whose second level and beyond are



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   Chinese characters, even when the TLD itself serves predominantly
   non-Chinese-speaking registrants and users.

1.2.3  Countries with Multiple Languages and Countries with Multiple
      Names

   From a user interface standpoint, writing ccTLD names in local
   characters is a problem.  As discussed below in Section 1.3.2, the
   DNS itself does not easily permit a domain to be referred to by more
   than one name (or spelling or translation of a name).  Countries with
   more than one official language would require that the country name
   be represented in each of those languages.  And, just as it is
   important that a user in China be able to represent the name of the
   Chinese ccTLD in Chinese characters, she should be able to access a
   Chinese-language site in France using Chinese characters.  That would
   require that she be able to write the name of the French ccTLD in
   those characters rather than in a form based on a Roman character
   set.

1.2.4  Availability of Non-ASCII Characters in Programs

   Over the years, computer users have gotten used to the fact that not
   every computer has a full set of characters available to every
   program.  An extreme example is an Arabic speaker using a public
   kiosk computer in an airport in the United States: there is only a
   small chance that the web browser there will be able to input and
   render Arabic correctly.  This has a direct effect on the
   multilingual TLD problem in that the DNS cannot simply change the
   names of the ccTLDs to be one of a given country's non-ASCII names
   without possibly preventing people from entering those names
   throughout the world.

1.3  Domain Name System Constraints

1.3.1  Administrative Hierarchy

   The domain name system is firmly rooted in the idea of an
   "administrative hierarchy", with the entity responsible for a given
   node of the hierarchy responsible for policies applicable to its
   subhierarchies (Cf.  [RFC1034], [RFC1035], and [RFC1591]).  The model
   works quite well for the domain and subdomains of a particular
   enterprise.  In an enterprise situation, the hierarchy can be
   organized to match the organizational structure; there are
   established ways to set policies; and there are, at least presumably,
   shared assumptions about overall goals and objectives among all
   registrants in the domain.  It is more problematic when a domain is
   shared by unrelated entities that lack common policy assumptions.  It
   is difficult to reach agreement on rules that should apply to all of



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   the entities and subdomains of such a domain.  That situation always
   prevails for the labels registered in a TLD (second-level names)
   except in those TLDs for which the second level is structural (e.g.,
   the .CO, .AC, .GOV conventions in many ccTLDs or in the historical
   geographical organization of .US [RFC1480]) in which case, it exists
   for the labels within that structural level.

   TLDs may, but need not, have consistent registration policies for
   those second (or third) level names.  Countries (or ccTLD
   administrators) have often adopted rules about what entities may
   register in their ccTLDs, and what forms the names may take.  RFC
   1591 outlined registration norms for most of the then-extant gTLDs,
   even though those norms have been largely ignored in recent years.
   Some recent "sponsored" domains are based on quite specific rules
   about appropriate registrations.  Homogeneous registration rules for
   the root are, by contrast, impossible: almost by definition, the
   subdomains registered in the root (TLDs) are diverse and no single
   policy about types and formats of names applying to all root
   subdomains is feasible.

1.3.2  Aliases

   In an environment different from the DNS, a rational way to permit
   assigning local-language names to a country code (or other) domain
   would be to set up an alias for the name, or to use some sort of "see
   instead" reference.  But the DNS does not have facilities for either.
   Instead, it supports a "CNAME" record, whose label can refer only to
   a particular label and not to a subtree.  For example, if A.B.C is a
   fully-qualified name, then a CNAME reference in B.C from X to A would
   make X.B.C appear to have the same values as A.B.C.  However, a CNAME
   reference from Y to C in the root would not make A.B.Y referenceable
   (or even defined) at all.  A second record type, DNAME [RFC2672], can
   provide an alias for a portion of the tree.  But it is problematic
   technically, and its use is strongly discouraged except as a means of
   enabling a transition from one domain to another.  Even if the design
   of yet another alias-type record type were contemplated, DNS
   technical constraints of query-response integrity and DNSSec zone
   signing (cf.  [RFC2535] and its successors) make it extremely
   unlikely that one could be defined that would met the desired
   requirements for "see instead" or true synonyms references.

1.4  Internationalization and Localization

   It has often been observed that, while many people talk about
   "internationalization", they often really mean, and want,
   "localization".  "Internationalization" in this context, suggests
   making something globally accessible while incorporating a
   broad-range "universal" character set and conventions appropriate to



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   all languages and cultures.  "Localization", by contrast, involves
   having things work well in a particular locality or for a broad range
   of localities, although aspects of the style of operation might
   differ for each locality.  Anything that actually involves the DNS
   must be global, and hence internationalized, since the DNS cannot
   meaningfully support different responses based, e.g., on the location
   of the user making a query.  While the DNS cannot support
   localization internally, many of the features discussed earlier in
   this section are much more easily thought about in local terms
   --whether localized to a geographical area, users of a language, or
   using some other criteria -- than in global ones.

2.  Client-side Solutions

   Traditionally, the IETF avoided becoming involved in standardization
   for actions that take place strictly on individual hosts on the
   network, assuming that it should confine itself to behavior that is
   observable "on the wire", i.e., in protocols between network hosts.
   Exceptions to this general principle have been made when different
   clients were required to utilize data or interpret values in
   compatible ways to preserve interoperability: the standards for email
   and web body formats, and IDNA itself, are examples of these
   exceptions.  Regardless of what is required to be standardized, it is
   almost never required, and often unwise, that a user interface
   present "on the wire" formats to the user, at least by default
   (debugging options that show the wire formats are common and often
   quite useful).  However, in most cases when the presentation format
   and the wire format differ, the client program must take precautions
   that the wire format can be reconstructed from user input, or to keep
   the wire format, while hidden, bound to the presentation mechanism so
   that it can be reconstructed.  While it is rarely a goal in itself,
   it is often necessary that the user be at least vaguely aware that
   the wire ("real") format is different from the presentation one and
   that the wire format be available for debugging.

   In fact, the DNS is an excellent example of the difference between
   the wire format and the user presentation format.  Most Internet
   users don't realize that the wire format for DNS queries and
   responses don't include the "." character.  Instead, each label is
   represented by a length in bytes of the label, followed by the label
   itself.

2.1  IDNA and the Client

   As mentioned above, IDNA itself is entirely a client-side protocol.
   It works by encoding labels to be placed into the DNS in a special
   format called "punycode" [RFC3492].  When labels in that format are
   encountered, they are transformed, by the client, back into



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   internationalized (normally Unicode [ISO10646]) characters.  In the
   context of this document, the important observation about IDNA is
   that any application program that supports it is already doing
   considerable transformation work on the client; it is not simply
   presenting the "on the wire" formats to the user.

2.2  Local Translation Tables for TLD Names

   We suggest that, in addition to maintaining the code and tables
   required to support IDNA, authors of application programs may want to
   maintain a table that contains a list of TLDs and locally-desirable
   names for each one.  For ccTLDs, these might be the names (or
   locally-standard abbreviations) by which the relevant countries are
   known locally (whether in ASCII characters or others).  With some
   care on the part of the application designer (e.g., to ensure that
   local forms do not conflict with the actual TLD names), a particular
   TLD name input from the user could be either in local or standard
   form without special tagging or problems.  When DNS names are
   received by these client programs, the TLD labels would be mapped to
   local form before IDNA is applied to the rest of the name; when names
   are received from users, local TLD names would be mapped to the
   global ones before applying IDNA or being used in other DNS
   processing.

3.  Advantages and Disadvantages of Local Translation

3.1  Every TLD Appears in the Local Language and Character Set

   The notion of a top-level domain whose name matches, e.g., the name
   that is used for a  country in that country or the name of a language
   in that language as, as mentioned above, immediately appealing.  But
   most of the reasons for it argue equally strongly for other TLDs
   being accessible from that language.  A user in Korea who can access
   the national ccTLD in the Korean language and character set has every
   reason to expect that both generic top level domains and domains
   associated with other countries would be similarly accessible,
   especially if the second-level domains bear Korean names.  A user in
   Spain or Portugal, or in Latin America, would presumably have similar
   expectations, but would expect to use Spanish or Portuguese names,
   not Korean ones.

   That level of local optimization is not realistic -- some would argue
   not possible -- with the DNS since it would ultimately require that
   every top level domain be replicated for each of the world's
   languages.  That replication process would involve not just the top
   level domain itself: in principle, all of its subtrees would need to
   be completely replicated as well.  Perhaps, in practice, not all
   subtrees would require replication, but only those for which a



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   language variation or translation was significant.  But, while that
   restriction would change the scale of the problem, it would not alter
   its basic nature.  The administrative hierarchy characteristics of
   the DNS (see Section 1.3.1) turn the replication process into an
   administrative nightmare: every administrator of a second-level
   domain in the world would be forced to maintain dozens, probably
   hundreds, of similar zone files for the replicates of the domain.
   Even if only the zones relevant to a particular country or language
   were replicated, the administrative and tracking problems to bind
   these to the appropriate top-level domain and keep all of the
   replicas synchronized would be extremely difficulty at best.  And
   many administrators of third- and fourth-level domains, and beyond,
   would be faced with similar problems.

   By contrast, dealing with the names of TLDs as a localization
   problem, using local translation, is fairly simple.  Each function
   represented by a TLD -- a country, generic registrations, or
   purpose-specific registrations -- could be represented in the local
   language and character set as needed.  And, for countries with many
   languages -- or users living, working, or visiting countries where
   their language was not dominant -- "local" could be defined in terms
   of the needs or w
ishes of each particular user.

   Note that this proposal is to allow mapping of native-language
   strings to existing TLDs.  It would almost certainly be ill-advised
   to stretch this idea too far and try to map strings that local users
   would be unlikely to guess into TLDs.  For example, there are
   probably no languages in which the country known in English as
   "Finland" is called "FI".  Thus, one would not want to create a
   mapping from two characters that look or sound like a Roman "F" and a
   Roman "I" to the ccTLD ".fi".

3.2  Unification of Country Code Domains

   It follows from some of the comments above that, while there appears
   to be some immediate appeal from having (at least) two domains for
   each country, one using the ISO 3166-1 code [ISO3166] and another one
   using a name based on the national name in the national language,
   such a situation would create considerable problems for registrants
   in both domains.  For registrants maintaining enterprise or
   organizational subdomains, ease of administration of a single family
   of zone files will usually make a registration in a single top-level
   domain preferable to replicated sets of them, at least as long as
   their functional requirements (such a local-language access) are met
   by the unified structure.

   For countries with multiple national languages that are considered
   equal and legally equivalent, the advantages of a translation-based



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   approach, rather than multiple registrations and replicated trees,
   would be even more significant.  Actually installing and maintaining
   a separate TLD for each language would be an administrative
   nightmare, especially if it was intended that the associated zones be
   kept synchronized.  The oft-suggested proposal to adopt an "exactly
   one extra domain for each country" rule would essentially require
   some of the multiple-official-language countries to violate their own
   constitutions.  Conversely, having multiple domains for a given
   country, based on the number of official languages and without any
   expectation of synchronization, would give some countries an
   additional allocation of TLDs that others would certainly consider
   unfair.

   Of course, having replicated domains might be popular with some
   registries and registrars, since replication would almost inevitably
   increase the total number of domains to be registered.  Helping that
   group of registries and registrars, while hurting Internet users by
   adding administrative overhead and confusion, is not a goal of this
   document.

3.3  User Understanding of Local and Global References

   While the IDNA tables (actually Nameprep [RFC3491] and Stringprep
   [RFC3454]) must be identical globally for IDNA to work reliably, the
   tables for mapping between local names and TLD names could be locally
   determined, and differ from one locale to another, as long as users
   understood that international interchange of names required using the
   standard forms.  That understanding could be assisted by software.

3.4  Limits on Expansion of the Number of TLDs

   The concept of using local translation does have one side effect,
   which some portions of the Internet community might consider
   undesirable.  The size and complexity of translation tables, and
   maintaining those tables, will be, to a considerable extent, a
   function of the number of top-level domains of interest, the
   frequency with which new domains are added, and the number of domains
   that are added at a time.  A country or other locale that wished to
   maintain a complete set of translations (i.e., so that every TLD had
   a representation in the local language) would presumably find setting
   up a table for the current collection of a few hundred domains to be
   a task that would take some days.  If the number of TLDs were
   relatively stable, with a relatively small number being added at
   infrequent intervals, the updates could probably be dealt with on an
   ad hoc basis.  But, if large numbers of domains were added
   frequently, or if the total number of TLDs became very large,
   maintaining the table might require dedicated staff if each new TLD
   is accommodated.  Worse, updating the tables stored on client



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   machines might require update and synchronization protocols and all
   of the complexities that tend to go with such protocols (see
   [RFC3696] for a discussion of some related issues in applications).

   In practice, there will be little requirement to translate every TLD
   into a local language.  There are already existing TLDs for which
   there is no obvious translations in many languages (most notably,
   ".arpa") or where the translation will be far from obvious to typical
   users (for example, ".int" and ".aero").  Of course, these could be
   translated by function: ".arpa" to the local term for
   "infrastructure", ".int" with "international" or "international
   organization", ".aero" with "aeronautical" or "airlines", and so on,
   but it is not clear whether doing so would have significant value.
   For almost every language, there are dozens of ccTLDs for which there
   are no translations of the country names into the local language that
   would be known by anyone other than geographers.  If new TLDs are
   added, there might not be a strong need (or even capability) to have
   language-specific equivalents for each.

3.5  Standardization of the Translations

   An immediate question when proposals such as this one are considered
   is whether the names for the various TLDs that do not match the
   strings that are actually in the DNS should be standardized and, if
   so, by what mechanism.  Standardization would promote communication
   within a country or among people sharing a language.  However, it is
   likely to be very difficult to reach appropriate international
   agreements to which wide conformance could be expected.  Exceptions
   might arise within particular countries or language groups but, even
   then, there might be advantages to users being able to specify
   additional synomymous names that are easy for them to remember.  As
   with IDNA-based IDNs, users who wish to transmit information about
   domain names to people whose exact capabilities and software are
   unknown, and to do so with minimal risk of confusion, will probably
   confine themselves to the names that actual appear in the DNS.

   In any event, neither standardization nor uniform use of either the
   system outlined here or of a specific collection of names is not
   required to make the system work for those who would find it useful.

3.6  Implications for Future New Domain Names

   Applications that implement the proposal in this document are likely
   to make the subsequent creation and acceptance of new IDNA-based TLDs
   significantly more difficult.  If this proposal becomes widely
   adopted, local language names mapped as it suggests will be generally
   expected by users of those languages to mean the same as a current
   TLD.  Creating a new, stand-alone IDNA-based TLD will then require



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   more deliberation and care to avoid conflicts and, when executed,
   will require all the application software that maps the name to the
   existing TLD to change the mapping tables.

   For several reasons, this problem may not be as serious in practice
   as it might first appear.  For ccTLDs allocated according to the ISO
   3166-1 list, there will presumably be no problem at all: not only are
   the 3166-1 alpha-2 
codes strictly in ASCII, but general trends
   against using country names or codes for any purpose not associated
   with those specific countries makes conflicts with internationalized
   names extremely unlikely.  Because the DNS does not currently have a
   usable aliasing function (see Section 1.3.2), it is likely that new
   IDNA-based TLDs will be allocated only after there is considerable
   opportunity for countries and other individual entities to identify
   any problems they see with proposed new names.

3.7  Mapping for TLDs, Not Domain Names or Keywords

   It should be clear to anyone who has read this far that the mapping
   described in this document is limited to TLDs, not full domain names
   or keywords.  In particular, nothing here should be construed as
   applying to anything other than TLDs, due at least in part to the
   limitations described in Section 3.1.  Further, this document is only
   about the domain name system (DNS), not about any keyword system.
   The interactions between particular keyword systems and the proposals
   here are left as a (possibly very difficult) exercise for the reader
   or implementer of such systems.  However, for the subset of such
   systems whose intent is to entirely hide DNS names or URIs from the
   user, their output would presumably be the LDH names that actually
   appeared in the DNS, i.e., in punycode form for IDNA names and
   without any application processing of the type contemplated here.

4.  Security Considerations

   IDNA provides a client-based mechanism for presenting Unicode names
   in applications while passing only ASCII-based names on the wire.  As
   such, it constitutes a major step along the path of introducing a
   client-based presentation layer into the Internet.  Client-based
   presentation layer transformations introduce risks from
   non-conforming tables that can change meaning without external
   protection.  For example, if a mapping table normally maps A onto C
   and that table is altered by an attacker so that A maps onto D
   instead, much mischief can be committed.  On the other hand, these
   are not the usual sort of network attacks: they may be thought of as
   falling into the "users can always cause harm to themselves"
   category.  The local translation model outlined here does not
   significantly increase the risks over those associated with IDNA, but
   may provide some new avenues for exploiting them.



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   Both this approach and IDNA rely on having updated programs present
   information to the user in a very different form than the one in
   which it is transmitted on the wire.  Unless the internal (wire) form
   is always used in interchange, there are possibilities for ambiguity
   and confusion about references.  As with IDNA itself, if only the
   "wire" form is presented, the user will perceive that nothing of
   value has been done, i.e., that no internationalization or
   localization has occurred.  So presentation of the "wire" form to
   eliminate the potential ambiguities is unlikely to be considered an
   acceptable solution, regardless of its security advantages.

5.  Acknowledgments

   This document was inspired by a number of conversations in ICANN,
   IETF, MINC, and private contexts about the future evolution and
   internationalization of top level domains.  Unknown to the author,
   but unsurprisingly (the general concept should be obvious to anyone
   even slightly skilled in the relevant technologies), the concept has
   been apparently developed independently in other groups but, as far
   as this author knows, not written up for general comment.
   Discussions within, and about, the ICANN IDN Committee were
   particularly helpful, although several of the participants in that
   committee may be surprised about where those discussions led.  Email
   correspondence with several people after the first version of this
   document was posted, notably Richard Hill, Paul Hoffman, Lee
   XiaoDong, and Soobok Lee, led to considerable clarification in the
   subsequent versions.  The author is particularly grateful to Paul
   Hoffman for extensive comments and additional text for the final
   version.

   The first draft version of this document was posted on October 21,
   2002.

6  References

   [ISO10646]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Information Technology - Universal Multiple-octet coded
              Character Set (UCS) - Part 1: Architecture and Basic
              Multilingual Plane", ISO Standard 10646-1, May 1993.

   [ISO3166]  International Organization for Standardization, "Codes for
              the representation of names of countries and their
              subdivisions -- Part 1: Country codes", ISO Standard
              3166-1:1977, 1997.

   [MIME]     Borenstein, N. and N. Freed, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet
              Mail Extensions): Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing



Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


              the Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC 1341, June
              1992.

              Updated and replaced by Freed, N.  and N.  Borenstein,
              "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part One:
              Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC2045, November
              1996.  Also, Moore, K., "Representation of Non-ASCII Text
              in Internet Message Headers", RFC 1342, June 1992.
              Updated and replaced by Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose
              Internet Mail Extensions) Part Three: Message Header
              Extensions for Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047, November 1996.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1123]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts - Application
              and Support", STD 3, RFC 1123, October 1989.

   [RFC1480]  Cooper, A. and J. Postel, "The US Domain", RFC 1480, June
              1993.

   [RFC1591]  Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation",
              RFC 1591, March 1994.

   [RFC2535]  Eastlake, D., "Domain Name System Security Extensions",
              RFC 2535, March 1999.

   [RFC2672]  Crawford, M., "Non-Terminal DNS Name Redirection", RFC
              2672, August 1999.

   [RFC3454]  Hoffman, P. and M. Blanchet, "Preparation of
              Internationalized Strings ("stringprep")", RFC 3454,
              December 2002.

   [RFC3467]  Klensin, J., "Role of the Domain Name System (DNS)", RFC
              3467, February 2003.

   [RFC3490]  Faltstrom, P., Hoffman, P. and A. Costello,
              "Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)",
              RFC 3490, March 2003.

   [RFC3491]  Hoffman, P. and M. Blanchet, "Nameprep: A Stringprep
              Profile for Internationalized Domain Names (IDN)", RFC
              3491, March 2003.




Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


   [RFC3492]  Costello, A., "Punycode: A Bootstring encoding of Unicode
              for Internationalized Domain Names in Applications
              (IDNA)", RFC 3492, March 2003.

   [RFC3696]  Klensin, J., "Application Techniques for Checking and
              Transformation of Names", RFC 3696, February 2004.


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com


































Klensin     
              Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Characters for DNS TLD Names         November 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin                   Expires May 5, 2005                  [Page 16]