

Network Working Group                                   A. Phillips, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                          webMethods, Inc.
Expires: December 23, 2004                                      M. Davis
                                                                     IBM
                                                           June 24, 2004


                     Tags for Identifying Languages
                       draft-phillips-langtags-04

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 23, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the structure, content, construction, and
   semantics of language tags for use in cases where it is desirable to
   indicate the language used in an information object. It also
   describes how to register values for use in language tags and a
   construct for matching such language tags, including user defined
   extensions for private interchange. This document replaces RFC 3066
   (which replaced RFC 1766).







Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    The Language Tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1   Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2   Language Subtag Sources and Interpretation . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2.1 Pre-Existing RFC3066 Registrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.2.2 Possibilities for Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   2.2.3 Classes of Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   2.3   Choice of Language Tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   2.4   Meaning of the Language Tag  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   2.4.1 Language Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   2.4.2 Matching Language Tags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   2.4.3 Canonicalization of Language Tags  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   2.5   Considerations for Private Use Subtags . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   3.    IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   3.1   Stability of IANA Registry Entries . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   3.2   Format of the IANA Language Subtag Registry  . . . . . . . . 22
   3.3   Registration Procedure for Subtags . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   3.4   Extensions and Extensions Namespace  . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   4.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   5.    Character Set Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   6.    Changes from RFC3066 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
   A.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   B.    Examples of Language Tags (Informative)  . . . . . . . . . . 37
   C.    Conversion of the RFC 3066 Language Tag Registry . . . . . . 39
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 41






















Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


1. Introduction

   Human beings on our planet have, past and present, used a number of
   languages. There are many reasons why one would want to identify the
   language used when presenting or requesting information.

   Information about a user's language preferences commonly needs to be
   identified so that appropriate processing can be applied. For
   example, the user's language preferences in a brower can be used to
   select web pages appropriately. A choice of language preference can
   also be used to select among tools (such as dictionaries) to assist
   in the processing or understanding of content in different langauges.

   In addition, knowledge about the particular language used by some
   piece of information content may be useful or even required by some
   types of information processing; for example spell-checking,
   computer-synthesized speech, Braille transcription, or high-quality
   print renderings.

   One means of indicating the language used is by labeling the
   information content with a language identifier. These identifiers can
   also be used to specify user preferences when selecting information
   content, or for labeling additional attributes of content and
   associated resources.

   These identifiers can also be used to indicate additional attributes
   of content that are closely related to the language. In particular,
   it is often necessary to indicate specific information about the
   dialect, writing system, or orthography used in a document or
   resource, as these attributes may be important for the user to obtain
   information in a form that they can understand, or important in
   selecting appropriate processing resources for the given content.

   This document specifies an identifier mechanism, a registration
   function for values to be used with that identifier mechanism, and a
   construct for matching against those values. It also defines a
   mechanism for private use extension and how private use, registered
   values, and matching interact.

   This document replaces RFC 3066, which replaced RFC 1766. For a list
   of changes in this document, see: Section 6.

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119] [10].






Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


2. The Language Tag

2.1 Syntax

   The language tag is composed of one or more parts: A primary language
   subtag and a (possibly empty) series of subsequent subtags. Subtags
   are distinguished by their length, position in the subtag sequence,
   and content, so that each type of subtag can be recognized solely by
   these features. This makes it possible to construct a parser that can
   extract and assign some semantic information to the subtags, even if
   specific subtag values are not recognized. Thus a parser need not
   have an up-to-date copy of the registered subtag values to perform
   most searching and matching operations.

   The syntax of this tag in ABNF [RFC 2234] [11] is:

   = lang *("-" extlang) ["-" script] ["-" region] *("-" variant) *("-" extension) ["-" privateuse]
   / privateuse        ; private-use tag
   / grandfathered     ; grandfathered registrations

   lang            = 2*3ALPHA          ; shortest ISO 639 code
                   / registered-lang
   extlang         = 3ALPHA            ; reserved for future use
   script          = 4ALPHA            ; ISO 15924 code
   region          = 2ALPHA            ; ISO 3166 code
                   / 3DIGIT            ; UN country number
   variant         = 5*15alphanum     ; registered or private use variants
   extension       = singleton 1*("-" (2*15alphanum)) ; extension subtag(s)
   privateuse      = "x" 1*("-" (1*15alphanum))       ; private use subtag(s)
   singleton       = 1ALPHA            ; single letters (except x, which has special meaning)
   registered-lang = 4*15ALPHA         ; registered language subtag
   grandfathered   = ALPHA *(alphanum / "-")          ; grandfathered registration
   alphanum        = (ALPHA / DIGIT)   ; letters and numbers

                      Figure 1: Language Tag ABNF

   The character "-" is HYPHEN-MINUS (ABNF: %x2D). Whitespace in the
   ABNF should be disregarded. For examples of language tags, see
   Appendix B. Note that although [RFC 2234] [11] refers to octets, the
   language tags described in this document are US-ASCII character
   sequences and may be used in documents (such as XML files) that might
   use an alternate encodings (such as Unicode UTF-16LE, for example).

   The tags and their subtags, including private-use and extensions, are
   to be treated as case insensitive: there exist conventions for the
   capitalization of some of them, but these should not be taken to
   carry meaning. For instance, [ISO 3166] [4] recommends that country
   codes be capitalized (MN Mongolia), while [ISO 639] [3] recommends



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   that language codes be written in lower case (mn Mongolian). In the
   language tags defined by this document, however, the tag 'mn-MN' is
   not distinct from 'MN-mn' or 'mN-Mn' (or any other combination) and
   each of these variations conveys the same meaning: Mongolian for
   Mongolia.

   For informative examples of language tags, see Appendix B at the end
   of this document.

2.2 Language Subtag Sources and Interpretation

   The namespace of language tags and their subtags is administered by
   the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) [15] according to the
   rules in Section 3 of this document.

   Terminology in this section:

   o  Tag or tags refers to a complete language tag, such as
      'fr-Latn-CA'

   o  Subtag refers to a specific section of a tag, separated by hyphen,
      such as the subtag 'Latn' in 'fr-Latn-CA'

   o  Code or codes refers to tags defined in external standards (and
      which are used as subtags in this document). For example, 'Latn'
      is an ISO 15924 [2] script code (which can be used as a script
      subtag in a language tag)

   The definitions in this section apply to the various subtags within
   the language tags defined by this document, excepting those
   "grandfathered" tags defined in Section 2.2.1.

   Note that registered subtags can only appear in specific positions in
   a tag. Specifically, they can only occur as primary language subtags
   or as variant subtags. In addition, sequences of private-use and
   extension subtags MUST only occur at the end of the sequence of
   subtags and MUST NOT be interspersed with subtags defined elsewhere
   in this document.

   Each subtag type has unique length and content restrictions that make
   identification of the subtag's type possible, even if the content of
   the subtag itself is unrecognized. This allows tags to be parsed and
   processed without reference to the latest version of the underlying
   standards or the IANA registry and makes the associated exception
   handling when parsing tags simpler.

   Single letter and digit subtags are reserved for current or future
   use. These include the following current uses:



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   o  The single letter subtag "i" is reserved for grandfathered,
      IANA-registered primary language subtags, such as "i-enochian".

   o  The single letter subtag "x" is reserved to introduce a sequence
      of private-use subtags. The interpretation of any private-use
      subtags is defined solely by private agreement and is not defined
      by the rules in this section or in any standard or registry
      defined in this document.

   o  All other single letter subtags are reserved to introduce
      standardized extension subtag sequences as described in Section
      3.4.

   The primary subtag is the first subtag in a language tag and cannot
   be empty. Except as noted, the primary subtag is the "language"
   subtag. The following rules apply to the assignment and
   interpretation of the primary subtag:

   o  All 2-character subtags in the IANA registry were defined
      according to the assignments found in the standard ISO 639, "Code
      for the representation of names of languages" [ISO639-1] [3], or
      in assignments subsequently made by the ISO 639 Part 1 maintenance
      agency or governing standardization bodies.

   o  All 3-character subtags in the IANA registry were defined
      according to the assignments found in ISO 639 Part 2, "Codes for
      the representation of names of languages -- Part 2: Alpha-3 code
      [ISO 639-2] [1]", or assignments subsequently made by the ISO 639
      Part 2 maintenance agency or governing standardization bodies.

   o  The subtags in the range 'qaa' through 'qtz' are reserved for
      private use in language tags. These subtags correspond to codes
      reserved by ISO639-2 for private use. These codes SHOULD be used
      for non-registered primary-language subtags (instead of using
      private-use subtags following "x-"). For example, the tag 'qaa' is
      preferred to 'x-someLanguage'. Please refer to Section 2.5  for
      more information on private use subtags.

   o  IANA-registered primary language subtags of 4 to 15 characters in
      length MAY also be used to form the primary language subtag. At
      the time this document was created, there were no examples of this
      kind of subtag and future registrations of this type will be
      discouraged: primary languages are STRONGLY RECOMMENDED for
      registration with ISO 639 and subtags rejected by ISO 639 will be
      closely scrutinized before they are registered with IANA.

   o  The single character subtag "x" as the primary subtag indicates
      that the whole language tag consists of private-use subtags.



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   o  Other values MUST NOT be assigned to the primary subtag except by
      revision or update of this document.

   Note: For languages that have both an ISO 639-1 2-character code and
   an ISO 639-2 3-character code, only the ISO 639-1 2-character code is
   defined.

   Note: For languages that have no ISO 639-1 2-character code and for
   which the ISO 639-2/T (Terminology) code and the ISO 639-2/B
   (Bibliographic) codes differ, only the Terminology code is defined.
   At present all languages that have both kinds of 3-character code
   also are assigned a 2-character code and hopefully future assignments
   of this nature will not arise.

   Note: In order to avoid versioning difficulties in applications such
   as those experienced in RFC 1766 [8], the ISO 639 Registration
   Authority Joint Advisory Committee (RA-JAC) has agreed on the
   following policy statement:

   "After the publication of ISO/DIS 639-1 as an International Standard,
   no new 2-letter code shall be added to ISO 639-1 unless a 3-letter
   code is also added at the same time to ISO 639-2. In addition, no
   language with a 3-letter code available at the time of publication of
   ISO 639-1 which at that time had no 2-letter code shall be
   subsequently given a 2-letter code."

   This will ensure that, for example, a user who implements "haw"
   (Hawaiian), which currently has no 2-character code, will not find
   his or her data invalidated by eventual addition of a 2-character
   code for that language."

   Previously, in RFC 3066 [16], the IANA registry contained whole tag
   registrations such as 'cel-gaulish', whereas this document refers to
   the registration of subtags, such as 'gaulish'.

   One of the grandfathered IANA registrations is "i-enochian". The
   subtag "enochian" could be registered as a primary language subtag
   (assuming that ISO 639 does not register this language first), making
   tags such as "enochian-AQ" and "enochian-Latn" valid.

   The following rules apply to the extended language subtags:

   o  Three letter subtags immediately following the primary subtag are
      reserved for future standardization, anticipating work that is
      currently under way on ISO 639.

   o  Extended language subtags MUST follow the primary subtag and
      precede any other subtags.



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   o  There MAY be any additional number of extended language subtags.

   o  Standardization of the extended language subtags for specific uses
      will be by revision or update of this document. Registration of
      extended language subtags and non-standard use MUST NOT be
      permitted.

   Example: In a future revision or update of this document, the tag
   'zh-min-nan' (registered under RFC 3066) might become a valid
   non-grandfathered tag in which the subtags 'min' and 'nan' might
   represent the subdialect 'nan' of the Chinese dialect 'min'.

   The following rules apply to the script subtags:

   o  All 4-character subtags were defined according to ISO 15924
      [2]--"Codes for the representation of the names of scripts":
      alpha-4 script codes, or subsequently assigned by the ISO 15924
      maintenance agency or governing standardization bodies, denoting
      the script or writing system used in conjunction with this
      language.

   o  Script subtags MUST immediately follow the primary language subtag
      and all extended language subtags and MUST occur before any other
      type of subtag described below.

   o  The subtags Qaaa-Qabx are reserved for private use in language
      tags. These subtags correspond to codes reserved by ISO 15924 for
      private use. These codes should be used for non-registered script
      values. Please refer to Section 2.5 for more information on
      private-use subtags.

   o  Script subtags cannot be registered using the process in Section
      3.3 of this document. Variant subtags may be considered for
      registration for that purpose.

   Example: 'de-Latn' represents German written using the Latin script.

   The following rules apply to the region subtags:

   o  All 2-character subtags following the primary subtag were defined
      in the IANA registry according to the assignments found in ISO
      3166 [4]--"Codes for the representation of names of countries and
      their subdivisions - Part 1: Country codes"--alpha-2 country codes
      or assignments subsequently made by the ISO 3166 maintenance
      agency or governing standardization bodies.

   o  All 3-character codes consisting of digit (numeric) characters
      were defined in the IANA registry according to the assignments



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      found in UN Standard Country or Area Codes for Statistical  Use
      [5] or assignments made thereto by the governing standards body.

   o  The region subtag defines language variations used in a specific
      region, geographic, or political area. Region subtags MUST follow
      any language, extended language, or script subtags and MUST
      precede all other subtags.

   o  There may be at most one region subtag in a language tag.

   o  Generally the ISO 3166 code is used to form the subtag except for
      countries with ambiguous ISO 3166 alpha-2 codes. Please refer to
      Section 2.3 for information on the reasons why the UN M49 code may
      be canonical for a specific country or region.

   o  UN numeric codes assigned to 'macro-geographical (continental)' or
      sub-regions not associated with an assigned ISO 3166 alpha-2 code
      are defined in the IANA registry and are valid for use in language
      tags.

   o  UN numeric codes for 'economic groupings' or 'other groupings' are
      not defined in the IANA registry and MUST NOT be used to form
      language tags.

   o  The alphanumeric codes in Appendix X of the UN document are also
      undefined and MUST NOT be used. (At the time this document was
      created these values match the ISO 3166 alpha-2 codes.)

   o  The subtags AA, QM-QZ, XA-XZ and ZZ are reserved for private use
      in language tags. These subtags correspond to codes reserved by
      ISO 3166 for private use. These codes SHOULD be used for private
      use region subtags (instead of using a private-use subtag
      sequence). For example, the tag 'fr-QM' would be preferred to
      'fr-x-someRegion'. Please refer to Section 2.5 for more
      information on private use codes.

   'de-Latn-CH' represents German written using Latin script for
   Switzerland.

   'sr-Latn-891' represents Serbian written using Latin script for
   Serbia and Montenegro (this country's ISO 3166 alpha2 code 'CS' was
   formerly assigned to Czechoslovakia).

   'es-419' represents Spanish as spoken in the UN-defined 'Latin
   America and Caribbean' region.

   The following rules apply to the variant subtags:




Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   o  Variant subtags in the IANA registry are associated with any
      external standard. All variant subtags are defined by the
      registration process defined in Section 3.3.

   o  Variant subtags MUST follow all of the other defined subtags, but
      precede any extension or private-use subtag sequences.

   o  Alphanumeric subtags of 5 to 15 characters MAY be registered with
      IANA, according to the rules in Section 3.3 of this document.

   Previously, in RFC 3066, the IANA registry contained whole tag
   registrations such as 'en-boont', whereas this document refers to the
   registration of subtags such as 'boont'.

   The following rules apply to extensions:

   o  Extension subtags are separated from the other subtags defined in
      this document by a single-letter subtag ("singleton"). The
      singleton MUST be one allocated to a registration authority via
      the mechanism described in Section 3.4 and cannot be the letter
      'x', which is reserved for private-use subtag sequences.

   o  Note: Private-use subtag sequences starting with the singleton
      subtag "x-" are described below.

   o  An extension MUST follow at least a primary language subtag. That
      is, a language tag cannot begin with an extension. Extensions
      extend language tags, they do not override or replace them. For
      example, the tag 'a-myExtension' is invalid.

   o  Each singleton subtag MUST appear at most one time in each tag
      (other than as a private-use subtag). That is, singleton subtags
      MUST NOT be repeated. For example, the tag "en-a-bbb-a-ccc" is
      invalid because the subtag "-a" appears twice.

   o  Extension subtags MUST meet all of the requirements for the
      content and format of subtags defined in this document.

   o  Extension subtags MUST meet whatever requirements are set by the
      document that defines their singleton prefix and whatever
      requirements are provided by the maintaining authority.

   o  Each extension subtag MUST be from two to fifteen characters long
      and consist solely of letters or digits, with each subtag
      separated by a single "-".

   o  Each singleton MUST be followed by at least one extension subtag.
      For example, the tag "tlh-a-b-foo" is invalid because the first



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      singleton "a" is followed immediately by another singleton "b".

   o  Extension subtags MUST follow all language, extended language,
      script, region and variant subtags in a tag. (Note: another way of
      saying this is that all subtags following the singleton and before
      another singleton are part of the extension. Thus in the tag
      "fr-a-Latn", the subtag 'Latn' does not represent the ISO 15924
      script code for Latin script.)

   o  In the event that more than one extension appears in a single tag,
      the tag SHOULD be canonicalized as described in Section 2.4.3.

   o  When comparing or matching language tags, extensions MAY be
      ignored.

   For example, if the prefix "-r" and the shown subtags were defined,
   then the following tag would be a valid example:
   "en-Latn-GB-boont-r-anExtension-another-x-privatetag"

   The following rules apply to private-use subtags:

   o  Private-use subtags are separated from the other subtags defined
      in this document by the reserved single-character subtag "x".

   o  Private-use subtags MUST follow all language, extended language,
      script, region, variant, and extension subtags in the tag. Another
      way of saying this is that all subtags following the singleton 'x'
      MUST be considered private use. Example: The subtag 'US' in the
      tag 'en-x-US' is a private use subtag.

   o  Unlike Extensions, a tag MAY consist entirely of private-use
      subtags.

   o  No source is defined for private use subtags. Use or
      standardization of the private use subtags is by private agreement
      and SHOULD NOT be considered part of this document.

   For example: Users who wished to utilize SIL Ethonologue for
   identification might agree to exchange tags such as
   'az-Arab-x-AZE-derbend'. This example contains two private-use
   subtags. The first is "AZE" and the second is "derbend".

2.2.1 Pre-Existing RFC3066 Registrations

   Existing IANA-registered language tags from RFC 1766 and/or RFC 3066
   that are not defined by additions to this document maintain their
   validity. IANA will maintain these tags in the registry under the
   "grandfathered" type. For more information see Appendix C.



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


2.2.2 Possibilities for Registration

   Possibilities for registration of subtags include:

   o  Primary language subtags for languages not listed in ISO 639 that
      are not variants of any listed or registered language, can be
      registered. At the time this document was created there were no
      RFC 3066 examples of this form of subtag. Before attempting to
      register a language subtag, there should be a good faith attempt
      to register the language with ISO 639. No language subtags will be
      registered for codes that exist in ISO 639-1 or ISO 639-2, which
      are under consideration by the ISO 639 maintenance or registration
      authorities, or which have never been attempted for registration
      with those authorities. If ISO 639 has previously rejected a
      language for registration, it is reasonable to assume that there
      MUST be additional very compelling evidence of need before it will
      be registered in the IANA registry (to the extent that it is very
      unlikely that any subtags will be registered of this type).

   o  Dialect or other divisions or variations within a language, its
      orthography, writing system, regional variation, or historical
      usage may be registered as variant subtags. For example, the
      "scouse" subtag (the Scouse dialect of English), was converted
      from RFC 3066.

   This document leaves the decision on what subtags are appropriate or
   not to the registration process described in Section 3.3.

   ISO 639 defines a maintenance agency for additions to and changes in
   the list of languages in ISO 639. This agency is:

   International Information Centre for Terminology (Infoterm)
   Aichholzgasse 6/12, AT-1120
   Wien, Austria
   Phone: +43 1 26 75 35 Ext. 312 Fax: +43 1 216 32 72

   ISO 639-2 defines a maintenance agency for additions to and changes
   in the list of languages in ISO 639-2. This agency is:

   Library of Congress
   Network Development and MARC Standards Office
   Washington, D.C. 20540 USA
   Phone: +1 202 707 6237  Fax: +1 202 707 0115
   URL: http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639

   The maintenance agency for ISO 3166 (country codes) is:

   ISO 3166 Maintenance Agency



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   c/o International Organization for Standardization
   Case postale 56
   CH-1211 Geneva 20 Switzerland
   Phone: +41 22 749 72 33  Fax: +41 22 749 73 49
   URL: http://www.iso.org/iso/en/prods-services/iso3166ma/index.html

   The registration authority for ISO 15924 (script codes) is:

   Unicode Consortium Box 391476
   Mountain View, CA 94039-1476, USA
   URL: http://www.unicode.org/iso15924

   The Statistics Division of the United Nations Secretariat maintains
   the Standard Country or Area Codes for Statistical Use and can be
   reached at:

   Statistical Services Branch
   Statistics Division
   United Nations, Room DC2-1620
   New York, NY 10017, USA

   Fax: +1-212-963-0623
   E-mail: statistics@un.org
   URL: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm

2.2.3 Classes of Conformance

   Implementations may wish to express their level of conformance with
   the rules and practices described in this document. There are
   generally two classes of conforming implementations: "well-formed"
   processors and "validating" processors. Claims of conformance SHOULD
   explicitly reference one of these definitions.

   An implementation that claims to check for well-formed language tags
   MUST:

   o  Check that the tag and all of its subtags, including extension and
      private-use subtags, conform to the ABNF or that the tag is on the
      list of grandfathered tags.

   o  Check that singleton subtags that identify extensions do not
      repeat. For example, the tag 'en-a-xx-b-yy-a-zz' is not
      well-formed.

   Well-formed processors are strongly encouraged to implement the
   default fallback mechanism in Section 2.4.2 and the associated
   canonicalization rules contained in Section 2.4.3.




Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   An implementation that claims to be validating MUST:

   o  Check that the tag is well-formed.

   o  Specify the particular registry date for which the implementation
      performs validation of subtags.

   o  Check that either the tag is a grandfathered tag, or that all
      language, script, region, and variant subtags consist of valid
      codes for use in language tags according to the IANA registry as
      of the particular date specified by the implementation.

   o  Specify which, if any, extension RFCs as defined in Section 3.4
      are supported, including version, revision, and date.

   o  For any such extensions supported, check that all subtags used in
      that extension are valid.

   o  If the processor generates tags, it MUST do so in canonical form,
      including any supported extensions, as defined in Section 2.4.3.


2.3 Choice of Language Tag

   One may occasionally be faced with several possible tags for the same
   body of text.

   Interoperability is best served when all users use the same language
   tag in order to represent the same language. If an application has
   requirements that make the rules here inapplicable, then that
   application risks damaging interoperability. Users of this document
   are strongly discouraged against defining their own rules for
   language tag choice and matching.

   Standards, protocols and applications that reference this document
   normatively but apply different rules to the ones given in this
   section MUST specify how the procedure varies from the one given
   here.

   1.  Use as precise a tag as possible, but no more specific than is
       justified. For example, 'de' might suffice for tagging an email
       written in German, while 'de-CH-1996' is probably unnecessarily
       precise for such a task.

   2.  Avoid using subtags that add no distinguishing information about
       the content. For example, the script subtag in 'en-Latn-US' is
       generally unnecessary, since nearly all English texts are written
       in the Latin script.



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   3.  Use the canonical subtag from the IANA registry in preference to
       any of its aliases. For example, you SHOULD use 'he' for Hebrew
       in preference to 'iw'.

   4.  You SHOULD NOT use the UND (Undetermined) code unless the
       protocol in use forces you to give a value for the language tag,
       even if the language is unknown. Omitting the tag is preferred.

   5.  You SHOULD NOT use the MUL (Multiple) tag if the protocol allows
       you to use multiple languages, as is the case for the
       Content-Language header in HTTP.

   To ensure consistent backwards compatibility, this document contains
   several provisions to account for potential instability in the
   standards used to define the subtags that make up langauge tags.
   These provisions mean that no language tag created under the rules in
   this document will become obsolete. In addition, tags that are in
   canonical form will always be in canonical form.

2.4 Meaning of the Language Tag

   The language tag always defines a language as spoken (or written,
   signed or otherwise signaled) by human beings for communication of
   information to other human beings. Computer languages such as
   programming languages are explicitly excluded.

   If a language tag B contains language tag A as a prefix, then B is
   typically "narrower" or "more specific" than A. For example,
   'zh-Hant-TW' is more specific than 'zh-Hant'.

   This relationship is not guaranteed in all cases: specifically,
   languages that begin with the same sequence of subtags are NOT
   guaranteed to be mutually intelligible, although they may be. For
   example, the tag 'az' shares a prefix with both 'az-Latn'
   (Azerbaijani written using the Latin script) and 'az-Cyrl'
   (Azerbaijani written using the Cyrillic script). A person fluent in
   one script may not be able to read the other, even though the text
   might be identical. Content tagged as 'az' most probably is written
   in just one script and thus might not be intelligible to a reader
   familiar with the other script.

   The relationship between the tag and the information it relates to is
   defined by the standard describing the context in which it appears.
   Accordingly, this section can only give possible examples of its
   usage.

   o  For a single information object, the associated language tags
      might be interpreted as the set of languages that is required for



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      a complete comprehension of the complete object. Example: Plain
      text documents.

   o  For an aggregation of information objects, the associated language
      tags could be taken as the set of languages used inside components
      of that aggregation.  Examples: Document stores and libraries.

   o  For information objects whose purpose is to provide alternatives,
      the associated language tags could be regarded as a hint that the
      content is provided in several languages, and that one has to
      inspect each of the alternatives in order to find its language or
      languages. In this case, the presence of multiple tags might not
      mean that one needs to be multi-lingual to get complete
      understanding of the document. Example: MIME multipart/
      alternative.

   o  In markup languages, such as HTML and XML, language information
      can be added to each part of the document identified by the markup
      structure (including the whole document itself). For example, one
      could write <span lang="FR">C'est la vie.</span> inside a
      Norwegian document; the Norwegian-speaking user could then access
      a French-Norwegian dictionary to find out what the marked section
      meant. If the user were listening to that document through a
      speech synthesis interface, this formation could be used to signal
      the synthesizer to appropriately apply French text-to-speech
      pronunciation rules to that span of text, instead of misapplying
      the Norwegian rules.


2.4.1 Language Range

   A Language Range is a set of languages whose tags all begin with the
   same sequence of subtags. A Language Range can be represented by a
   'language-range' tag, by using the definition from HTTP/1.1 [14] :

      language-range = language-tag / "*"

   That is, a language-range has the same syntax as a language-tag or is
   the single character "*". This definition of language-range
   implicitly assumes that there is a semantic relationship between tags
   that share the same subtag prefixes.

   A language-range matches a language-tag if it exactly equals the tag,
   or if it exactly equals a prefix of the tag such that the first
   character following the prefix is "-". (That is, the language-range
   'en-de' matches the language tag 'en-DE-boont', but not the language
   tag 'en-Deva'.)




Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   The special range "*" matches any tag. A protocol which uses language
   ranges may specify additional rules about the semantics of "*"; for
   instance, HTTP/1.1 specifies that the range "*" matches only
   languages not matched by any other range within an "Accept-Language:"
   header.

   As noted above, not all languages or content denoted by a specific
   language-range may be mutually intelligible and this use of a prefix
   matching rule does not imply that language tags are assigned to
   languages in such a way that it is always true that if a user
   understands a language with a certain tag, then this user will also
   understand all languages with tags for which this tag is a prefix.
   The prefix rule simply allows the use of prefix tags if this is the
   case.

2.4.2 Matching Language Tags

   Implementations that are searching for content or otherwise matching
   language tags to a language-range [Section 2.4.1] may choose to
   assume that there is a semantic relationship between two tags that
   share common prefixes. This is called 'language tag fallback'. The
   most common implementations follow this pattern:

   1.  When searching for content using language tag fallback, the
       language tag is progressively truncated from the end until a
       match is located. For example, starting with the tag
       'en-US-boont', searchs or matches would first be performed with
       the whole tag, then with 'en-US', and finally with 'en'. This
       allows some flexibility in finding content in accordance with
       Rules 1 and 2 in Section 2.3; allows better maintenance; and
       usually provides better results when data is not available at a
       specific level of tag granularity or is sparsely populated (than
       if the default language for the system or content were used). Any
       implementation that uses this technique should ensure that
       appropriate data is available on each level.

   Tag to match: en-US-boont
   1. en-US-boont
   2. en-US
   3. en

               Figure 2: Default Fallback Pattern Example

   2.  Private-use and Extension subtags are orthogonal to language tag
       fallback. By default, implementations SHOULD ignore both
       private-use and extension subtags and follow the default fallback
       pattern (above). Thus a request to match the tag
       "en-US-boont-x-traditional" would produce exactly the same



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


       information content as the example above.

   3.  Implementations that choose to interpret one or more private-use
       or extension subtags can choose a different fallback pattern or
       use the private-use or extension subtags to interpret content in
       a different fashion.

   4.  Implementations that choose not to interpret one or more
       private-use or extension subtags SHOULD NOT remove or modify
       these extensions in content that they are processing.

   5.  Any language tag processor MAY match language tags using simple
       string comparisons and the default fallback pattern and SHOULD
       use this pattern for unrecognized extension subtag sequences that
       are processed for matching. When performing canonicalization of
       language tags for the purpose of matching, implementations MUST
       NOT reorder the subtags within an extension or private-use subtag
       sequence.

   6.  Extension and private-use subtags MAY be ignored when matching or
       comparing language tags to a language-range (such as when
       performing language negotiation or selecting content).

   7.  Some applications of language tags may want or need to consider
       extensions and private-use subtags when matching tags. If
       extensions and private-use subtags are included in a matching
       process that utilizes the default fallback mechanism, then the
       implementation MUST canonicalize the language tags and/or ranges
       before performing the matching. Note that implementations that
       claim to be "well-formed" processors as defined in Section 2.2.3
       generally fall into this category.


2.4.3 Canonicalization of Language Tags

   Since a particular language tag or language-range may be processed
   many times, language tags SHOULD always be created or generated in a
   canonical form suitable for matching using the default fallback
   mechanism.

   A language tag is in canonical form when:

   1.  The tag is well-formed according the rules in Section 2.1 and
       Section 2.2.

   2.  None of the subtags in the language tag has a canonical mapping
       in the IANA registry.




Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   3.  If more than one extension subtag sequence exists, the extension
       sequences are ordered into case-insensitive ASCII order by
       singleton subtag.

   For example, the language tag "en-A-aaa-B-ccc-bbb-x-xyz" is in
   canonical form, while "en-B-ccc-bbb-A-aaa-X-xyz" is well-formed but
   not in canonical form.

   Note: Canonicalization of language tags does not imply anything about
   the use of upper or lowercase letter in subtags as described in
   Section 2.1. All comparisons MUST be performed in a case-insensitive
   manner.

   An extension MUST define any relationships that may exist between the
   various subtags in the extension and thus MAY define an alternate
   canonicalization scheme for the extension's subtags. Extensions MAY
   define how the order of the extension's subtags are interpreted. For
   example, an extension could define that its subtags are in canonical
   order when the subtags are placed into ASCII order: that is,
   "en-a-aaa-bbb-ccc" instead of "en-a-ccc-bbb-aaa". Another extension
   might define that the order of the subtags influences their semantic
   meaning (so that 'en-b-ccc-bbb-aaa' has a different value than
   'en-b-aaa-bbb-ccc').

2.5 Considerations for Private Use Subtags

   Private-use codes and subtags require private agreement between the
   parties that intend to use or exhange language tags that use them and
   great caution should be used in employing them in content or
   protocols intended for general use. Private-use subtags are simply
   useless for information exchange without prior arrangement.

   The value and semantic meaning of  private-use tags and of the
   subtags used within such a language tag are not defined by this
   document.
















Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


3. IANA Considerations

   This section deals with the processes and requirements necessary to
   maintain the registry of subtags and extensions for use in language
   tags as defined by this document and in accordance with the
   requirements of RFC 2434 [13].

   The language subtag registry will be maintained so that, except for
   extension subtags, it is possible to validate all of the subtags that
   appear in a language tag under the provisions of this document or its
   revisions or sucessors. In addition, the meaning of the various
   subtags will be unambiguous and stable over time. (The meaning of
   private-use subtags, of course, is not defined by the IANA registry.)

   The previous registry under RFC 3066 contained only a few registered
   tags. The new registry, under this document, contains a comprehensive
   list of all of the subtags valid in language tags. This allows
   implementers a straightfoward and reliable way to validate language
   tags.

   The impact on the IANA maintainers of the registry will be a small
   increase in the frequency of new entries after the initial conversion
   of the registry as described in Appendix C. The initial set of
   records will be created by the process described in Appendix C and
   should represent no impact on IANA.

3.1 Stability of IANA Registry Entries

   The stability of the registry and the subtags it defines is critical
   to the long term stability of language tags. Assignments to the IANA
   Language Subtag Registry MUST follow the following stability rules.
   (These rules specifically deal with potential instability in ISO 639,
   ISO 15924, and ISO 3166 due to withdrawl or deprecation of existing
   codes and their subsequent reassigment, as well as the interaction
   between registrations and these standards):

   o  Once assigned in the IANA registry, no part of a subtag's
      definition (except for the "notes" field and additions to the
      "recommended prefix" field) may be changed. This means that ISO
      639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166 codes that are withdrawn by the
      respective maintenance or registration authority remain valid in
      language tags. It also means that subtags cannot be assigned a
      canonical equivalent or alias, except when they are created. This
      means that canonical language tags are stable: they will never
      become non-canonical as a result of future registrations or
      changes in the registry.

   o  If ISO 639, ISO 15924, or ISO 3166 assign a new code (not in the



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      IANA language subtag registry) a meaning equivalent to that of a
      code already defined in the IANA registry for that type, then the
      corresponding new subtag MUST have a canonical alias of the
      existing subtag.

      1.  If ISO 3166 were to assign the code 'QX' to represent the
          value "Isle of Man" (represented in the IANA registry by the
          UN M49 code '833'), '833' remains the canonical subtag and
          'QX' would be assigned '833' as an alias. This prevents tags
          that are in canonical form from becoming non-canonical.

      2.  If the tag 'enochian' were registered as a primary language
          subtag and ISO 639 subsequently assigned an alpha-3 code to
          the same language, the new ISO 639 code would be entered into
          the IANA registry with a canonical mapping to 'enochian'. The
          new ISO code can be used, but it is not canonical.

   o  Stability provisions apply to grandfathered tags with this
      exception: should all of the subtags in a grandfathered tag become
      valid subtags in the IANA registry, then the grandfathered tag
      MUST be deprecated. Note that this will not affect language tags
      that match the grandfathered tag, since these tags will match
      valid subtag sequences. For example, if the subtags 'min' and
      'nan' in the language tag 'zh-min-nan' be registered as extended
      language subtags, then the grandfathered tag 'zh-min-nan' would be
      deprecated (but existing content or implementations that use
      'zh-min-nan' would remain valid.

   o  If ISO 639, ISO 15924, or ISO 3166 reassign a code that is in the
      IANA registry under the same category (which generally means that
      it was previously withdrawn by the maintenance or registration
      authority), then the new subtag MUST NOT be registered and an
      alternative subtag MUST be created according to the following
      rules:

      1.  In the event that either ISO 639 or ISO 15924 assigns a new
          meaning to an existing code, the Language Subtag Reviewer, as
          described in Section 3.3, shall prepare a proposal for
          entering in the IANA registry as soon as practical a
          registered language or variant subtag as an alternate value
          for the new code. The form of the registered language subtag
          or variant subtag will be at the discretion of the language
          subtag reviewer and must conform to other restrictions on
          language or variant subtags in this document.

      2.  In the event ISO 3166 assigns a new meaning to an existing
          code, then the language subtag reviewer, as described in
          Section 3.3, shall prepare a proposal for entering the



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


          appropriate numeric UN country code as an entry in the IANA
          registry. If there is not an available UN numeric code with
          the proper meaning, then the language subtag reviewer SHALL
          petition the UN to create one. If there is not a timely
          response from the UN, then a registered variant code SHALL be
          registered, as in #1 above.

      3.  The normal registration process described in Section 3.3 of
          this document applies to the review and registration of the
          registered subtags described above. Note that these subtags
          should never be used in combination with the subtag type for
          which they are an alternate. For example, a "script" variant
          subtag should not be used with a script subtag.


3.2 Format of the IANA Language Subtag Registry

   The IANA Language Subtag Registry will consist of a text file that is
   machine readable in the format described in this section, plus copies
   of the registration forms approved by the Language Subtag Reviewer in
   accordance with the process described in Section 3.3. With the
   exception of the registration forms for grandfathered tags, no
   registration records will be maintained for the initial set of
   subtags.

   Each record in the subtag registry will consist of a series of fields
   separated by semi-colons and terminated by a newline. Text appearing
   after a "#" symbol contains comments. Whitespace surrounding fields
   in the file is ignored. Lists inside a field are comma separated.

   The fields in each record, in order, are:

   type; subtag; description; date; canonical_value; recommended_prefix
   # comments

   o  Semicolons delimit the fields.

   o  Empty fields (and their semicolons) at the end of the record may
      be omitted.

   o  Leading or trailing whitespace in each field is not part of the
      content.

   o  When the type is "grandfathered", then the subtag field is
      actually a whole tag.

   o  The recommended_prefix is empty, except where the type is
      "variant"



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   o  Notes are always presented as comments at the end, after a hash
      mark.


   # language codes: ISO 639 and registered codes

   language; aa; Afar; 2004-06-28; ;
   language; he; hebrew; 2004-06-28; ;
   language; iw; hebrew; 2004-06-28; he ; #note mapping
   language; seuss; Hypothetical Language; 2005-04-01 ; ;# registered language

   # script codes: ISO 15924

   script; Arab; Arabic; 2004-06-28; ;
   script; Armn; Armenian; 2004-06-28; ;

   # region codes: ISO 3166 and UN codes

   region; AF; Afghanistan; 2004-06-28; ;
   region; CS; Czechoslovakia; 2004-06-28; ;
   region; YU; Yugoslavia; 2004-06-28; ;
   region; 891; Serbia and Montenegro; 2004-06-28; ;

   # registered variants

   variant; boont; Boontling; 2004-06-28; ; en #boont variant of English

   #grandfathered from RFC 3066

   grandfathered; de-CH-1996; German Swiss variant orthography of 1996; 2001-07-17; ;

                Figure 3: Example of the Registry Format

   The field 'type' MUST consist of one of the following strings:
   "language", "extlang", "script", "region", "variant", and
   "grandfathered" and denotes the type of subtag (or tag, in the case
   of grandfathered).

   The field 'subtag' contains the subtag being defined.

   The field 'description' contains a description of the subtag
   transcribed into ASCII.

   The field 'date' contains the date the record was added to the
   registry in ISO 8601 format. For example: 2004-06-28 represents June
   28, 2004, in the Gregorian calendar.

   The field 'canonical value' represents a canonical mapping of this



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   record to a subtag record of the same 'type'. Note that this field
   MUST NOT be modified: therefore a subtag whose record contains no
   canonical mapping when the record is created is a canonical form and
   will remain so.

   The field 'recommended prefix' is for use with registered variants
   and contains a comma separated list of language-ranges considered
   most appropriate for use with this subtag. Additional values can be
   added to this field for variants only via additional registration.
   Other modification of this field (such as removing or changing
   values) is not permitted.

   Notes and comments may contain additional information about the
   subtag, as deemed appropriate for understanding the registry and
   implementing language tags using the various subtags. These values
   can be changed via the registration process and no guarantee of
   stability is provided.

   Maintenance of the registry requires that as new codes are assigned
   by ISO 639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166, the Language Subtag Reviewer
   will evaluate each assignment, determine whether it conflicts with
   existing registry entries, and submit the information to IANA for
   inclusion in the registry.

   The Language Subtag Reviewer MUST ensure that new subtags meet the
   requirements in Section 2.3 or submit an appropriate alternate code
   as described in that section. She or he will use the following form
   to submit this information:

   LANGUAGE SUBTAG REGISTRATION FORM (NEW RECORD)
   Record Text:
   Type:
   Subtag:
   Description:
   Date:
   Canonical Mapping:
   Recommended Prefix:
   Note:

                                Figure 4

   The field 'record text' contains the exact record that IANA is to
   insert into the Language Subtag Registry. The contents of the
   remaining fields must exactly match those in this field.

3.3 Registration Procedure for Subtags

   The procedure given here MUST be used by anyone who wants to use a



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   subtag not given an interpretation in Section 2.2 of this document or
   previously registered with IANA.

   Only primary language and variant subtags will be considered for
   registration. (Subtags required for stability are the only exception
   to this. See Section 3.1.)

   This procedure MAY also be used to register or alter the information
   for the "note" or "recommended prefix" fields in a subtag's record as
   described in Figure 3. Changes to all other fields in the IANA
   registry is NOT permitted.

   If registering a new language subtag, the process starts by filling
   out the registration form reproduced below. Note that each response
   is not limited in size and should take the room necessary to
   adequately describe the registration.

   LANGUAGE SUBTAG REGISTRATION FORM
   1. Name of requester:
   2. E-mail address of requester:
   3. Subtag to be registered:
   4. Type of Registration:
      [ ] language
      [ ] variant
   5. Description of subtag (in English or transcribed into ASCII):
   6. Intended meaning of the subtag:
   7. Recommended prefix(es) of subtag (for variants):
   8. Native name of the language or variation (transcribed into ASCII):
   9. Reference to published description of the language (book or article):
   10. Any other relevant information:

                                Figure 5

   The subtag registration form MUST be sent to
   <ietf-languages@iana.org> for a two week review period before it can
   be submitted to IANA. (This is an open list. Requests to be added
   should be sent to <ietf-languages-request@iana.org>.)

   Variant subtags are generally registered for use with a particular
   language range (see Section 2.4.2. For example, the subtag 'boont' is
   intended for use with language tags that match the language range
   'en', since Boontling is a dialect of English. In other words, the
   subtag boont is intended for use in tags that start with 'en' and
   could include tags such as 'en-Latn-boont' or 'en-US-boont'. This
   information MUST be provided in the registration form.

   Any registered subtag MAY be incorporated into a variety of language
   tags, according to the rules of Section 2.1. This makes validation



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   simpler and thus more uniform across implementations, and does not
   require new registrations for different intended language ranges.

   The intended language ranges for a given registered subtag will be
   maintained in the IANA registry as a guide to usage. If it is
   necessary to add an additional intended language range to that list
   for an existing language tag, that can be done by filing an
   additional registration form. In that form, the "Any other relevant
   information:" field should indicate that it is the addition of an
   additional intended language range.

   Requests to add a language range to a subtag that imply a different
   semantic meaning will be rejected. For example, if a request were
   made to add the language range 'de' to the subtag 'nedis' so that the
   tag 'de-nedis' represented some German dialect would be rejected
   because it would change the semantic meaning assigned to the subtag.
   A separate subtag SHOULD be created for such instances.

   When the two week period has passed, the subtag reviewer, who is
   appointed by the IESG, either forwards the request to IANA@IANA.ORG,
   or rejects it because of significant objections raised on the list or
   due to problems with constraints in this document (which should be
   explicitly cited). Note that the reviewer can raise objections on the
   list if he or she so desires. The important thing is that the
   objection must be made publicly.

   The applicant is free to modify a rejected application with
   additional information and submit it again; this restarts the two
   week comment period.

   Decisions made by the reviewer may be appealed to the IESG [RFC 2028]
   [9] under the same rules as other IETF decisions [RFC 2026] [18]. All
   registered forms are available online in the directory http://
   www.iana.org/numbers.html under "languages".

   Updates of registrations follow the same procedure as registrations.
   The subtag reviewer decides whether to allow a new registrant to
   update a registration made by someone else; normally objections by
   the original registrant would carry extra weight in such a decision.

   Registrations are permanent and stable. Once registered, subtags will
   not be removed from the registry and will remain the canonical method
   of referring to a specific language or variant. This provision does
   not apply to grandfatered tags, which may become deprecated due to
   registration of subtags.

   Note: The purpose of the "published description" is intended as an
   aid to people trying to verify whether a language is registered, or



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   what language a particular subtag refers to. In most cases, reference
   to an authoritative grammar or dictionary of that language will be
   useful; in cases where no such work exists, other well known works
   describing that language or in that language may be appropriate. The
   subtag reviewer decides what constitutes "good enough" reference
   material. This requirement is not intended to exclude particular
   languages or dialects due to the size of the speaker population or
   lack of a standardized orthography. Minority languages will be
   considered equally on their own merits.

3.4 Extensions and Extensions Namespace

   Extension subtags are those introduced by single-letter subtags other
   than 'x-'. They are reserved for the generation of identifiers which
   contain a language component, and are compatible with applications
   that process language tags according to this specification. For
   example, they might be used to define locale identifiers, which are
   generally based on language.

   The structure and form of extensions are defined by this document so
   that implementations can be created that are forward compatible with
   applications that may be created using single-letter subtags in the
   future. In addition, defining a mechanism for maintaining
   single-letter subtags will lend to the stability of this document by
   reducing the likely need for future revisions or updates.

   IANA will maintain a registry of allocated single-letter subtags.
   This registry contain the following information: letter identifier;
   name; purpose; RFC defining the subtag namespace and its use; and the
   name, URL, and email address of the maintaining authority.

   Allocation of a single-letter subtag shall take the form of an RFC
   defining the name, purpose, processes, and procedures for maintaining
   the subtags. The maintaining or registering authority, including
   name, contact email, discussion list email, and URL location of the
   registry must be indicated clearly in the RFC. The RFC MUST specify
   each of the following:

   o  The specification MUST reference the specific version or revision
      of this document that govern its creation and MUST reference this
      section of this document.

   o  The specification and all subtags defined by the specification
      MUST follow the ABNF and other rules for the formation of tags and
      subtags as defined in this document. In pariticular it MUST
      specify that case is not significant.

   o  The specification MUST specify a canonical representation and this



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      canonical representation SHOULD NOT conflict with any of the
      matching or fallback mechanisms defined in this document.

   o  The specification of valid subtags MUST be available over the
      Internet and at no cost.

   o  The specification MUST be in the public domain or available via a
      royalty-free license acceptable to the IETF and specified in the
      RFC.

   o  The specification MUST be versioned and each version of the
      specification MUST be numbered, dated, and stable.

   o  The specification MUST be stable. That is, extension subtags, once
      defined by a specificaiton, MUST NOT be retracted or change in
      meaning in any substantial way.

   o  IANA MUST be informed of changes to the contact information and
      URL for the specification.

   The determination of whether an Internet-Draft meets the above
   conditions and the decision to grant or withhold such authority rests
   solely with the IESG, and is subject to the normal review and appeals
   process associated with the RFC process.

   Extension authors are strongly cautioned that many (including most
   well-formed) processors will be unaware of any special relationships
   or meaning inherent in the order of extension subtags. Extension
   authors SHOULD avoid subtag relationships or canonicalization
   mechanisms that interfere with the default fallback mechansm. For
   example, if the subtag 'aaa' were least significant in the tag
   'fr-c-aaa-bbb-ccc'.



















Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


4. Security Considerations

   The only security issue that has been raised with language tags since
   the publication of RFC 1766, which stated that "Security issues are
   believed to be irrelevant to this memo", is a concern with language
   ranges used in content negotiation - that they may be used to infer
   the nationality of the sender, and thus identify potential targets
   for surveillance.

   This is a special case of the general problem that anything you send
   is visible to the receiving party. It is useful to be aware that such
   concerns can exist in some cases.

   The evaluation of the exact magnitude of the threat, and any possible
   countermeasures, is left to each application protocol.

   Although the specification of valid subtags for an extension MUST be
   available over the Internet, implementations SHOULD NOT mechanically
   depend on it being always accessible, to prevent denial-of-service
   attacks.































Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


5. Character Set Considerations

   The syntax in this document requires that language tags use only the
   characters A-Z, a-z, 0-9, and HYPHEN-MINUS, which are present in most
   character sets, so presentation of language tags should not have any
   character set issues.

   The issue of deciding upon the rendering of characters based on the
   language tag is not addressed in this memo; however, if different
   spans of text are not marked with font information, it may be useful
   to provide the ability to mark spans of text with language. For
   example, a rendering engine may use that information in deciding
   which font to use in displaying Han-based ideographs when it
   encounters mixed Japanese-Chinese text that has no attached font
   information.




































Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


6. Changes from RFC3066

   The main goals were to maintain backward compatibility (so that all
   previous codes would remain valid); reduce the need for large numbers
   of registrations; to provide a more formal structure to allow parsing
   into subtags even where software does not have the latest
   registrations; to provide stability in the face of potential
   instability in ISO 639, 3166, and 15924 codes (*demonstrated
   instability* in the case of ISO 3166); and to allow for external
   extension mechanisms.

   o  Allows ISO 15924 script code subtags and allows them to be used
      generatively.

   o  Adds the concept of a variant subtag and allows variants to be
      used generatively.

   o  Adds an extension mechanism including both private-use and
      standardized extensions.

   o  Defines the private-use tags in ISO 639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166
      as the mechanism for creating private-use language, script, and
      region subtags respectively

   o  Defines a syntax for private-use variant subtags which can be used
      without registration.

   o  Defines an extended language subtag for use with certain
      anticipated features of ISO 639-3.

   o  Defines a process for handling reuse of values by ISO 639, ISO
      15924, and ISO 3166 in the event that they register a previously
      used value for a new purpose.

   o  Changes the IANA language tag registry to a language subtag
      registry

   o  Makes the choice of UN or ISO 3166 codes explicit in Section 2.2
      and modified the text of Rule 7a. It also sets a start date for
      ambiguity resolution.

   o  Expands the maximum size of some of the subtags, including the
      primary subtag. In RFC 3066 the maximum subtag length was eight
      characters long. In this document the maximum length for most
      subtags is fifteen characters (and is thirty-one characters for
      extensions and private-use subtags).

   o  Added the concept of well-formed vs. validating processors,



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      defining the rules by which an implementation can claim to be one
      or the other. This affects applications that perform matching in
      particular.

   o  Provided a complete list of valid subtags in the IANA registry to
      allow for robust implementation and ease of maintenance.

   Ed Note: The following items are provided for the convenience of
   reviewers and will be removed from the final document.

   Changes between draft-03 and this version are:

   o  Modified ABNF to better reflect private_use actual usage.
      (M.Davis)

   o  Added hyphen in phrase "IANA-registered" (P.Constable)

   o  Modified the text related to ISO 639 private-use tags in language
      choice to make it clear that 'qaa' (or similar) is preferred to
      'x-someTag'. (P.Constable)

   o  Modified the section on region subtags to make what is denoted
      clearer. This also resulted in some minor editorial wording
      changes. (P.Constable)

   o  In section 2.4, revised so that we always used "associated tags"
      instead of the singular "tag". This makes the examples much
      clearer. (P.Constable)

   o  In section 2.4.1, revised so that language-ranges are more clearly
      defined and removed the references to "sets", which was rather
      confusing. (P.Constable)

   o  Modified the Section 2.4.3 so that it is clear that
      canonicalization must be performed when matching and is
      recommended when generating. In addition, the canonicalization
      rules were cleaned up so that they are clearer, (P.Constable)

   o  The term 'obsoleted' was replaced with the term 'superseded' in
      the section on processing the RFC 3066 registry. (P.Constable)

   o  A note was added about casing in the section on canonicalization.
      (A.Phillips)

   o  Added the concept of well-formed vs. validating to section on
      choice, defining the rules by which an implementation can claim to
      be one or the other. This affects applications that perform
      matching in particular. (M.Davis/A.Phillips)



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   o  Spelled 'superceded' as 'superseded' (J.Cowan)

   o  Replaced references to 'i-hakka' with 'i-enochian' (D.Ewell)

   o  Canonicalized RFC and ISO references. (D.Ewell)

   o  Slightly reworded the reference to 'zh-min-nan' in the extended
      language example to make it clear that this is not currently a
      valid extended language series of subtags (and how it could become
      one). (D.Ewell)

   o  Changes to force extensions to adhere closely to this document and
      to specify a canonicalization mechanism. (M.Davis)

   o  Changes to the character sets section to make clear that language
      tags must always use (subset of) ASCII and to make the example
      slightly clearer. (A.Phillips/M.Davis)

   o  Additions to the requirements for validating processors, making
      them validate registrations and canonicalized correctly. (M.Davis)

   o  Corrected the registration form to remove a lingering reference to
      extended language subtags. (A.Phillips)

   o  Modified the intro to the IANA Considerations section (section 3)
      because it now does more than just subtag registration.
      (A.Phillips)

   o  Changed the ABNF to make it consistent with RFC 2234 according to
      Harald's information (H.Alvestrand).

   o  Fixed the definition of validating processors to deal with the
      changes in the IANA registry. (A.Phillips and M.Davis)


















Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


References

   [1]   International Organization for Standardization, "ISO 639-2:1998
         - Codes for the representation of names of languages -- Part 2:
         Alpha-3 code - edition 1", August 1988.

   [2]   ISO TC46/WG3 and M. Everson, Ed., "ISO 15924:2003 (E/F) - Codes
         for the representation of names of scripts", March 2003.

   [3]   International Organization for Standardization, "Code for the
         representation of names of languages, 1st edition", ISO
         Standard 639, 1988.

   [4]   International Organization for Standardization, "Codes for the
         representation of names of countries, 3rd edition", ISO
         Standard 3166, August 1988.

   [5]   Statistical Division, United Nations, "Standard Country or Area
         Codes for Statistical Use", UN Standard Country or Area Codes
         for Statistical Use, Revision 4 (United Nations publication,
         Sales No. 98.XVII.9, June 1999.

   [6]   Hardcastle-Kille, S., "Mapping between X.400(1988) / ISO 10021
         and RFC 822", RFC 1327, May 1992.

   [7]   Borenstein, N. and N. Freed, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions) Part One: Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing
         the Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC 1521, September
         1993.

   [8]   Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of Languages", RFC
         1766, March 1995.

   [9]   Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in the
         IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October 1996.

   [10]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [11]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [12]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform
         Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August
         1998.

   [13]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
         Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


         1998.

   [14]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
         Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
         HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [15]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
         Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the Internet
         Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [16]  Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of Languages", BCP
         47, RFC 3066, January 2001.

   [17]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646", STD
         63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [18]  <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2026.txt>


Authors' Addresses

   Addison Phillips (editor)
   webMethods, Inc.
   432 Lakeside Drive
   Sunnyvale, CA  94088
   US

   EMail: aphillips@webmethods.com


   Mark Davis
   IBM

   EMail: mark.davis@us.ibm.com

















Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


Appendix A. Acknowledgements

   Any list of contributors is bound to be incomplete; please regard the
   following as only a selection from the group of people who have
   contributed to make this document what it is today.

   The contributors to RFC 3066 and RFC 1766, the precursors of this
   document, made enormous contributions directly or indirectly to this
   document and are generally responsible for the success of language
   tags.

   The following people (in alphabetical order) contributed to this
   document or to RFCs 1766 and 3066:

   Glenn Adams, Harald Tveit Alvestrand, Tim Berners-Lee, Marc Blanchet,
   Nathaniel Borenstein, Eric Brunner, Sean M. Burke, Jeremy Carroll,
   John Clews, Jim Conklin, Peter Constable, John Cowan, Mark Crispin,
   Dave Crocker, Martin Duerst, Michael Everson, Doug Ewell, Ned Freed,
   Tim Goodwin, Dirk-Willem van Gulik, Marion Gunn, Paul Hoffman,
   Richard Ishida, Olle Jarnefors, Kent Karlsson, John Klensin, Alain
   LaBonte, Eric Mader, Keith Moore, Chris Newman, Masataka Ohta, George
   Rhoten, Markus Scherer, Keld Jorn Simonsen, Thierry Sourbier, Otto
   Stolz, Tex Texin, Rhys Weatherley, Misha Wolf, Francois Yergeau and
   many, many others.

   Very special thanks must go to Harald Tveit Alvestrand, who
   originated RFCs 1766 and 3066, and without whom this document would
   not have been possible. Special thanks must go to Michael Everson,
   who has served as language tag reviewer for almost the complete
   period since the publication of RFC 1766.





















Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


Appendix B. Examples of Language Tags (Informative)

   Simple language code:

      de (German)

      fr (French)

      ja (Japanese)

   Language code plus Script code :

      zh-Hant (Traditional Chinese)

      en-Latn (English written in Latin script)

      sr-Cyrl (Serbian written with Cyrillic script)

   Language-Script-Region:

      zh-Hans-CN (Simplified Chinese for the PRC)

      sr-Latn-891 (Serbian, Latin script, Serbia and Montenegro)

   Language-Script-Region-Variant:

      en-Latn-US-boont (Boontling dialect of English)

   Language-Region:

      de-DE (German for Germany)

      zh-SG (Chinese for Singapore)

      cs-CS (Czech for Czechoslovakia)

      sr-891 (Serbian for Serbia and Montenegro, UN country code, see 7a
      in Section 2.3

   Other Mixtures:

      zh-CN (Chinese for the PRC)

      en-boont (Boontling dialect of English)

   private-use mechanism:





Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


      de-CH-x-phonebook

      az-Arab-x-AZE-derbend

   Extended language subtags (examples ONLY: extended languages must be
   defined by revision or update to this document):

      zh-min

      zh-min-nan-Hant-CN

   Private-use tags:

      qaa-Qaaa-QM-xsouthern (all private tags)

      de-Qaaa (German, with a private script)

      de-Latn-QM (German, Latin-script, private region)

      de-Qaaa-DE (German, private script, for Germany)

   Tags that use extensions (examples ONLY: extensions must be defined
   by revision or update to this document or by RFC):

   o  en-US-u-gregorianCalendar

   o  zh-CN-x-privateUse

   o  en-a-anExtension-b-another

   Some Invalid Tags:

      de-891-DE (two region tags)

      a-DE (use of a single character tag in primary position)

      zh-xsouthern-DE (private-use variant followed by another tag)

      ar-a-aaa-b-bbb-a-ccc (two extensions with same single letter
      prefix)











Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


Appendix C. Conversion of the RFC 3066 Language Tag Registry

   Upon publication of this document as a BCP, the existing IANA
   language tag registry must be converted into the new subtag registry.
   This section defines the process for performing this conversion.

   When this document is published, an email request will be sent to the
   list ietf-languages@iana.org requesting the conversion of the
   registry from the authors of this document. In that request, the
   authors of this document will provide a URL whose referred content is
   the proposed IANA Language Subtag Registry following conversion.

   Tags that are currently deprecated will be maintained as
   grandfathered entries. A note should be added indicating that they
   are 'deprecated' and the original note indicating why the tag was
   deprecated left in place.

   Tags that consist entirely of subtags that are valid under this
   document and which have the correct form and format for tags defined
   by this document are marked as 'superseded' by this document. For
   example, zh-Hant is now defined by this document.

   Tags that contain subtags which are consistent with registration
   under the guidelines in this document will have a new subtag
   registration created for each eligible subtag. If all of the subtags
   in the original tag are fully defined by the resulting registrations
   or by this document, then the original tag is marked as 'superseded'
   by this document. For example, en-boont will result in a new subtag
   "boont".

   Tags that contain one or more subtags that do not match the valid
   registration pattern and which are not otherwise defined by this
   document are marked as 'grandfathered' by this document.

   There will be a reasonable period in which the community may comment
   on the proposed list entries, which SHALL be no less than two weeks
   in length. At the completion of this period, the Language Subtag
   Reviewer will notify IANA@IANA.ORG and the ietf-languages mail lists
   that the task is complete and forward the necessary materials to IANA
   for publication.

   Registrations that are in process under the rules defined in RFC 3066
   MAY be completed under the former rules, at the discretion of the
   language tag reviewer. Any new registrations submitted after the
   request for conversion of the registry MUST be rejected.

   All existing RFC 3066 language tag registrations will be maintained
   in perpetuity.



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   The rules governing the conversion of RFC 1766 and RFC 3066
   registered tags are:

   o  If the formerly registered tag would now be defined by this
      document, then the existing tag is marked as superseded by this
      document and no subtag will be registered as a result. For
      example, 'zh-Hans' is now defined by the addition of ISO 15924
      script codes.

   o  If the registered tag contained one or more subtags that follow
      the guidelines for registered language or variant subtags, and all
      of the subtags are either now defined by this document or would be
      valid to register, then each subtag not already covered by this
      document will be registered automatically by IANA without further
      review and the existing tag marked as superseded by this document.
      For example: the tag 'en-boont' fits the pattern for a registered
      variant. The variant subtag "boont" will be registered
      automatically and 'en-boont' marked as superseded.

   o  If the registered tag contains any subtags that are not otherwise
      valid for registration according to the rules in this document,
      then the tag as a whole is maintained as an exceptional case (that
      is, it is "grandfathered"). This includes special cases of Sign
      Language tags. For example, the tag 'zh-min-nan' is not covered by
      any addition and is grandfathered, as is 'sgn-BE-fr' (Belgian
      French Sign Language).

   Users of tags that are grandfathered should consider registering
   appropriate subtags in the IANA subtag registry (but are not required
   to).

   Where two subtags have the same meaning, the priority of which to
   make canonical SHALL be the following:

   o  As of March 1995 (the issue date for RFC 1766), if a code exists
      in the associated ISO standard and it is not deprecated or
      withdrawn as of that date, then it has priority.

   o  Otherwise, the earlier-registered tag in the associated ISO
      standard has priority.











Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                       June 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Phillips & Davis       Expires December 23, 2004               [Page 42]


