Internet Engineering Task Force                         SIPPING WG
Internet Draft                                          Charlton/Gasson/
Document: draft-charlton-deaf-req-00.txt                Gybels/Spanner/
                                                        van Wijk
October 2001                                            RNID/Ericsson
Expires:  April 2002
Category: Informational


     User Requirements for SIP in support of deaf, hard of hearing 
                   and speech-impaired individuals


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions 
   of Section 10 of RFC2026[1].
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Table of Contents

   1. Abstract........................................................2
   2. Terminology and Conventions Used in this Document...............2
   3. Introduction....................................................3
   4. Purpose and Scope...............................................3
   5. Background......................................................4
   6. Deaf, Hard of Hearing and Speech-impaired Requirements 
      for SIP.........................................................4
      Introduction....................................................4
      6.1. Connection without Difficulty..............................4
      6.2 User Profile................................................5
      6.3 Intelligent Gateways........................................5
      6.4 Inclusive Design............................................5
      6.5 Resource Management.........................................6
      6.6 Confidentiality and Security................................6
   7. Some Real World Scenarios.......................................6
      7.1 Transcoding Service.........................................7
      7.2 Media Service Provider......................................7
      7.3 Sign Language Interface.....................................8
      7.4 Synface Support for Voice Calls.............................8
   8. Some Suggestions for Service Providers and User Agent 
      Manufacturers...................................................8
   9. Acknowledgements................................................9
  10. Author's Addresses..............................................9
  References and Notes...............................................10

Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  1 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


1. Abstract

   This document aims to present a set of SIP user requirements that 
   support communications for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired
   individuals. These user requirements address the current difficulties
   of deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired individuals in using 
   communications facilities, while acknowledging the multi-functional
   potential of SIP-based communications.

   A number of issues related to these user requirements are further 
   raised in this document.

   Also included are some real world scenarios and some technical 
   requirements to show the robustness of these requirements on a
   concept-level. 

2. Terminology and Conventions Used in this Document

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT","REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119[2] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant SIP implementations.

   For the purposes of this document, the following terms are considered
   to have these meanings:

   Abilities: A person's capacity for communicating which could include
   a hearing or speech impairment or not. The terms Abilities and
   Preferences apply to both caller and call-recipient.

   Preferences: A person's choice of communication mode. This could 
   include any combination of media stream, e.g., text, audio, video. 
   The terms Abilities and Preferences apply to both caller and 
   call-recipient. 

   Relay Service: A third-party or intermediary in deaf, hard of hearing
   and speech-impaired communications. See the definition for 
   Transcoding Services.

   Transcoding Services: A human or automated third party acting as an
   intermediary in any session between two other User Agents (being a
   User Agent itself), and transcoding one stream into another (e.g.,
   voice to text or vice versa).

   Textphone: Sometimes called a TTY (teletypewriter), TDD
   (telecommunications device for the deaf) or a minicom, a textphone
   enables a deaf, hard of hearing or speech-impaired person to place a
   call to a telephone or another textphone. Some textphones use the V18
   protocol as a standard for communication with other textphone
   communication protocols world-wide. 




Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  2 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


   User: A deaf, hard of hearing or speech-impaired individual. A user
   is otherwise referred to as a person or individual, and users
   referred to as people.

   Note: For the purposes of this document, a deaf, hard of hearing, or
   speech-impaired person is an individual who chooses to use SIP
   because it can minimize or eliminate constraints in using common
   communication devices. As SIP promises a total communication solution
   for any kind of person, regardless of ability and preference,
   therefore there is no attempt to specifically define deaf, hard of
   hearing or speech-impaired in this document.

3. Introduction

   The background for this document is the recent developments of SIP
   and SIP-based communications, and a growing awareness of deaf, hard
   of hearing and speech-impaired issues in the technical community. 

   The SIP capacity to simplify setting up, managing and tearing down
   communication sessions between all kinds of User Agents has specific
   implications for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired 
   individuals. 

   As SIP enables multiple sessions with translation between multiple
   types of media, these requirements aim to provide the standard for
   recognising and enabling these interactions, and for a communications
   model that includes any and all types of SIP-networking abilities and
   preferences.
 
4. Purpose and Scope

   The scope of this document is to first present a current set of user
   requirements for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired
   individuals through SIP-enabled communications. These are then
   followed some real world scenarios in SIP-communications that could
   be used in a test environment, and some concepts on how these
   requirements can be developed by service providers and User Agent
   manufacturers. 

   These recommendations make explicit the needs of a currently often
   disadvantaged user-group and attempts to match them with the capacity
   of SIP. It is also not the intention here to prioritise the needs of
   the deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired in a way that would
   penalise other individuals. 

   These requirements aim to encourage developers and manufacturers
   worldwide to consider the specific needs of deaf, hard of hearing and
   speech-impaired individuals. This document presents a world-vision
   where deafness, hard of hearing or speech impairment are no longer a
   barrier to communication. 




Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  3 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


5. Background

   Deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired people are currently
   sometimes unable to use commonly available communication devices.
   Although this is documented[3], this does not mean that developers or
   manufacturers are always aware of this. Communication devices for the
   deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired are currently often
   primitive in design, expensive, and non-compatible with progressively
   designed, cheaper and more adaptable communication devices for other
   individuals. 

   Additionally, non-technical human communications for the deaf, hard
   of hearing and speech-impaired (sign languages, lip reading) are
   non-standard around the world.

   Intermediary or third-party services (e.g. transcoding services) for
   enabling the hearing impaired full access to modern facilities and
   services are currently sometimes limited, although their value is
   undeniable as compared to the previous complete unavailability of
   such transcoding services.

   Yet communication methods in recent decades have proliferated: email,
   mobile phones, video streaming, etc. These methods are an advance in
   the development of data transfer technologies between devices. 

   Developers and advocates of SIP agree that this is a protocol that
   not only anticipates the growth in communications between convergent
   networks in real time, but also fulfils the potential of the Internet
   as a communications and information forum. Further, that these
   developments allow a standard of communication that can be applied
   throughout all networking communities, regardless of abilities and
   preferences.

6. Deaf, Hard of Hearing and Speech-impaired Requirements for SIP

   Introduction

   The user requirements in this section are provided for the benefit of
   service providers, User Agent manufacturers and any other interested
   party in the development of products and services for the deaf, hard
   of hearing and speech-impaired.

   The user requirements are as follows:

6.1 Connection without Difficulty

   This requirement states: 

   Whatever the preferences and abilities of the user and User Agent,
   there SHOULD be no difficulty in setting up SIP sessions. These
   sessions could include multiple proxies, call routing decisions,
   transcoding services, e.g., TypeTalk[4] or other media processing,
   and could include multiple simultaneous or alternative media streams.

Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  4 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


   This means that any User Agent in the conversation space (including
   transcoding services) SHOULD be able to add or remove a media stream
   from the call without having to tear it down and re-establish it.

6.2 User Profile

   This requirement states:

   Deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired user abilities and
   preferences (i.e., user profile) MUST be communicable by SIP, and
   these abilities and preferences MUST determine the handling of the
   session.

   The User Profile for a deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired
   person might include:
   - How media streams are received and transmitted (text, voice, video,
   or any combination)
   - Redirecting specific media streams through a transcoding service
   (e.g., TypeTalk)
   - Roaming (for example, a deaf person accessing their User Profile
   from a web-interface at an Internet café)
   - Anonymity, that is, not revealing that a deaf person is calling,
   even through a transcoding service (for example, TextDirect informs
   the call-recipient that there is an incoming text call without saying
   that a deaf person is calling).

   Part of this requirement is to ensure that deaf, hard of hearing and
   speech-impaired people can keep their preferences and abilities
   confidential from others, to avoid possible discrimination or
   prejudice, while still being able to establish a SIP session.

6.3 Intelligent Gateways

   This requirement states:

   SIP SHOULD support a class of User Agents to perform as gateways for
   legacy systems designed for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired
   people.

   For example, an individual could have a SIP User Agent acting as a
   gateway to a PSTN legacy textphone.

6.4 Inclusive Design

   This requirement states:

   Where applicable, design concepts for communications (devices,
   applications, etc.) MUST include the abilities and preferences of
   deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired people.





Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  5 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


   Transcoding services and User Agents MUST be able to connect with
   each other regardless of the provider or manufacturer. This means
   that new User Agents MUST be able to support legacy protocols through
   appropriate gateways.

6.5 Resource Management

   This requirement states:

   User Agents SHOULD be able to identify the content of a media stream
   in order to obtain such information as the cost of the media stream,
   if a transcoding service can support it, etc. 
 
   User Agents SHOULD be able to choose among transcoding services and
   similar services based on their capabilities (e.g., whether a
   transcoding service carries a particular media stream), and any
   policy constraints they impose (e.g., charging for use). It SHOULD be
   possible for User Agents to discover the availability of alternative
   media streams and to choose from them. 

6.6 Confidentiality and Security

   This requirement states:

   All third-party or intermediaries (transcoding services) employed in
   a session for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired people MUST
   offer a confidentiality policy. All information exchanged in this
   type of session MUST be secure, that is, erased before
   confidentiality is breached, unless otherwise required by legal
   intercept[5]. 

   This means that transcoding services (e.g., interpretation,
   translation) MUST publish their confidentiality and security
   policies.

7. Some Real World Scenarios

   These scenarios are intended to show some of the various types of
   media streams that would be initiated, managed, directed, and
   terminated in a SIP-enabled network, and shows how some resources
   might be managed between SIP-enabled networks, transcoding services
   and service providers. 

   To illustrate the communications dynamic of these kinds of scenarios,
   each one specifically mentions the kind of media streams transmitted,
   and whether User Agents and Transcoding Services are involved.








Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  6 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


7.1 Transcoding Service 

   In this scenario, a hearing person calls the household of a deaf
   person and a hearing person.

   1. A voice conversation is initiated between the hearing 
   participants: 
   ( Phone A) <-----Voice ---> ( Phone B)
   2. During the conversation, the hearing person asks to talk with the
   deaf person, while keeping the voice connection open so that voice to
   voice communications can continue if required.
   3. A Relay Service is invited into the conversation.
   4. The Relay Service transcodes the hearing person's words into text.
   5. Text from the hearing person's voice appears on the display of the
   deaf person's User Agent.
   6. The deaf person types a response. 
   7. The Relay Service receives the text and reads it to the hearing
   person:
   (        ) <------------------Voice----------------> (        )
   (Phone A ) -----Voice---> (Voice To Text   ) -Text-> (Phone B )
   (        ) <----Voice---- (Service Provider) <-Text- (        )
   8. The hearing person asks to talk with the hearing person on the
   other side.
   9. The Relay Service withdraws from the call. 

7.2 Media Service Provider

   In this scenario, a deaf person wishes to listen to a Radio program
   through a text stream of the program's audio stream.

   1. The deaf person attempts to establish a connection to the radio
   broadcast, with User Agent preferences set to receiving audio stream
   as text.
   2. The User Agent of the deaf person queries the radio station User
   Agent on whether a text stream is available, other than the audio
   stream.
   3. However, the radio station has no text stream available for a deaf
   listener, and responds in the negative.
   4. As no text stream is available, the deaf person's User Agent
   requests a Voice-To-Text transcoding service (e.g., TypeTalk) to come
   into the conversation space. 
   5. The transcoding service User Agent identifies the audio stream as
   a radio broadcast. However, the policy of the transcoding service is
   that it does not accept radio broadcasts because it would overload
   their resources far too quickly.
   6. In this case, the connection fails.

   Alternatively, continuing from 2 above:
   3. The radio station does provide text with their audio streams.
   4. The deaf person receives a text stream of the radio program.

   Note: To support deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired, service
   providers are encouraged to provide text with audio streams.

Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  7 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


7.3 Sign Language Interface

   In this scenario, a deaf person enables a VisiCAST Avatar by setting
   up a User Agent to receive audio streams as XML data that will
   operate an avatar for sign-language. For outgoing communications,
   the deaf person types text that is transcoded into an audio stream
   for the other conversation participant.

   For example:
   (         ) --Voice--> ( VoiceToVisiCast ) --XMLData--> (         )
   ( hearing )                                             ( deaf    )
   ( Party A ) <--Voice-- ( Text To Voice    ) <---Text--- ( Party B )
   (         )            ( Service Provider )             (         )

7.4 Synface Support for Voice Calls

   In order to receive voice calls, a hard of hearing person uses the
   Synface Avatar software on a PC. Synface software processes voice
   (audio) stream data and displays an animated face that a hard of
   hearing person can lip read. During a conversation, the hard of
   hearing person uses Synface as support for understanding the audio
   stream. 

   For example:
   (        ) <-----Voice-----> ( hard of ) -Voice-> ( PC with )
   ( hearing )                  ( hearing )          ( Synface )
   ( Party A )                  ( party B )          ( software)
   (         )                  (         )          (         )

8. Some Suggestions for Service Providers and User Agent Manufacturers

   This section is included to encourage service providers and user
   agent manufacturers in developing products and services that can be
   used by as wide a range of individuals as possible, including the
   deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired. 

   - Service providers and User Agent manufacturers can offer to a deaf,
     hard of hearing and speech-impaired person the possibility of being
     able to hide their specific preferences and abilities from being
     made public in any transaction. 
   - If a User Agent performs auditory signalling, for example a pager,
     it could also provide another signalling method, for example,
     visual or sensory. 
   - Service providers who allow the user to store specific setting or
     preferences and abilities (i.e., user profile) might consider
     storing these setting in a central repository, accessible no matter
     the location of the user and regardless of the User Agent used at
     that time or location. 
   - If there are several transcoding services available, the User Agent
     can be set to select the most economical/highest quality service.
   - The service provider can show the cost per minute and any minimum
     charge of a transcoding service call before a session starts,
     allowing the user a choice of engaging in the service or not.

Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  8 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


   - Service providers are encouraged to offer an alternative stream
     with audio streams, for example, text or data streams that operate
     avatars, etc. 
   - All services for interpreting, transliterating, or facilitating
     communications for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired people
     are required to:
     - Keep information exchanged during the transaction strictly
       confidential 
     - Enable information exchange literally and simply, without
       deviating and compromising the content
     - Facilitate communication without bias, prejudice or opinion
     - Match skill sets to the requirement of the individual
     - Behave in a professional and appropriate manner
     - Be fair in claiming compensation for services
     - Strive to improve the skill-sets used for their services.

9. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank the following individuals for their
   contributions to this draft:

   Arnoud van Wijk, Ericsson
   David R. Oran, Cisco
   Mark Watson, Nortel Networks
   Brian Grover, RNID
   Anthony Rabin, RNID
   Michael Hammer, Cisco
   Henry Sinnreich, Worldcom
   Rohan Mahy, Cisco
   Julian Branston, Cedalion Hosting Services

10. Author's Addresses

   Nathan Charlton, RNID, nathan.charlton@rnid.org.uk
   Mick Gasson, RNID, mike.gasson@rnid.org.uk
   Guido Gybels, RNID, Guido.Gybels@rnid.org.uk
   Mike Spanner, RNID, mike.spanner@rnid.org.uk
   19-23 Featherstone Street
   London EC1Y 8SL
   Tel: +44-20 7296 8000
   Textphone: +44-20 7296 8001
   Fax: +44-20 7296 8199

   Arnoud van Wijk
   Ericsson EuroLab Netherlands BV
   P.O. Box 8
   5120 AA Rijen
   The Netherlands
   Fax: +31-161-247569
   Email: Arnoud.van.Wijk@eln.ericsson.se

   Comments can be sent to the SIPPING mailing list.


Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page  9 of 10]SIP for deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired           October 2001


References and Notes

   1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP9,
   RFC 2026, October 1996.
   2. S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
   levels". Request for Comments 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force.
   March 1997.
   3. Moore, Matthew, et al.  "For Hearing People Only:  Answers to Some
   of the Most Commonly Asked Questions About the Deaf Community, Its
   Culture, and the Deaf Reality".  MSM Productions Ltd., 2nd Edition,
   September 1993.
   4. TypeTalk is a UK based Relay Service with human operators
   performing text to voice and voice to text transcoding services.
   5. This requirement recognises emerging regulatory conditions
   world-wide that allow for the surveillance and interception of
   electronic mail by legal authorities.


Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2001. All Rights Reserved. This
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
   not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

   Expires:  April 2002











Charlton/Gasson/Gybels/Spanner/van Wijk                  [Page 10 of 10]
