



Network Working Group                                       T. Bray, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       Textuality Services
Intended status: Standards Track                      September 10, 2014
Expires: March 14, 2015


               Privacy Choices for Internet Data Services
                     draft-bray-privacy-choices-00

Abstract

   This document considers the factors Internet data service providers
   should consider when making choices concerning privacy options, and
   presents arguments in favor of choices resulting in more privacy for
   their services' users.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 14, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Bray                     Expires March 14, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft Privacy Choices for Internet Data Services September 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Privacy-technology arguments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     3.1.  Positive and negative failures  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     3.2.  Free public data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.3.  Making privacy choices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.4.  Failures of privacy technology  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.5.  Cost of privacy technology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

   Privacy issues are becoming increasingly visible, and service
   providers must choose how much privacy is appropriate in the context
   of their services.

   There are arguments that privacy protection is inappropriate for
   freely-public information and "brochure-ware", that it is too flawed
   to be worthwhile, that privacy choices are best left to end users,
   and that the cost of deploying privacy protection is too high.

   This document argues that these arguments are flawed and that in
   almost every case, the best choice for a service provider and its
   users is the one that maximmizes privacy.

2.  Terminology

   The term "data service" means any Internet-mediated offering that is
   accessible to the general public.  Examples would include Web sites,
   HTTP APIs, streaming media, and various flavors of chat.

   In this document, "privacy protection" means technology whose
   deployment increases the cost and difficulty, for anyone but the user
   and provider of a data service, of ascertaining who is accessing
   which services and what messages are being exchanged between the user
   and the service.  Obvious examples are encryption and authentication
   technologies.

3.  Privacy-technology arguments

3.1.  Positive and negative failures

   There are two classes of privacy-related failure in the operation of
   data services.  A positive failure occurs when privacy was provided
   but was not necessary; a negative failure is when privacy was not




Bray                     Expires March 14, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft Privacy Choices for Internet Data Services September 2014


   provided, but was necessary for safe or prudent use of the data
   service.

   The cost of these failure classes is not symmetric; negative failures
   can endanger businesses, property, and lives, while positive failures
   usually incur at most a little extra expense.

3.2.  Free public data

   It is reasonable to question whether, for freely-available public
   data, such as the contents of an online reference work or a
   promotional Web site, it makes sense to deploy privacy protection.

   Here are some reasons to answer that question in the affirmative:

   1.  It is very difficult to predict when accessing information might
       lead to negative consequences.  For example, some governments
       criminalize certain behaviors to the extent that accessing free
       public reference documents concerning that behavior could lead to
       arrest and prosecution.

   2.  If one groups available data services into those which are non-
       controversial and thus require no privacy protection, and those
       which are controversial and do, some will conclude that anything
       with privacy protection must be controversial and thus subject to
       suspicion.  This effect is better avoided.

3.3.  Making privacy choices

   Service providers may argue that privacy choices are best left to the
   users of their services; and thus, that opt-in privacy is an
   appropriate strategy.

   However, the technical and social factors forming the context for
   such choices are very complex; even experts often disagree on privacy
   requirements.  Thus, the end-users of a data service are likely not
   well-equipped to make good choices.

   Because of this, and because of the asymmetric costs of positive and
   negative privacy failures, it is usually best to remove the necessity
   for making these difficult choices, by always providing the maximum
   achievable amount of privacy protection.

3.4.  Failures of privacy technology

   Internet privacy technologies are known to be imperfect.  Algorithms
   have been compromised and there is widespread dissatisfaction with
   the PKI infrastructure.



Bray                     Expires March 14, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft Privacy Choices for Internet Data Services September 2014


   Furthermore, it is widely agreed that an attacker who wishes to
   compromise a target's privacy has many means, ranging from social
   engineering to hardware hacking to zero-day exploits, to bypass
   privacy protection.

   Therefore, it is reasonable to question the deployment of privacy
   protection, which may create an unrealistic expectation of complete
   safety when in fact that is not achievable.

   However, this line of argument fails on economic grounds.
   Deployments of privacy technology, however imperfect, generally have
   the effect of increasing the cost to an attacker of invading end-
   users' privacy.  Every time that cost goes up, certain surveillance
   activities, whether by government bodies or criminals, become
   uneconomic and will be abandoned, with the effect of globally
   increasing the security and privacy of Internet data services.

3.5.  Cost of privacy technology

   Privacy technologies are not free; there are monetary costs for
   accessing the PKI infrastructure and bandwidth/computation costs
   related to encryption and authentication.  Service providers may find
   it difficult to justify such expenses, particularly those who have
   severe budget constraints.

   However, the cost of PKI access, computation, and bandwidth have
   historically been declining monotonically, decreasing the force of
   this argument with every passing year.  It should also be noted that
   those who are operating on low budgets are often providing data
   services to disadvantaged groups, who may be in particular need of
   privacy protection.

Author's Address

   Tim Bray (editor)
   Textuality Services

   Email: tbray@textuality.com
   URI:   https://www.tbray.org/












Bray                     Expires March 14, 2015                 [Page 4]
