Internet Draft                                              J. Vollbrecht
Document: <draft-irtf-aaaarch-session-id-00.txt>  Interlink Networks,Inc.
Category: Informational                                          G. Carle
                                                                 S. Zander
                                                                  T. Zseby
                                                                 GMD FOKUS
                                                             February 2001


                                Session ID


Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
    six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    The authors would like to note that although this draft is in a very
    early stage of development it has been submitted to motivate
    discussion about the topic.

Abstract

    This draft describes bindings that are needed for auditing and
    accounting in an interdomain generic AAA environment. It introduces
    the concept of a session ID that is used to bind together a set of
    related activities. These activities can be single messages,
    transactions or sessions. For accounting different accounting
    records must be tied together and linked to a user ID in order to
    produce a bill. Auditing requires a binding of authentication,
    authorization and accounting and the actual service delivered in
    order to trace back all occurred actions. For both there must be a
    link between the different sub-sessions a service is composed of.
    This draft presents different approaches on how this binding can be
    achieved. Furthermore requirements for the session ID which is used
    for the binding are given and it is shown how the session ID can be
    created with regard to the generic AAA architecture [1]. Finally
    some examples are given.


Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby     Expires August 2001       [Page 1]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


Table of Contents

    1.  Introduction..................................................2
    2.  Terminology...................................................3
    3.  Binding Objectives............................................5
    4.  Binding Concepts..............................................6
    5.  Related Work..................................................6
    5.1   RADIUS......................................................7
    5.2   DIAMETER....................................................7
    5.3   WWW based services..........................................8
    6.  Session ID Requirements.......................................9
    7.  Generation of Session IDs....................................10
    8.  Auditing.....................................................10
    9.  Accounting...................................................11
    10. Anonymous Service Usage......................................11
    11. Examples.....................................................11
    12. Security Considerations......................................11
    13. References...................................................12
    14. Acknowledgments..............................................12
    15. Author's Addresses...........................................12
    16. Full Copyright Statement.....................................13

1. Introduction

    The Generic AAA Architecture described in [1] is an infrastructure
    that supports authentication, authorization and accounting for
    generic services. A session is linked to one or more "users" which
    might be an individual, a hardware device or a piece of software. A
    "user" may act as a "customer" or with the permission of the
    customer. The user might be identified with a public key, a user-ID,
    an IP address, a phone number etc. A session also relates to one or
    more service "providers" which support the session with resources of
    some sort. Furthermore a session may incorporate one or more
    "broker" which supports information on existing providers.

    This draft describes the concept of a session ID which is needed in
    [1] for the binding of:

    - Authentication, Authorization and Accounting with the Service
      provisioning process (Service Session)

    - Accounting records (maybe generated by different hosts) which
      provide the accounting data for the services a user has used

    - Different service sessions that logically belong together

    Authentication, authorization and service usage needs to be linked
    to make a later auditing and accounting possible. This is even more
    important if these functions are performed by different entities (in
    different domains). In the case of fraud it must be checked whether
    the authentication authenticated a wrong person or the rights
    granted by the authorization process were wrong. The service usage
    must be linked to authentication and authorization to associate the

Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 2]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    accounted data in the service session to the person which requested
    the service and has been identified during the authentication.
    Furthermore in the case of misuse it must be possible to backtrack
    the malicious service user which hopefully could be done having a
    link to the authentication and authorization.

    A session should have a session ID which allows each provider and
    user in the session to audit session activity and compare it with
    what other providers and users believe happened in the session. The
    session ID should allow a provider to merge accounting data for the
    different activities and generate a bill. Each user and provider may
    have a different view on the overall session. In particular a user
    or provider may only know a part of the session that took place.

    In case we have more than one accounting record generated per
    session (service) the session ID is used to link the different
    records together. In [3] it is shown that even in the simple dialup
    service we haven at least two accounting records (start and stop)
    which must be tied together to provide useful information for later
    billing. Other services may well produce more than two records for
    example if interim reports are used or we have different service
    equipment involved (e.g. print service).

    A service which is provided with the architecture described in [1]
    may be composed of different services from different providers. For
    the user this may still look like a single service. To correlate
    accounting and auditing information the different sessions which are
    part of a service need to be linked together. This can be achieved
    via session IDs. Several alternatives for linking are possible.  One
    alternative would be the use of a common session ID. Another
    alternative would be to use individual session IDs for each
    subsession, in combination with a binding function (or a binding
    service) that would allow to obtain information about the related
    services. In the accounting case it might not be necessary to link
    to the session ID if there is a separate billing for each accounted
    process.

    A session ID must be unique for each provider-user combination. This
    means that each provider and user may have to create a piece of the
    session ID to guarantee that it is unique to it. It is also possible
    that the provider creates the whole session ID by using user and
    provider information.

2. Terminology

    Service:
    A service is a performance offered by a provider. In contrast to
    goods, services are usually intangible and production and consuming
    happens simultaneously. Services can be very different. A service
    can be for instance a 2 hour videoconference including audio, video
    and whiteboard, the guaranteed transmission of 100000 packets with a
    high priority, the provisioning of accounting records, etc.


Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 3]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    Session:
    A session is a service provisioning over time. Start and stop of the
    session is determined by the service definition. Examples for
    sessions are audio/video flows, downloading data, collecting
    continuous (interim) accounting data, etc. Also the concatenation of
    transactions can be called a session. A session may have subsessions
    and transactions. A session has three different phases: session
    establishment, service session, session teardown.

    Super- and Subsession:
    A session can be a super- or subsession. A session is called a
    supersession if it has one or more subsessions which are a part of
    the supersession. A subsession is a session which is part of a
    supersession. All sessions together form the session graph. In case
    of a hierarchical relationship we have a session tree with a root
    session which is the supersession for all other sessions. Whether a
    particular session is a super- or subsession depends on the
    viewpoint (e.g. a supersession of a subsession can be a subsession
    of another supersession). The supersession should have knowledge of
    all subsessions.

    In certain cases it also might be desirable to be able to determine
    the supersession ID from the subsession ID. Nevertheless, for
    privacy reasons knowledge about the subsession should not
    automatically imply knowledge about the supersession. Privacy may be
    compromised if the ID of the supersession contains some cleartext
    information which might for instance reveal participants. Even if
    the supersession encrypts these information the knowledge that there
    exists a supersession may be problematic. Even if the communication
    between two parties is encrypted the fact that someone knows that
    there is a communication between them might be already compromising.

    Peer Session:
    A peer-session is a session which is on the same level with another
    session (this means it is neither a super- nor a sub-session). Peer-
    sessions may interact which each other.

    Transaction:
    A transaction consists of request and response messages that are
    exchanged. Transactions differ from sessions because they do not
    require a "continuous" flow of data. Examples for transactions are
    the authorization of a service, buying a book, etc. Transactions can
    be part of a session. Simple transactions consist of a single
    request-response message pair. An authentication and/or
    authorization transaction is often used to determine if a session is
    allowed prior to actual session establishment.

    Authentication Transaction:
    An authentication transaction is the exchange of request/response
    messages to perform authentication.

    Authorization Transaction:


Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 4]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    An authorization transaction is the exchange of request/response
    messages to perform authorization. During a session reauthorization
    transactions might be necessary.

    Accounting Transaction:
    An accounting transaction is the exchange of request/response
    messages to perform accounting. Accounting can be performed in the
    form of accounting transactions that report on resource usage by a
    session. Accounting transaction can occur during a session if
    accounting or charging indications are needed [pol based acct] or
    only at the start and the end of the session.

    Accounting Session:
    An accounting session consists of subsequent accounting records. It
    can be seen as the concatenation of single messages or as
    concatenation of multiple accounting transactions.

    Auditing:
    Auditing is the process of examining information on a provided
    services to check whether the service has been provided correctly
    and the contractual negotiated parameters have been met. // Auditing
    should be performed by an independent third party in order to
    prevent fraud.

    Auditing Transactions:
    Auditing transactions are message exchanges used in the process of
    auditing a session. This could be requests to store or to query
    auditing information.

    AAA Transactions:
    AAA messages and transactions may be considered a form of signaling
    used to control a session. AAA transactions should have unique
    transaction IDs, different from the session ID, which can be used to
    associate the transactions with the session.

    Binding:
    Binding is the process of building associations between different
    messages, transactions and sessions which logically belong together
    for accounting and auditing purposes.

3. Binding Objectives

    There are different objectives to bind messages, sessions and
    transactions together.

    A) Binding authentication, authorization transactions to the main
       service session and accounting: This is required in order to
       concatenate information about the user (user ID) to the session
       and the involved transactions. For accounting it is important to
       map the user ID to the corresponding accounting records. For
       auditing it is also of interest how the user has been
       authenticated (e.g. strong or weak mechanism) and authorized.


Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 5]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    B) Binding together accounting records for one service session: This
       is needed to recognize which accounting records belong to the
       same service session. The bound accounting records form the
       accounting session.

    C) Binding together sub-sessions which belong to a service-package
       or super-session: This would be for example the binding of audio-
       and video session for a videoconference (super-session). Binding
       of sub-sessions to a super-session is useful to concatenate the
       services used by one user simultaneously and the accounting data
       for this session.

    A) and B) would be the "traditional" (see section 5) session ID. The
    purpose of A) is auditing and to also link user authorization to
    accounting while B) is needed for accounting and auditing. C) would
    link different services (even from different domains) together.

    The IDs could be named differently according to the bindings they
    provide.

4. Binding Concepts

    In the following we first describe two different concepts for
    binding messages, sessions and transactions together:

    - Hierarchical binding: With an hierarchical binding sub-session ID
      are derived from the super-session (or parent-session) ID. Here we
      have to distinguish whether one should be able to determine the
      supersession ID from subsession IDs. For instance whether the ID
      of a videoconference session could be derived from the audio-
      session ID. This might violate privacy requirements.

    - Peer-to-peer binding: With a peer-to-peer binding two sessions at
      an equal level are concatenated (e.g. an audio-session that
      consists of two audio-sessions in different provider networks).
      Information on the binding between two sessions can be stored at
      the concatenation points where both sessions are known (e.g. AAA
      server or the border routers between two providers).

    Second the binding could also distinguished according to the
    following:

    - Implicit (late) binding: No explicit binding is created during
      session lifetime. Binding is created if needed (e.g. for auditing)
      based on service relevant information like user name, IP address,
      etc.

    - Explicit binding: The binding is created during the session
      lifetime and/or shortly after.

5. Related Work



Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 6]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    This chapter gives an overview of existing services which already
    use the concept of a session ID.

5.1 RADIUS

    [2] defines the RADIUS protocol which is used for authorization and
    accounting a dial-in service. A RADIUS session is defined as
    follows: Each service provided by the NAS to a dial-in user
    constitutes a session, with the beginning of the session defined as
    the point where service is first provided and the end of the session
    defined as the point where service is ended.  A user may have
    multiple sessions in parallel or series if the NAS supports that.

    For accounting purposes a session ID is generated [3]. RADIUS
    generates on accounting records at the start and the stop of a
    session. The RADIUS Acct-Session-ID attribute is used to match the
    two reports of a session and is defined as follows: This attribute
    is a unique Accounting ID to make it easy to match start and stop
    records in a log file. The start and stop records for a given
    session MUST have the same Acct-Session-ID.  It is strongly
    recommended that the Acct-Session-ID be a printable ASCII string.
    For example, one implementation uses a string with an 8-digit upper
    case hexadecimal number, the first two digits increment on each
    reboot (wrapping every 256 reboots) and the next 6 digits counting
    from 0 for the first person logging in after a reboot up to 2^24-1,
    about 16 million.  Other encodings are possible. Another attribute
    which is defined in [3] is the Acct-Multi-Session-ID. This attribute
    links together multiple related sessions and thus can be seen as
    kind of supersession ID with regard to the session ID of one
    session. The attribute is defined as follows: This attribute is a
    unique Accounting ID to make it easy to link together multiple
    related sessions in a log file.  Each session linked together would
    have a unique Acct-Session-ID but the same Acct-Multi-Session-ID.
    It is strongly recommended that the Acct-Multi-Session-ID be a
    printable ASCII string.

5.2 DIAMETER

    The successor of RADIUS is the basis for the forthcoming AAA
    protocol DIAMETER [4]. DIAMETER has a session ID for binding the
    different AAA transaction together. Therefore a Session-ID AVP has
    been defined. The initial request for authentication and/or
    authorization of a user would include the Session-ID. The Session-ID
    is then used in all subsequent messages to identify the user's
    session. The session state (associated with a Session-ID) is freed
    upon receipt of the Session-Termination-Request, Session-
    Termination-Answer and according to rules established in a
    particular extension/application of DIAMETER.

    The Session-ID AVP is defined as follows: The Session-ID AVP (AVP
    Code 263) is of type Data and is used to identify a specific session
    (see section 3.0). All messages pertaining to a specific session
    MUST include only one Session-ID AVP and the same value MUST be used

Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 7]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    throughout the life of a session. When present, the Session-ID
    SHOULD appear immediately following the DIAMETER Header. For
    messages that do not pertain to a specific session, multiple
    Session-ID AVPs MAY be present as long as they are encapsulated
    within different Grouped-AVP AVPs [messages which do not belong to
    any session!]. The Session-ID MUST be globally unique at any given
    time since it is used by the server to identify the session (or
    flow). The format of the session identifier SHOULD be as follows:

    <Sender's Host-Name><sender's port number> <monotonically increasing
    32 bit value><optional value>

    The monotonically increasing 32 bit value SHOULD NOT start at zero
    upon reboot, but rather start at a random value. This will minimize
    the possibility of overlapping Session-IDs after a reboot.
    Alternatively, an implementation MAY keep track of the increasing
    value in non-volatile memory. The optional value is implementation
    specific but may include a modem's device ID, a layer 2 address,
    timestamp, etc. The session ID is created by the DIAMETER device
    initiating the session, which in most cases is done by the client.
    Note that a Session-ID MAY be used by more than one extension (e.g.
    authentication for a specific service and accounting, both of which
    have separate extensions).

    The Session-Timeout AVP can be used by a server to tell the client
    the maximum session duration. The client may use this attribute to
    indicate the maximum length that it is willing to accept.

5.3 WWW based services

    WWW based services are content services, electronic shops and web
    based messaging services etc. Since HTTP is a stateless protocol for
    the provision of certain services there is need to keep state over a
    number of different HTTP requests. A session ID is used in web based
    services to allow the following: tracking of user, keep state for a
    user over different pages/http requests, limited form of
    authentication (prevent replay attacks). There are two traditional
    methods of propagating a session ID which have been used before HTTP
    state management was invented [6]: URL parameter or cookies. Cookies
    are optimal but not reliable since the client can disable the use of
    them. A session ID used for authentication is normally a short-lived
    cookie which is only kept in browser memory and is not written to
    disk. However if used for keeping state the session ID may be stored
    on disk, so that the state can be resumed even after shutoff and
    restart of the computer.

    [6] describes a way to create stateful sessions with HTTP requests
    and responses. The state management mechanism allows clients and
    servers that wish to exchange state information to place HTTP
    requests and responses within a larger context, which is called a
    "session".  This context might be used to create, for example, a
    "shopping cart", in which user selections can be aggregated before
    purchase, or a magazine browsing system, in which a user's previous

Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 8]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    reading affects which offerings are presented. Neither clients nor
    servers are required to support cookies.  A server MAY refuse to
    provide content to a client that does not return the cookies it
    sends.

    In [5] it is shown that the HTTP State Management mechanism is both
    useful and controversial compared to the traditional methods. It is
    useful because numerous applications of HTTP benefit from the
    ability to save state between HTTP transactions, without encoding
    such state in URLs.  It is controversial because the mechanism has
    been used to accomplish things for which it was not designed and is
    not well-suited.  Some of these uses have attracted a great deal of
    public criticism because they threaten to violate the privacy of web
    users, specifically by leaking potentially sensitive information to
    third parties such as the Web sites a user has visited.  There are
    also other uses of HTTP State Management which are inappropriate
    even though they do not threaten user privacy.

    [other protocols to look at: SIP, SDP, RTSP]

6. Session ID Requirements

    Global uniqueness:
    To uniquely identify a session a session ID must be globally unique
    which means unique in time and location. The might be relaxed to
    unique within a given time period or within a certain spatial scope.
    For instance if we have to audit session data for 10 years the
    session ID must be unique within this period. If it is assured that
    a session does not cross certain boundaries the uniqueness
    requirement may be relaxed to "unique within this boundaries".

    Privacy:
    A session ID must not enable a third party to be able to derive the
    "real" ID of the user from the session ID. The session ID should
    only be resolvable to the entity which generated it. For the
    provisioning of anonymous services it might be required that the
    session ID is nor resolvable at all. In case of a fully anonymous
    session the session ID has to be build without even knowing user
    specific parameter. Therefore no relation to the user is given.
    Furthermore no information should be logged which would give a hint
    on the real ID.

    Efficiency:
    The generation and linkage of session IDs must be sufficiently fast
    compared to the overall process of service authentication and
    authorization to avoid unnecessary latency. Especially it must be
    avoided to increase latency in service provision due to the
    transport of session IDs between providers.

    Security:
    A session ID must be non predictable. Otherwise it may be possible
    to take over another persons session. It must not be possible to
    derive user data from the session ID. This can be avoided by using a

Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 9]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    one way hash over the data (e.g. [8]). There may be situations where
    it is allowed to directly use user data in the session ID. For
    security reasons session IDs could be transmitted via encrypted
    channels (e.g. IPSEC).

    Flexibility:
    There may be different solutions of generating/assigning session ID
    and binding session IDs together which can be used in different
    situations. One method can be tailored to a specific service
    (usage). However all methods must be compatible in a way such that
    accounting and auditing is not limited to an unacceptable degree.

    Granularity:
    The solution must allow for the finest grained auditing possible of
    a provided service. However cases in which there is only lax
    auditing required should also be supported efficiently.

7. Generation of Session IDs

    When and where should the session ID be generated?

    To tie the three As together the session ID must be generated as
    part of the authentication process. The session ID may be build
    using parameter from the authentication request as well as IP
    address or DNS name of the requester. The authentication may be
    performed by the service equipment (e.g. dialup the NAS) or by
    another entity. In case of a free service there may be no
    authentication and authorization. In this case the session ID is
    generated by the service equipment at the start of the service
    usage.

    How is the Session ID generated?

    A global unique session ID can created in the generic AAA
    architecture as follows. The ID is composed of three different
    parts: ID = user_ID + service_ID + AAA_ID
    The user_ID is an ID which is created by the service. This ID may be
    based on user specific information. The ID may contain user specific
    information in cleartext or it may be a cryptographic hash over some
    user information. The service_ID is the ID which is used to identify
    the service at the AAA server. The AAA server needs some kind of ID
    to map a certain request to a certain service i.e. pass the request
    to the ASM. The AAA_ID is a global unique ID of the AAA server
    providing the requested service. The ID of the AAA needs to be
    globally unique anyway.

8. Auditing

    Auditing is used to examine the correct provisioning of the service.
    The auditing process should be defined in a way that it is accepted
    by both sides (provider and user) as a valid process to proof that
    the provider has fulfilled the provisioning task correctly even in a
    legal action.

Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 10]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001



    A session ID is required here to map all actions, messages,
    transactions and sub-sessions to the specific user. Since Auditing
    requires traceability of all performed actions, the auditability of
    a service is usually in direct contrast to anonymity. For privacy
    reasons it is possible to restrict access to the data used for
    auditing to a few trusted instances and/or to distribute the
    knowledge of the concatenated actions in a way that only the
    concatenation of information from different instances gives a the
    whole view.

    A session ID is always needed except we provide no auditing function
    at all. This may be the case for a cheap service. Auditing
    capability may be an added value for the customer. On the other hand
    the government may force providers to audit specific activities
    and/or data.

9. Accounting

    The binding of accounting records to a specific user is required to
    generate a bill. Furthermore a session ID is used to tie together
    accounting messages and transactions. This can be subsequent records
    for one session, records form different sources or providers.

10.    Anonymous Service Usage

    The ability to provide an anonymous services is very important. The
    anonymity of the service user can prevent proper auditing and
    therefore is in direct contrast to the requirement for auditability
    of the service. We distinguish between a full anonymous services
    where it is not possible at all to obtain the user-session mapping
    and a partial anonymous services where certain instances are able to
    resolve the user-session mapping.

11.    Examples

    In this section there should be several examples on how the session
    ID could be used for accounting and auditing with the generic AAA
    architecture [1]. The same examples as in [7] could be used.

    Video on Demand (with QoS)
    VPN (with QoS)
    Content service (with QoS)
    Dialup (with Mobility/Roaming)
    Bandwidth request
    Network printing
    E-commerce
    Anonymous service

12.    Security Considerations

    Privacy
    Forging/Spoofing Session IDs

Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 11]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    Encryption

13.    References

    [1] C. de Laat, G. Gross, L. Gommans, J. Vollbrecht, D. Spence,
        "Generic AAA Architecture", IETF RFC2903, August 2000

    [2]  Rigney C., Rubens A., Simpson W. and S. Willens, "Remote
        Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2138, April
        1997.

    [3]  Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2139, April 1997.

    [4]  P. Calhoun, A. Rubens, H. Akhtar, E. Guttman.  "DIAMETER Base
        Protocol", draft-calhoun-diameter-17.txt, IETF work in Progress,
        September 2000.

    [5]  K. Moore, N. Freed: " Use of HTTP State Management", IETF
        RFC2964, October 2000

    [6]  D. Kristol, L. Montulli: "HTTP State Management Mechanism",
        IETF RFC2965, October 2000

    [7]  J. Vollbrecht, P. Calhoun, S. Farrell, L. Gommans, G. Gross, B.
        de Bruijn, C. de Laat, M. Holdrege, D. Spence, et al, "AAA
        Authorization Application Examples", Informational RFC 2905,
        August 2000.

    [8]  R. Rivest: "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm" IETF RFC1321,
         April 1992

14.    Acknowledgments


15.    Author's Addresses

    John R. Vollbrecht
    Interlink Networks, Inc.
    775 Technology Drive, Suite 200
    Ann Arbor, MI  48108
    USA
    Phone: +1 734 821 1205
    Fax:   +1 734 821 1235
    EMail: jrv@interlinknetworks.com

    Georg Carle
    GMD FOKUS
    Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31
    10589 Berlin
    Germany
    Phone: +49-30-34 63 7149
    Email: carle@fokus.gmd.de


Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 12]

Internet Draft                  Session ID               February 2001


    Sebastian Zander
    GMD FOKUS
    Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31
    10589 Berlin
    Germany
    Phone: +49-30-34 63 7287
    Email: zander@fokus.gmd.de

    Tanja Zseby
    GMD FOKUS
    Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31
    10589 Berlin
    Germany
    Phone: +49-30-34 63 7153
    Email: zseby@fokus.gmd.de

16.    Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved. This
    document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.












Vollbrecht, Carle, Zander, Zseby      Expires August 2001     [Page 13]
-- 
_________________________________________________________________________
dr.ir. C.Th.A.M. de Laat, Faculty of Physics and Astronomy,
Utrecht University, Princetonplein 5, NL-3584CC Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Tel: (31)30-2534585 , mobile: 06-51566438 , Fax:(31)30-2537555
web: http://www.phys.uu.nl/~delaat , mail: c.t.a.m.delaat@phys.uu.nl
