





NGTRANS Working Group                                         F. Templin
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                     Nokia

Expires 8 January 2002                                     8 August 2002


             ISATAP Profile for Tunnel Setup Protocol (TSP)

                draft-templin-ngtrans-isatap-tsp-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document proposes a profile for the Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel
   Addressing Protocol (ISATAP) using the Tunnel Setup Protocol (TSP).


11..                      Introduction

   The Tunnel Setup Protocol [TSP] is a control protocol to setup IPv6
   or IPv4 tunnels. It also provides additional features of autoconfigu-
   ration including prefix delegation, DNS delegation, etc. [ISATAP] is
   an automatic tunneling mechanism that requires no configured tunnel
   state in participating nodes. This document proposes a profile for
   ISATAP using TSP.




Templin                  Expires 8 January 2002                 [Page 1]

Internet Draft           ISATAP Profile for TSP            8 August 2002


22..  MMoottiivvaattiioonn

   Unlike configured tunnels [MECH], the automatic tunneling feature of
   ISATAP requires no kernel-resident configured tunnel state.  Thus,
   ISATAP does not suffer from finite scaling limitations in kernel data
   structures. Also unlike configured tunnels, ISATAP derives IPv4 tun-
   nel endpoint addresses directly from the IPv6 addresses assigned to
   ISATAP links. Thus, communicating nodes can use stateless IPv6-in-
   IPv4 encapsulation to send packets directly to one another without
   going through a tunnel endpoint server, i.e., route optimization is
   automatically enabled.

   It would therefore seem that a stateful tunnel setup protocol such as
   TSP would have no application for an automatic tunneling mechanism
   such as ISATAP. But, in addition to tunnel setup, TSP also provides a
   rich autoconfiguration environment that could provide future benefits
   for ISATAP. Thus, the following section presents an ISATAP profile
   for TSP.


33..  IISSAATTAAPP PPrrooffiillee ffoorr TTSSPP

   [V6V4TSP] proposes an IPv6 over IPv4 profile for TSP. The TSP profile
   for ISATAP proposed by this document is identical to [V6V4TSP] with
   the exception that ISATAP substitutes the TUNNELTYPE "isatap" for the
   TUNNELTYPE "v6v4" defined in [V6V4TSP,7]. The 'create' action speci-
   fied in [V6V4TSP,4.1] is used identically for the ISATAP profile
   except that the 'create' operation for TUNNELTYPE "isatap" is defined
   as a NULL operation from the standpoint of kernel tunnel state cre-
   ation. All other aspects of the [V6V4TSP] profile are used in their
   identical fashion for this proposed ISATAP profile.


44..  IIAANNAA CCoonnssiiddeerraattiioonnss

   The TUNNELTYPE "isatap" is registered for this document.


55..  SSeeccuurriittyy CCoonnssiiddeerraattiioonnss

   Same as [V6V4TSP,8]

Acknowledgments
   TBD

Normative References
   [TSP]      Blanchet, M. "Tunnel Setup Protocol", July 2002,
              (work in progress).



Templin                  Expires 8 January 2002                 [Page 2]

Internet Draft           ISATAP Profile for TSP            8 August 2002


   [ISATAP]   Templin, F., Gleeson, T., Talwar, M., and D. Thaler,
              "Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol
              (ISATAP)", draft-ietf-ngtrans-isatap-04.txt, (work
              in progress).

   [MECH]     Nordmark, E., and R.E. Gilligan, "Transition
              Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers",
              draft-ietf-ngtrans-mech-v2-00.txt, (work in
              progress)

   [V6V4TSP]  Blanchet, M. "IPv6 over IPv4 Profile for Tunnel
              Setup Protocol (TSP)", July 2002,
              draft-vg-ngtrans-tsp-v6v4profile-01.txt,
              (work in progress)

Author's  Address:

   Fred L. Templin
   Nokia
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, CA 94043 USA
   Phone: (650)-625-2331
   Email: ftemplin@iprg.nokia.com




























Templin                  Expires 8 January 2002                 [Page 3]

