



Network Working Group                                             X. LEE
Internet-Draft                                                   E. CHEN
Expires: March 31, 2006                                       J. Klensin
                                                                  N. HSU
                                                                  W. MAO
                                                           Sep. 27, 2005


   Registration and Administration Guideline for Chinese Domain Names
                    draft-xdlee-idn-cdnadmin-05.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 31, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   Most of the Chinese domain names will have variants, this memo
   specifies the proposed procedure to register and administrate Chinese
   domain names based on [RFC3743] to avoid the conflict among the
   variants.





LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Chinese Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Chinese Domain Name Label (CDNL) . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Simplified Chinese Variant Table (SCVT)  . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  Traditional Chinese Variant Table (TCVT) . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.5.  Original Chinese Domain Name Label (OCDNL) . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Procedure for CDNLs registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10



































LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


2.  Introduction

   Non-ASCII characters are included in the DNS using the methods of
   Internationalized Domain Names for Applications (IDNA, described in
   [RFC3490], [RFC3491] and [RFC3492]), so it is possible for users to
   access Internet with their native languages, most of which are not
   English.  Many languages have special requirements which are not
   addressed in the IDNA RFCs.  For example, effective use of Chinese
   domain names (CDN) requires variant equivalence to handle apparent
   character differences between Simplified and Traditional Chinese.

   Chinese variant equivalence itself is very complicated.  The basic
   requirement is to match the user perception that a Simplified Chinese
   (SC) domain name should be equal to its Traditional Chinese (TC)
   form.  When they register SC domain names, they do want the
   traditional forms, and expect others to be able to access their sites
   by other forms, and vice versa.

   This document specifies a solution for Chinese domain name
   registration and administration to manage Simplified Chinese and
   Traditional Chinese domain name equivalence.  This solution, based on
   [RFC3743], is suitable for any DNS zone manager or registrar who
   provides Chinese domain names service.  In the terminology of
   [RFC3743], this solution is IDL-based (Internationalized Domain
   Label).


























LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


3.  Terminology

   This document adopts the terminologies that are defined in [RFC3743].
   In order to describe the problem simply, we define some additional
   terminologies.

3.1.  Chinese Characters

   Since few people will even attempt to use all Chinese characters,
   this document suggests permitting only a subset of Chinese characters
   in CDN, i.e., in the DNS.  When this document discusses Chinese
   characters, we only refer to a subset made up of the characters in
   the first column of the tables in 3.3 and 3.4.  These are defined, in
   detail, in [LVT-CN] and [LVT-TW].  Of course, this doesn't suggest
   that characters not listed in this table are not Chinese characters.
   However, we strongly suggest that registries do not permit
   registration of Chinese characters that are not in these tables.
   These tables will be updated or extended in the future if necessary.

3.2.  Chinese Domain Name Label (CDNL)

   If an IDN label includes at least one Chinese character then this
   label is called a Chinese Domain Name (CDN) Label.  CDN labels may
   contain characters from the traditional letter-digit-hyphen (LDH) set
   as well as Chinese characters.

3.3.  Simplified Chinese Variant Table (SCVT)

   A language table for Simplified Chinese has been defined based on
   rules defined in [RFC3743].  Its key characteristic is that the
   preferred variant is the SC character that is used by Mainland China
   users or defined in Chinese related standards.

3.4.  Traditional Chinese Variant Table (TCVT)

   Similarly, a language table has been defined for Traditional Chinese.
   It is also based on the rules of [RFC3743}.  The preferred variant is
   the TC character, which is used in Taiwan or defined in related
   standards.

3.5.  Original Chinese Domain Name Label (OCDNL)

   The CDNL that users submit for registration.








LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


4.  Procedure for CDNLs registration

   This document use the same procedure for CDNLs registration as the
   one defined in section 3.2.3 of [RFC3743].

   Because the first column of SCVT is same as the first column of TCVT,
   the third column of SCVT and the third column of TCVT are the same
   too, so the CV(IN, ZH-CN) will be same as the CV(IN, ZH-TW) after
   Step 3; The PV(IN, ZH-CN) is SC form, and the PV(IN, ZH-TW) is TW
   form.  After this algorithm, not more than three records, including
   OCDNL, SC form and TC form, are added into zone file.

   The set of languages associated with IN is both ZH-CN and ZH-TW by
   default.  The procedure for CDNLs registration uses the registry-
   defined rules, which may be different for different registries
   supporting CDNs, for optional processing.  The motivation for such
   rules is described below.

   The preferred variant(s) is/are TC in TCVT, and SC in SCVT.  There
   may be more than one preferred variant for a given valid character.

   In actuality, while IDNA, and hence [RFC3743], look at characters one
   at a time, the actual relationship between the valid code point and
   the preferred variant is contextual: whether one character can be
   substituted for another depends on the characters with which it is
   associated in a label or, more generally, in a phrase.  In
   particular, some of the preferred variants make no sense in
   combination with other characters, and therefore those combinations
   should not be added into the Zone file as ZV.  It would be possible
   to define and implement rules to reduce the preferred variant labels
   to only those that are plausible.  This could be done, for example,
   with some artificial intelligence tools, or with feedback from the
   registrant, or with selection based on frequency of occurrence in
   other texts.  To illustrate one possibility, we could require that
   the OCDNL is TC-only or SC-only, and if there are more than one
   preferred variants, we could use the OCDNL as the PV, instead of PV
   produced by the algorithm.

   To emphasize, the tables in [LVT-CN] and [LVT-TW] follow the table
   format and terminologies defined in [RFC3743].  If you intend to
   implement Chinese domain names registration based on these two tables
   or ones similar to them, a complete understanding of [RFC3743] is
   needed for the proper use of those tables.








LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


5.  Security Considerations

   This document is subject to the same security considerations as
   [RFC3743], which defines the table formats and operations.  As with
   that base document, part of its intent is to reduce the security
   problems that might be caused by confusion among characters with
   similar appearances or meanings.  While it will not introduce any
   additional security issues, additional registration restrictions such
   as those outlined in section 3 may further help reduce potential
   problems.









































LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


6.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks for these person's suggestions, promotions and efforts on such
   tough work: WANG YanFeng, Ai-Chin LU, Shian-Shyong TSENG, QIAN
   HuaLin, and Li-Ming TSENG.

   Especially, thanks Joe ZHANG and XiaoMing WANG for their outstanding
   contributions on SCVT in [LVT-CN].  And also thanks Kenny Huang,
   Zheng-Wei Lin, Shi-Xiong Tseng, Lie-Neng Wu, Cheng-Wu Pan, Lin-Mei
   Wei, Qi-Qing Hsu for their efforts and contributions on editing the
   TCVT in [LVT-TW].  These experts provided basic materials, or gave
   very important suggestions and principles to accomplish these two
   variant tables.

   And that, the authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of
   those who commented and make suggestions on this document, including
   James SENG, and other JET members.

7.  References

   [LVT-CN]   QIAN, H. and X. LEE, ".CN Chinese Character Table",
              IANA IDN Languages Tables, March 2005.

   [LVT-TW]   LU, A., ".TW Traditional Chinese Character Table",
              IANA IDN Languages Tables, March 2005.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3490]  Faltstrom, P., Hoffman, P., and A. Costello,
              "Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)",
              RFC 3490, March 2003.

   [RFC3491]  Hoffman, P. and M. Blanchet, "Nameprep: A Stringprep
              Profile for Internationalized Domain Names (IDN)",
              RFC 3491, March 2003.

   [RFC3492]  Costello, A., "Punycode: A Bootstring encoding of Unicode
              for Internationalized Domain Names in Applications
              (IDNA)", RFC 3492, March 2003.

   [RFC3743]  KONISHI, K., HUANG, K., QIAN, H., and Y. KO, "Joint
              Engineering Team (JET) Guidelines for Internationalized
              Domain Names (IDN) Registration and Administration for
              Chinese, Japanese, and Korean", RFC 3743, April 2004.






LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


Authors' Addresses

   LEE Xiaodong
   CNNIC, No.4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
   Beijing  100080

   Phone: +86 10 58813020
   Email: lee@cnnic.cn
   URI:   http://www.cnnic.cn


   Erin CHEN
   TWNIC, 4F-2, No. 9, Sec. 2, Roosevelt Rd.
   Taipei  100

   Phone: +886 2 23411313
   Email: erin@twnic.net.tw
   URI:   http://www.twnic.net.tw


   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   Email: john+ietf@jck.com


   Nai-Wen HSU
   TWNIC, 4F-2, No. 9, Sec. 2, Roosevelt Rd.
   Taipei  100

   Phone: +886 2 23411313
   Email: snw@twnic.net.tw
   URI:   http://www.twnic.net.tw


   MAO Wei
   CNNIC, No.4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
   Beijing  100080

   Phone: +86 10 58813055
   Email: mao@cnnic.cn
   URI:   http://www.cnnic.cn






LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Guideline for Chinese Domain Names          Sep. 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




LEE, et al.              Expires March 31, 2006                [Page 10]


