


Network Working Group                                         A. Muhanna
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Standards Track                          V. Devarapalli
Expires: August 13, 2010                                        WiChorus
                                                           S. Gundavelli
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                            S. Thalanany
                                                             US Cellular
                                                       February 09, 2010


               Mobility Session Suspend Support in PMIPv6
          draft-muhanna-netext-mobility-session-suspend-01.txt

Abstract

   This specification defines a new extension to Proxy Mobile IPv6 for
   suspending a mobility session by using a new Mobility Session Suspend
   option.  This option is used by the mobile access gateway in the
   Proxy Binding Update to request the local mobility anchor to suspend
   a specific mobile node mobility session.  When the local mobility
   anchor successfully processes the Proxy Binding Update, the local
   mobility anchor suspends the delivery of the downlink traffic to the
   specified mobile node mobility session.  The mobile access gateway
   sends another Proxy Binding Update with the mobility session suspend
   option and the suspend flag cleared to indicate to the local mobility
   anchor to resume sending the downlink traffic for the mobile node
   mobility session.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 13, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

































Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Conventions & Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.1.  Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Mobile Access Gateway Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  Extensions to the Conceptual Data Structure . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Operational Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Local Mobility Anchor Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.1.  Extensions to the Binding Cache Entry . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  Operational Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Message Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.1.  Mobility Session Suspend Option . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.2.  Status Codes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9































Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


1.  Introduction

   In some planned deployments of Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6), the mobile
   node at times has to attach to a legacy network that supports circuit
   switched calls to be able to initiate and receive voice calls.  This
   is because of a limitation in the access network that uses PMIPv6,
   where there is no support for circuit switched sessions and voice
   over IP is not available yet.  When this happens, it is preferable to
   put the PMIPv6 mobility session on suspend instead of deleting the
   mobility session and having to set it up again.  Therefore, an
   extension to the PMIPv6 protocol is needed to enable the suspend and
   resume of a mobility session.

   When the mobile node falls back to a legacy circuit switched network,
   the mobile access gateway receives an indication to suspend a
   particular mobility session, i.e., suspend sending downlink traffic
   to the mobile node.  The indication to suspend the session is out of
   scope and not defined in this document.  When the suspend indication
   is received, the mobile access gateway sends a Proxy Binding Update
   message to the local mobility anchor with the Mobility Session
   Suspend option, and with the Suspend flag set.  See Section 5.1.

   When the local mobility anchor receives and successfully processes
   the Proxy Binding Update with the Mobility Session Suspend option, it
   sets a suspend flag in the binding cache entry (BCE) that corresponds
   to the mobility session.  In addition, the local mobility anchor
   updates the mobile node routing entry to suspend forwarding the
   downlink traffic to the mobile node through the tunnel pointing to
   the mobile node proxy Care-of-Address and instead starts dropping all
   downlink traffic.  Then the local mobility anchor sends a successful
   Proxy Binding Acknowledgement with the Mobility Session Suspend
   option included with the S-flag set.

   It is very useful when the mobile node leaves the legacy network and
   comes back to the PMIPv6 access network to directly resume sending
   data traffic without service interruption.  In other words, it is
   useful for the MAG and the LMA, when the PMIPv6 mobility session is
   suspended, to allow uplink traffic from the mobile node.  This is
   useful to prevent any loss of uplink packets when the mobile node
   attaches to the PMIPv6 access network again.

   After the mobile node resumes its data session by sending uplink data
   traffic and the mobile access gateway receives an indication to
   resume the mobile node mobility session, the mobile access gateway
   sends a new Proxy Binding Update message with the Mobility Session
   Suspend option included and the S-flag cleared.  When the local
   mobility anchor receives and successfully processes the Proxy Binding
   Update with the Mobility Session Suspend option with the S-flag



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


   cleared, the local mobility anchor validates that the suspend/resume
   flag in the mobile node BCE is set and if set, the local mobility
   anchor clears this flag and updates the mobile node routing entry to
   resume sending downlink traffic for this specific mobility session.

   The mobile access gateway and the local mobility anchor uses the same
   rules in [RFC5213] to identify the mobile node mobility session by
   including the proper mobility options.


2.  Conventions & Terminology

2.1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.2.  Terminology

   All the general mobility related terminology and abbreviations are to
   be interpreted as defined in Mobile IPv6 [RFC3775] and Proxy Mobile
   IPv6 [RFC5213] specifications.


3.  Mobile Access Gateway Considerations

3.1.  Extensions to the Conceptual Data Structure

   Every mobile access gateway maintains a Binding Update List (BUL)
   entry for each currently attached mobile node, as explained in
   Section 6.1 of the Proxy Mobile IPv6 specification [RFC5213].  To
   support this specification, the conceptual Binding Update List entry
   data structure must be extended with the following additional field.

   o  A flag indicating whether the mobility session is suspended.

3.2.  Operational Summary

   o  If the mobile access gateway determines that a mobility session of
      a mobile node requires to be suspended, it sends a Proxy Binding
      Update message with the the Mobility Session Suspend option with
      the S-flag set to the local mobility anchor.

   o  If the mobile access gateway determines that a mobile node
      mobility session needs to be suspended, the mobile access gateway
      updates the mobile node routing entry to start dropping any
      downlink traffic that is destined to the mobile node.  However,



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


      the mobile access gateway sets the suspend flag in the Binding
      Update List entry after it receives a successful Proxy Binding
      Acknowledgement message with the Mobility Session Suspend option
      included and the S-flag set from the local mobility anchor.

   o  If the mobile access gateway receives an indication to resume the
      mobile node's mobility session, the mobile access gateway sends a
      new Proxy Binding Update message with the Mobility Session Suspend
      option included and the S-flag cleared.  In this case, the mobile
      access gateway updates the mobile node routing entry and clears
      the suspend flag in the mobile node Binding Update List entry only
      after receiving a successful Proxy Binding Acknowledgement from
      the local mobility anchor with the Mobility Session Suspend option
      included and the S-flag cleared.

   o  If the mobile access gateway sends a Proxy Binding Update with the
      Mobility Session Suspend option included with the S-flag set and
      in response it receives a successful Proxy Binding Acknowledgement
      with the status code set to "success" and the Mobility Session
      Suspend option is not included, the mobile access gateway MUST
      assume that the local mobility anchor does not support the
      mobility session suspend feature as defined in this specification.
      In this case, the mobile access gateway SHOULD NOT include the
      Mobility Session Suspend option in any future Proxy Binding Update
      message to this local mobility anchor.  The mobile access gateway
      may log an event.


4.  Local Mobility Anchor Considerations

4.1.  Extensions to the Binding Cache Entry

   If the local mobility anchor supports mobility session suspend as per
   this specification, the local mobility anchor needs to maintain an
   indication in the mobile node BCE.  This requires that the BCE
   described in section 5.1 of the Proxy Mobile IPv6 specification
   [RFC5213] to be extended.  To support this specification, the BCE
   must be extended with the following additional field.

   o  A flag indicating whether the mobility session is suspended.

4.2.  Operational Summary

   If the local mobility anchor successfully processes a Proxy Binding
   Update message with the Mobility Session Suspend option, it must
   perform the following actions.





Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


   o  If the S-flag is set, the local mobility anchor MUST set the
      suspend flag in the corresponding binding cache entry and MUST
      update the mobile node routing entry to drop all downlink traffic
      that is destined to this mobile node mobility session.  In
      addition, the local mobility anchor MUST respond with a successful
      Proxy Binding Acknowledgement with the Mobility Session Suspend
      option included with the S-flag set.

   o  If the S-flag is cleared, the local mobility anchor validates that
      the suspend flag of the mobile node BCE is set and responds with a
      successful Proxy Binding Acknowledgement with the Mobility Session
      Suspend option included with the S-flag cleared.

   o  If the S-flag is cleared and the mobile node BCE has the suspend
      flag already cleared, the local mobility anchor SHOULD respond
      with a successful Proxy Binding Acknowledgement with status code
      is set to <MOBILITY-SESSION-NEVER-SUSPENDED>.

   o  After the local mobility anchor responds with a successful Proxy
      Binding Acknowledgement with the Mobility Session Suspend option
      included with the S-Flag cleared, the local mobility anchor MUST
      clear the suspend flag in the mobile node BCE and MUST update the
      mobile node routing entry to resume sending downlink traffic that
      is destined to the mobile node mobility session.


5.  Message Formats

5.1.  Mobility Session Suspend Option

   A new mobility option, the Mobility Session Suspend option, is
   defined for use in the Proxy Binding Update and Proxy Binding
   Acknowledgment messages exchanged between the mobile access gateway
   and the local mobility anchor.  This option can be used for
   suspending the mobile node mobility session at the mobile access
   gateway and the local mobility anchor to ensure that the delivery of
   downlink traffic is suspended until the local mobility anchor
   receives another Proxy Binding Update with the Mobility Session
   Suspend option with the S-flag cleared.

   The Mobility Session Suspend option has no alignment requirement.
   Its format is as follows:









Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


       0                   1                   2                   3
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |     Type      |   Length      |S|         Reserved            |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+



                 Figure 1: Mobility Session Suspend Option

   Type

      <IANA>

   Length

      8-bit unsigned integer indicating the length in octets of the
      option excluding the type and length fields.  This field is always
      set to 2.

   S-Flag

      Indicates that the mobile node mobility session needs to be
      suspended, i.e., suspend sending the downlink traffic of the
      mobile node's mobility session.  When this flag is cleared, it
      means the mobile node mobility session can be resumed.

   Reserved

      These fields are unused.  They MUST be initialized to zero by the
      sender and MUST be ignored by the receiver.


5.2.  Status Codes

   The following status code value is defined for use in the Binding
   Acknowledgment message when using Proxy Mobile IPv6.


   MOBILITY-SESSION-NEVER-SUSPENDED (TBD less than 128)

      When the local mobility anchor receives a Proxy Binding Update
      with the Mobility Session Suspend option with the S-Flag cleared
      and the mobile node BCE already has the S-flag cleared, the local
      mobility anchor uses this code to indicate to the mobile access
      gateway that the Proxy Binding Update has been processed
      successfully but the mobility session was not previously
      suspended.



Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


6.  IANA Considerations

   This specification defines a new Mobility Option, the Mobility
   Session Suspend Option, described in Section 5.1.  This option is
   carried in the Mobility Header.  The type value for this option needs
   to be assigned from the same numbering space as allocated for the
   other mobility options defined in the Mobile IPv6 specification
   [RFC3775].

   This specification defines a new Binding Acknowledgement status code
   as described in Section 5.2 and requests that this code be allocated
   with numeric value in the range specified in Section 5.2 from the
   "Status Codes" registry of the Mobility IPv6 Parameters located at
   http://www.iana.org/assignments/mobility-parameters.


7.  Security Considerations

   This specification does not introduce any new security requirements
   on the top of those documented in Proxy Mobile IPv6 [RFC5213].


8.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Michael Brown for the useful
   discussion on the need of mobility session suspend functionality.


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC5213]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
              and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.













Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Mobility Session Suspend in PMIPv6      February 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Ahmad Muhanna
   Ericsson Inc.
   2201 Lakeside Blvd.
   Richardson, TX  75082
   USA

   Email: ahmad.muhanna@ericsson.com


   Vijay Devarapalli
   3950 North First Street
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: vijay@wichorus.com


   Sri Gundavelli
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: sgundave@cisco.com


   Sebastian Thalanany
   US Cellular
   8410 West Bryn Mawr Avenue
   Chicago, IL  60631
   USA

   Email: sebastian.thalanany@uscellular.com
















Muhanna, et al.          Expires August 13, 2010               [Page 10]


