Network Working Group                               D. Beard
Internet Draft                                      Nortel Networks
draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt
                                                    Y. Yang
Category: Informational                             Cisco Systems
Expires: April 2002
                                                    October 2002

                      Known Threats to Routing Protocols


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 4, 2003.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

This draft provides a summary of known threats to routing protocols.



------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 1]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   Table of Contents

  1.0 INTRODUCTION ......................................2
  2.0 THREAT CATEGORY	.................................3
  2.1 THREAT SOURCES	.................................3
  2.2 THREAT ACTIONS	.................................3
  2.3 THREAT CONSEQUENCE DEFINITIONS.....................3
  2.4 THREAT CONSEQUENCE ZONES ..........................4
  2.5 THREAT CONSEQUENCE PERIODS ........................5
  3.0 GENERALLY IDENTIFIABLE ROUTING THREATS ............5
  3.1 DELIBERATE EXPOSURE ...............................5
  3.2 SNIFFING ..........................................6
  3.3 TRAFFIC ANALYSIS ..................................6
  3.4 SPOOF .............................................7
  3.5 FALSIFICATION......................................8
    3.5.1 Falsifications by Originators .................8
      3.5.1.1 Overclaiming ..............................8
      3.5.1.2 Underclaiming ............................10
      3.5.1.3 Misclaiming ..............................12
    3.5.2 Falsifications by Forwarders .................13
  3.6 INTERFERENCE .....................................14
  3.7 OVERLOAD .........................................14
  4.0 SPECIFIC THREAT TYPES ............................15
  4.1 IMPERSONATION AND INTRUSION DETECTION ............15
  4.2 BYZANTINE FAILURES ...............................16
  4.3 DISCARDING OF CONTROL PACKETS ....................16
  5.0 SUBVERSION OF CONTROL PLANE THREATS ..............17
  5.1 NETWORK MAPPING THREATS ..........................17
  5.2 PROMISCUOUS MODE AND NETWORK TOPOLOGY ............18
  5.3 INSTABILITY IN UNICAST ROUTING PROTOCOLS .........18
  6.0 MULTICAST ROUTING PROTOCOL CONSIDERATION .........18
  6.1 CORE AND SOURCE-BASED TREES ......................19
  6.2 MULTICAST AND UNICAST THREATS ....................20
  7.0 SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS ..........................21
  8.0 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .................................21
  9.0 AUTHOR'S ADDRESS       ...........................21
 10.0 APPENDIX 1 - REFERENCES ..........................22







1.0 Introduction


   This draft provides a summary of known threats to routing protocols.
   This document is organized as follows:

   Section 2 defines threat categories.
   Section 3 defines identifiable routing threat actions.
   Section 4 defines specific threat types.
   Section 5 defines compromise of the control plane.
   Section 6 discusses multicast routing protocol considerations.
   Section 7 discusses security considerations.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 2]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

2.0 Threat Category

   Threat is defined in [SEC-GLOSS] as a potential for violation of
   security, which exists when there is a circumstance, capability, action,
   or event that could breach security and cause harm. A threat presents
   itself when an attacker has the ability to take advantage of an existing
   security weakness.  Threats can be categorized based on various rules,
   such as threat sources, threat actions, threat consequences, threat
   consequence zones, and threat consequence periods.

2.1 Threat Sources

   A threat against routing protocols always sources from a device (router)
   that is not legitimate.  A device (router) is legitimate when it is
   intended by the authoritative network administrator to participate in
   the routing dialog and computation, running correct and bug-free code,
   and using correct and bug-free configuration information [DV-SECURITY].
   By correct and bug-free configuration information, we mean the
   configurations obey routing protocols and are intended by the
   authoritative network administrator.  

   Threats can be classified into four categories, based on their sources
   [DV-SECURITY]:

  1. Threat from compromised links: A compromised link is where an
     attacker can, somehow, access a physical medium and/or have some control
     over the channel.  This threat exists when there is no access control
     mechanisms applied to physical mediums or channels, or such mechanisms
     can be circumvented. The attacker may eavesdrop, replay, delay, or drop
     routing messages, or break routing sessions between authorized routers,
     without participating in the routing exchange.
  
  2. Threats from compromised devices (e.g. routers): A compromised device
     (router) is an authorized router with routing software bugs, hardware
     defects, and / or incorrect/unintended configurations.  This threat
     takes place when there are no mechanisms to verify a device's (router)
     system integrity, i.e. the router is working correctly as been intended
     by the authoritative network administrator, or such mechanisms can be
     circumvented.  The attacker may inappropriately claim authority for some
     network resources, or violate routing protocols, such as advertising
     invalid routing information and etc. 
  
  
  3. Threat from unauthorized devices (routers): An unauthorized device
     (router) participates in routing exchange and computation, without being
     authorized (explicitly or implicitly) from the authoritative network
     administrator. This threat happens when there is no access control
     mechanism applied to routing sessions/routing exchanges or such
     mechanism can be circumvented. The attacker may gain knowledge of the
     network topology through routing exchange, as well as do anything that a
     compromised router can do.
  
  4. Threat from masquerading devices (routers): A masquerading device
     (router) illegitimately assumes another router's identity. This threat
     occurs when there are no (data origin or peer entity) authentication
     mechanisms, or such mechanisms can be circumvented. The attacker can do
     anything that an unauthorized router can do.

     A device (router) can play multiple roles concurrently.  A legitimate
     OSPF router might be a masquerading RIP router, and a compromised iBGP
     link might be a compromised OSPF router as well.

2.2 Threat Actions

   A threat action is an assault on system security [SEC-GLOSS], which
   could be an intentional behaviour, or an accidental event. 
 
2.3 Threat Consequence Definitions 

   A threat consequence is A security violation that results from a threat
   action [SEC-GLOSS].  Four types of threat consequences, disclosure,
   deception, disruption, and usurpation, are identified in [SEC-GLOSS].
   Specifically for threats against routing protocols, these consequences
   can be described as:

------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 3]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   Disclosure: Disclosure of routing information happens where a router
   successfully accesses the information without being authorized.
   Compromised links can cause disclosure, if routing exchanges lack
   confidentiality.  Compromised devices (routers), unauthorized devices
   (routers), and masquerading devices (routers) can always cause
   disclosure, as long as they are successfully involved in the routing
   exchanges.  (Anyway, routers are designed to learn the network topology)

   Deception: This consequence happens when a legitimate router receives a
   false routing message and believes it to be true.  All attackers
   (Compromised links, compromised device (routers), unauthorized devices
   (routers), and masquerading devices (routers) can cause this consequence
   if the receiving router lacks ability to check routing message
   integrity, routing message origin authentication or peer router
   authentication.

   Disruption: This consequence occurs when a legitimate router's operation
   is being interrupted or prevented. Subvert links can cause this by
   replaying, delaying, or dropping routing messages, or breaking routing
   sessions between legitimate routers. Compromised devices (router),
   unauthorized devices (routers), and masquerading device (routers) can
   cause this consequence by sending false routing messages, interfering
   normal routing exchanges, or flooding unnecessary messages. (DoS is a
   common threat action causing disruption.)

   Usurpation:  This consequence happens when an attacker gains control
   over a legitimate router's services/functions. Compromised links can
   cause this by delaying or dropping routing exchanges, or replaying
   out-dated routing information.  Compromised routers, unauthorized
   routers, and masquerading routers can cause this consequence by sending
   false routing information, interfering routing exchanges, or system
   integrity.

   Note: an attacker does not have to directly control a router to control
   its services.  For example, in Figure 2-1, Network 1 is dual-homed
   through Router A and Router B, and Router A is preferred. However,
   Router B is compromised and advertises a lower metric. Consequently,
   devices on the Internet choose the path through Router B to reach
   Network 1.  In this way, Router B steals the data traffic and Router A
   surrenders its control of the services to Router B.

     +-------------+   +-------+
     |  Internet   |---| Rtr A |
     +------+------+   +---+---+
            |              |
            |              |
            |              |
            |            *-+-*
        +-------+       /     \ 
        | Rtr B |------*  N 1  *
        +-------+       \     /
                         *---*
             Figure 2-1

   Also, several threat consequences might be caused by a single threat
   action.  In Figure 2-1, there exist at least two consequences: routers
   using Router B to reach Network 1 are deceived, while Router A is
   usurped.  

2.4 Threat Consequence Zones

   A threat consequence zone covers an area within which the network
   resources could be affected by the threat consequences.  Possible threat
   consequence zones can be classified as: a single link or router,
   multiple routers (within a single routing domain), a single routing
   domain, multiple routing domains, or the global Internet. The threat
   consequence zone varies based on the threat action and origin. Similar
   threat actions that happened at different locations may cause totally
   different threat consequence zones. For example, when a compromised link
   breaks the routing session between a distribution router and a stub
   router, only reach ability from and to the network devices attached on
   the stub router will be impaired. In other words, the threat consequence
   zone is a single router. Nonetheless, if the compromised router is
   located between a customer edge router and its corresponding provider
   edge router, such an action might cause the whole customer site to lose
   its connection. In this case, the threat consequence zone might be a
   single routing domain.
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 4]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

2.5 Threat Consequence Periods 

   Threat consequence period is defined as a portion of time from an
   attacker's launching a threat action to the threat consequence
   disappears and the network operating as intended by the authoritative
   network administrator. The threat consequence period is related with the
   duration of the threat action. In some cases, the network operation will
   get back to normal as soon as the threat action has been stopped.  In
   other cases, however, threat consequences may appear longer than threat
   action. For example, in the original ARPANET link-state algorithm, some
   errors in a router might introduce three instances of an LSA, and all of
   them would be flooded throughout the network forever, until the entire
   network was power cycled [PROTO-VULN]. 

   With security facilities, the network might detect the threat action,
   implement countermeasures, and resume normal operations even before the
   threat action has been stopped.  In this documentation, we assume such
   facilities do not exist. 
 

3.0 Generally Identifiable Routing Threats

   This section addresses generally identifiable and recognized threat
   action against routing protocols.  The threats are not necessarily
   specific to individual protocols but may be present in one or more of
   the common routing protocols in use today. 

3.1 Deliberate Exposure 

   Deliberate Exposure is defined as an intentional action that attackers
   employ to release false routing information directly to other routers.
   This definition presumes that the receiving routers are not authorized
   to access the routing information. 

   All types of attackers (Compromised links, compromised routers,
   unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers) can deliberately expose
   routing information to whomever they want, after obtaining the critical
   routing information.

   The consequence of deliberate exposure is the disclosure of routing
   information.

   The threat consequence zone of deliberate exposure depends on the
   routing information that the attackers have exposed. The more knowledge
   they have exposed, the bigger the threat consequence zone.

   The threat consequence period of deliberate exposure might be longer
   than the duration of the action itself. The routing information exposed
   will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of the exposed
   network.

   Note: An exposure is different from a deliberate exposure. While the
   deliberate exposure is always a threat action, the exposure is not. A
   legitimate router may expose routing information to peering
   unauthorized/masquerading routers, by routing exchanging, as long as the
   legitimate router is deceived and misbelieves its peers are also
   legitimate.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 5]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

3.2 Sniffing 

   Sniffing is an action whereby attackers monitor and/or record the
   routing exchanges between authorized routers.  

   Compromised links can sniff the links over which they have control.
   (Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers can
   sniff, but do not need to do this, to access the routing information.
   They can learn the routing information as long as they are successfully
   involved in the routing exchanges). 

   The consequence of sniffing is disclosure of routing information. 

   The threat consequence zone of sniffing depends on the attacker's
   location, the routing protocol type, and, ultimately, what routing
   information has been recorded. For example, if the compromised link were
   located in an OSPF totally stubby area, the threat consequence zone
   should be limited to the whole area.  Or, the compromised link could
   gain knowledge of multiple routing domains, if it sniffs an eBGP session
   between two providers. 

   The threat consequence period might be longer than the duration of the
   action. After the compromised link stops sniffing, its knowledge will
   not be out-dated until there is a topology change of the disclosed
   network.


3.3 Traffic Analysis

   Traffic analysis is action whereby attackers gain routing information by
   analyzing the characteristics of the data traffic. 

   Compromised links can analyze the data traffic over the links where they
   have control. (Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and
   masquerading routers do not need to do this, although they can, to
   access the routing information. They learn the routing information by
   being successfully involved in the routing exchanges).

   The consequence of data traffic analysis is the disclosure of routing
   information.  For example, the source and destination IP address of the
   data traffic, the type, magnitude, and volume of traffic is disclosed.

   The threat consequence zone of the traffic analysis depends on the
   attacker's location and, ultimately, what data traffic has flown
   through. A compromised link at the network core should be able to gain
   more information than its counterpart at the edge.    

   The threat consequence period might be longer than the duration of the
   traffic analysis. After the attacker stops traffic analysis, its
   knowledge will not be out-dated until there is a topology change of the
   disclosed network.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 6]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

3.4 Spoof

   A spoof is defined as an action whereby an attacker participates in the
   routing computation and exchanges with authorized routers by
   illegitimately assumes a legitimate router's identity.  

   All types of attackers (compromised links, compromised routers,
   unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers) can spoof. When an
   attacker succeeds to spoof, it plays a role of masquerading router.

   The consequences of spoof are:


   1. The deception of peer relationship: The deceived peering routers do
   not believe the masquerading router's fake identity.

   2. The deception of peer relationship:  The authorized routers, which
   exchange routing messages with the masquerading router, do not realize
   they are peering with a router that is faking another router's identity. 

   There are other consequences caused by a spoofing (masquerading) router.
   For example, the masquerading router might cause disruption of a network
   by sending unrealistic routing information. But these consequences are
   directly resulted from other threat actions instead of spoof, which are
   also discussed in this documentation.  

   The threat consequence zone covers two different scopes:

   1. The consequence zone of the disclosed routing information depends on
   what routing information has been exchanged between the attacker and its
   peers.

   2. The disclosure of routing information: The masquerading router will
   participate in the routing computation and exchanges, and consequently
   gain access to the routing information.

   There are other consequences caused by a spoofing (masquerading) router.
   For example, the masquerading router might cause disruption of a network
   by sending unrealistic routing information. But these consequences are
   directly resulted from other threat actions instead of spoof.  

   The threat consequence zone covers two different scopes:

   1. The consequence zone of the fake peer relationship will be limited to
   those routers mistrusting the attacker's identity.

   2. The consequence zone of the disclosed routing information depends on
   the attacker's location, the routing protocol type, and, ultimately,
   what routing information has been exchanged between the attacker and its
   deceived peers.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 7]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


   The threat consequence period has two different definitions too:

   1. The consequence period of the fake peer relationship is same as the
   duration of the spoof. As soon as the attacker stops spoofing, the fake
   peer relationship disappears. 

   2. The consequence period of the disclosed routing information will be
   longer than the duration of the spoof. After the attacker stops
   spoofing, its knowledge will not be out-dated until there is a topology
   change of the disclosed network.

3.5 Falsification

   Falsification is defined as an intentional action whereby false routing
   information is being sent.  Routers use routing information to depict
   network topology, compute routing table, and further forward data
   traffic. False routing information describes the network in a way
   unrealistic, or realistic but not intended by the authoritative network
   administrator. 

   Routers can originate, receive, and forward routing information.  A
   router originates some routing information to advertise the attached
   network resource to other routers.  A router receives routing
   information to gain routing knowledge.  And, unless the router is a stub
   router, the router usually forwards the routing information to other
   routers.  

   To falsify the routing information, an attacker has to be either the
   originator or a forwarder of the routing information. It cannot be a
   receiver-only.

3.5.1 Falsifications by Originators

   An originator of routing information can launch following
   falsifications:

3.5.1.1  Overclaiming

   An over-claiming is defined as an action that an attacker employs to
   advertise its ownership of some network resources, while in reality,
   this ownership does not exist, or the advertisement is not authorized.  

     +-------------+   +-------+   +-------+
     | Internet    |---| Rtr B |---| Rtr A |
     +------+------+   +-------+   +---+---+
            |                          .
            |                          |
            |                          .
            |                        *-+-*
        +-------+                   /     \ 
        | Rtr C |------------------*  N 1  *
        +-------+                   \     /
                                     *---*
                  Figure 3-1 

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 8]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


     +-------------+   +-------+   +-------+
     |  Internet   |---| Rtr B |---| Rtr A |
     +------+------+   +-------+   +-------+
            |
            |
            |
            |                        *---*
        +-------+                   /     \ 
        | Rtr C |------------------*  N 1  *
        +-------+                   \     /
                                     *---*

                  Figure 3-2

   Figure 3-1 and 3-2 provide examples. Router A, the attacker, is
   connected with the Internet through Router B. Router C is authorized to
   advertise its link to Network 1. In Figure 3-1, Router A owns a link to
   the Network 1, but is not authorized to advertise it. In Figure 3-2,
   Router A does not own such a link. But in either case, Router A
   advertises the link to the Internet, through Router B.

   Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers can
   over-claim network resources.
 
   The consequence of overclaiming includes:

   1. Usurpation of the overclaimed network resources.  In Figure 3-1 and
   3-2, it will cause a usurpation of Network 1 when Router B or other
   routers on the Internet (not shown in the figures) believe that Router A
   provides the best path to reach the Network 1 and thereby forward the
   data traffic, destined to Network 1, to Router A. The best result is the
   data traffic uses an unauthorized path (Figure 3-1), and the worst case
   is the data never reach the destination Network 1 (Figure 3-2).  The
   ultimate consequence is Router A gains the control over the Network 1's
   services, by controlling the data traffic.

   2. Usurpation of the legitimate advertising routers.  In Figure 3-1 and
   3-2, Router C is the legitimate advertiser of Network 1.  By
   overclaiming, Router A also controls (partially or totally) the
   services/functions provided by the Router C.  (This is NOT a disruption,
   because Router C is operating in a way intended by the authoritative
   network administrator.)

   3. Deception of other routers. In Figure 3-1 and 3-2, Router B, or other
   routers on the Internet, might be deceived to believe the path through
   Router A is the best.

   4. Disruption of data planes on some routers. This might happen on
   routers that are on the path, which is used by other routers to reach
   the overclaimed network resources through the attacker. In Figure 3-1
   and 3-2, when other routers on the Internet are deceived, they will
   forward the data traffic to Router B, which might be overloaded. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 9]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   The threat consequence zone varies based on the consequence:

   1. Where usurpation is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
   network resources that are overclaimed by the attacker (Network 1 in
   Figure 3-1 and 3-2), and the routers that are authorized to advertise
   the network resources but lose the competition against the attacker
   (Router C in Figure 31 and 3-2).

   2. Where deception is concerned, the consequence zone covers the routers
   that do not believe the attacker's advertisement and use the attacker to
   reach the claimed subnets (Router B and other deceived routers on the
   Internet in Figure 3-1 and 3-2).

   3. Where disruption is concerned, the consequence zone includes the
   routers that are on the path of misdirected data traffic (Router B in
   Figure 3-1 and 3-2).

   The threat consequence will cease when the attacker stops overclaiming,
   and will totally disappear when the routing tables are converged.  As a
   result the consequence period is longer than the duration of the
   overclaiming.

3.5.1.2  Underclaiming

   An underclaiming threat is defined as an action that an attacker
   illegitimately hides its authorized ownership of some network resources.
   The attacker could be the only router authorized to claim the network
   resources, or there might exist some legitimate backup routers.  Figure
   3-3 and 3-4 provide two examples. 

     +-------------+   +-------+
     |  Internet   |---| Rtr A |
     +------+------+   +---+---+
            |              |
            |              |
            |              |
            |            *-+-*
        +-------+       /     \ 
        | Rtr B |      *  N 1  *
        +-------+       \     /
                         *---*

               Figure 3-3

     +-------------+                +-------+
     |  Internet   |----------------| Rtr A |
     +------+------+                +---+---+
            |                           |
            |                           |
            |                           |
            |                         *-+-*
        +-------+     +-------+      /     \ 
        | Rtr C |-----| Rtr B |-----*  N 1  *
        +-------+     +-------+      \     /
                                      *---*

                  Figure 3-4


------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 10]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


   Router A, the attacker, owns a link to Network 1 and is authorized to
   advertise Network 1. Nevertheless, Router A refuses to advertise Network
   1.  In Figure 3-3, Network 1 is single-homed with Router A and therefore
   can only be advertised by Router A. In Figure 3-4, Network is dual-homed
   with Router A and B, and both routers are authorized to advertise
   Network 1 (Router A may or may not provide a preferred path against
   Router B, the backup router). 

   Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers can
   underclaim network resources.

   The consequence of underclaiming includes:

   1. Usurpation of the underclaimed network resources: In Figure 3-3, when
   Router A underclaims Network 1, Network 1 is isolated from the rest of
   the world, and cannot provide services to other devices, though Network
   1's own operation is not disrupted.  In Figure 3-4, if the path through
   Router A is preferred, the underclaiming will force Network 1 to use a
   sub-optimal path to provide its services.  (If the path through Router B
   is intended to be preferred, the services by Network 1 will not really
   be hurt even though Router A underclaims).
  
   2. Usurpation of the legitimate backup routers. In Figure 3-4, if Router
   A's path is preferred but Router A underclaims Network 1, it actually
   force Router B to serve Network 1. (Again, if Router B's path is
   intended to be preferred, Router A's underclaim does not really usurp
   Router B.)

   3. Deception of other routers.  Routers on the Internet (not shown in
   Figure 3-3 or 3-4) might not be able to reach Network 1 (Figure 3-3), or
   have to use a sub-optimal path through Router B when Router A's path is
   preferred.

   4. Disruption of data planes on some routers. This might happen on
   routers that are on the sub-optimal paths.  In Figure 3-4, when other
   routers on the Internet are deceived and use the sub-optimal path
   through Router B to reach Network 1, they will forward the data traffic
   to Router C. Router B and C might then become overloaded.  (When the
   path through Router B is intended to be preferred, Router B and C might
   also be overloaded. However, the disruption in such a case is not a
   consequence of an underclaim).

   Note: Some others type of usurpation might result from an underclaim in
   routing protocols.  Figure 3-5 provides an example. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 11]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


     +-------------+   +-------+
     |  Internet   |---| Rtr A |
     +------+------+   +---+---+
            |              |
            |              |
            |              |
            |            *-+-*
        +-------+       /     \ 
        | Rtr B |      *  N 1  *
        +---+---+       \     /
            |            *---*
          *-+-*
         /     \ 
        *  N 2  *
         \     /
          *---*

               Figure 3-5




   The threat consequence zone varies based on the consequence:

   1. Where usurpation is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
   network resources that are underclaimed by the attacker (Network 1 in
   Figure 3-3 and 3-4), and the routers that are intended to be backup with
   a lower preference (Router B in Figure 3-4, if Router A's path is
   preferred).

   2. Where deception is concerned, the consequence zone covers the routers
   that cannot reach the underclaimed network resources or those that have
   to use sub-optimal paths.

   3. Where disruption is concerned, the consequence zone covers the
   routers that cannot reach the underclaimed network resources or those
   that have to use sub-optimal paths.


   Like overclaiming, the consequence period is longer than the duration of
   the underclaiming--the threat consequence will mitigate when the
   attacker stops underclaiming and will totally disappear when routing
   tables are converged.   
   
3.5.1.3  Misclaiming

   A Misclaiming threat is defined as an attacker action advertising its
   authorized ownership of some network resources in a way that is not
   intended by the authoritative network administrator. An attacker can
   eulogize or disparage when advertising these network resources.

   Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers can
   misclaim network resources. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 12]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   The threat consequences of Misclaiming are a combination of consequences
   from overclaiming and underclaiming. Eulogizing the network resources
   might cause the same consequences made by overclaiming, while
   disparaging might trigger the same results from underclaiming.

   The consequence zone and period are also similar to those of
   overclaiming or underclaiming.

3.5.2 Falsifications by Forwarders

   When a legitimate router forwards routing information, it must or must
   not modify the routing information, depending on the routing information
   and the routing protocol type. For example, in RIP, the forwarder must
   modify the routing information by increasing the hop count by 1. On the
   other hand, the forwarder must not modify the type 1 LSA in OSPF. In
   general, forwarders in distance vector routing protocols are authorized
   to and must modify the routing information, while most forwarders in
   link state routing protocols are not authorized to and must not modify
   most routing information.

   As a forwarder authorized to modify routing message, an atteby an
   attacker does not forward necessary routing information to other
   authorized routers. Unauthorized aggregation (summarization) is a
   special type of understatements.

   3. Misstatement: This is defined as an action whereby the attacker
   describes route attributes in a wrong way. For example, in RIP, the
   attacker increases the path cost by two hops instead of one. Another
   example is, in BGP, the attacker deletes some AS numbers from the AS
   PATH. 

   When forwarding routing information that should not be modified, an
   attacker can launch the following falsifications:

   1. Deletion: Attacker deletes valid data in the routing message.
   2. Insertion: Attacker inserts false data in the routing message.
   3. Substitution: Attacker replaces valid data in the routing message
      with false data.
   4. Replaying: Attacker replays out-dated data in the routing message.

   All types of attackers (Compromised links, compromised routers,
   unauthorized routers, and masquerading routers) can falsify the routing
   information when they forward the routing messages.

   The threat consequences of these falsifications by forwarders are
   similar to those caused by originators: Usurpation of some network
   resources and related routers; deception of routers using false paths;
   and disruption of data planes of routers on the false paths.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 13]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


   The threat consequence area and period are also similar.

3.6 Interference

   Interference is defined as a threat action where attackers inhibit
   exchanges on legitimate routers. Attackers can do this by adding noise,
   not forwarding packets, replaying out-dated packets, delaying responses,
   denial of receipts, and breaking synchronization.

   Compromised links can interfere with the routing exchanges over the
   links where they have control.  Compromised, unauthorized and
   masquerading routers can slowdown their routing exchanges or create
   flapping routing sessions of the legitimate peering routers. 

   The consequence of interference is the disruption of routing operations. 

   The consequence zone of interference varies based on the source of the
   threats: 

   1. When a compromised link launches the action, the threat consequence
   zone covers routers that are using the link to exchange the routing
   information.  Routers behind might be disrupted too. 

   2. When compromised routers, unauthorized routers, or masquerading
   routers are the attackers, the threat consequence zone covers routers
   with which the attackers are exchanging routing information, and router
   behind.

   The threat consequences might disappear as soon as the interference is
   stopped, or might not totally disappear until the networks are
   converged.  Therefore, the consequence period is equal or longer than
   the duration of the interference.

3.7 Overload

   Overload is defined as a threat action whereby attackers place excess
   burden on legitimate routers.  Attackers can overload data plane or
   control plane. Because data plane is involved in routing exchanges,
   overload of data plane will also influence the routing operations.

   The consequence of overload is the disruption of routing operations.

   The consequence zone varies based on several factors:

   1. When compromised links launch an overload action against the control
   plane, the consequence zone covers routers that are using the links to
   exchange the routing information, and routers behind.

   2. When compromised links launch an overload action against the data
   plane, the consequence zone coves routers that are physically connected
   by the links, and routers behind. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 14]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   3. When Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, or masquerading
   routers launch an overload action against the control plane, the threat
   consequence zone covers routers with which the attackers are exchanging
   routing, and routers behind.

   4. When Compromised routers, unauthorized routers, or masquerading
   routers launch an overload action against the data plane, the threat
   consequence zone covers of routers with which the attackers have
   physical connections, and routers behind.

   The threat consequences might disappear as soon as the overload is
   stopped, or not disappear until networks are converged.

4.0 Specific Threat Types

   In this section a more specific focus of threats to routing protocols is
   discussed.  These threats may be further exploited based upon weakness
   in routing operations associated with the general threats described
   above.

4.1 Impersonation and Intrusion

   This subsection describes threats through the perspective of an
   impersonation detection scheme in multicast or unicast routing protocol
   environments.  Threats are defined based upon prevention and detection
   attributes suggested for the routing protocol.

   A routing protocol can be secured by prevention or detection mechanisms.
   In prevention mechanisms, threats are identified and the protocol is
   designed to alleviate or eliminate those threats. The classical example
   to take is the Perlman [BYZANTINE] Digital Signature (DS) approach in
   securing networks. The gist of these schemes is based on a router having
   a <public key, private key> pair and each router signing a routing
   message with its private key so that other routers along the path can be
   verify the authenticity of the message with originator's public key.
   Approaches in reference [OSPF-SIG] have been defined for Link State
   protocols like OSPF, and the idea can be extended to other routing
   protocols. Therefore, the prevention schemes although very attractive
   have an added cost for security. As an example in the case of a DS
   scheme as proposed by Perlman [BYZANTINE] and Murphy et. al. [OSPF-SIG],
   the performance cost associated with the setup of these keys is an added
   factor that can be prohibitively expensive for a large network. Also,
   the performance cost wherein each router in the path verifies the
   signature is an important factor that needs to be considered. 

   The link state protocol in OSPF has a basic cryptographic authentication
   scheme defined in RFC 2328 [OSPFv2]. In this approach all the routers
   share the same session keys. The protocol is insecure when an insider
   compromises, as the compromised insider has access to the key and
   becomes a threat to the network. Such a scheme is good for external
   threats. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 15]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


   Any intrusion detection schemes [SENSOR-IDS,DOS-IDS,and DIST-MONINTOR]
   can help to secure against external attacks and the following threats: *
   Non-existent information * Modification of information.  These detection
   schemes are involved at a higher level. The protocol is modified to
   generate the set of data that is used by the external Intrusion
   Detection Systems (IDS) to detect bad routers in the network. 


4.2 Byzantine Failures

   Byzantine failures are malicious attempts to control a router in order
   to attack that system as an authenticated system element.   Byzantine
   attacks may be seen where any intermediate node or group of nodes can
   intentionally create routing loops, misrouting packets on non-optimal
   paths, or selectively dropping packets (black hole). Another way to
   state the problem is that Byzantine failures occur when a processor
   returns incorrect or malicious data.ê Under such an attack, only the
   source and destination nodes are assumed to be trusted.  Detecting a
   Byzantine error is harder than the fail-stop model in the sense that at
   least one other processor must do the same computation to confirm the
   results.ê What isn't clear is just how much validation is required to
   determine whether a Byzantine failure has occurred.ê 

4.3 Discarding of Control Packets

   Similar to Byzantine threats discussed above, uncontrolled discarding of
   control packets lies in the same plane.  That is, discarding of control
   packets will have the same consequence as an incorrect routing control
   packet propagated in the network by a compromised router. In distance
   vector protocols the consequences may not be as dire because of the
   protocol behaviour, i.e. the routing update, is exchanged only with the
   neighbour.  However in the case of link state routing protocols, the
   threat associated to discarding of control packet can become a serious
   issue, as the routing updates are flooded in the network. Exploitation
   of this threat was discussed by S.F. Wu B. Vetter and F. Wang
   [ATTACK-LS]from the perspective of an insider attacks in a Link State
   Routing environment.  It is worth considering this threat in more
   detail.

   If the compromised (bad) router partitions the network, i.e. the router
   is the only path between two good routers, then the bad router can avoid
   forwarding the routing information on to the network on the other side. 

        *-----* 		           *----*
       /       \          *---*           /       \ 	
      / Routers \        /     \         / Routers \ 
      * on one  *-------*   F   *-------* on other *
       \ side  /         \     /         \  side  /
        *-----*           *---*           *------*


       Figure 4-1 	Network Partitioning Due to F

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 16]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   In this scenario, the network is partitioned and either side may not
   receive correct updates and the update packets may be dropped. 

   Clearly if F is positioned such that the network is not partitioned,
   then the correctness of the protocol in such circumstances depends on
   the mechanism of transmitting routing updates. In the case of a typical
   LSRP like OSPF, reliable flooding is used that guarantees that the
   updates are received by each and every router in the network. Hence even
   when a set of bad routers partition a network, if there exists at least
   one good path between all the routers then this threat can be deterred
   by designing a robust transmitting mechanism for control updates. 


5.0 Subversion of Control Plane Threats 

   Subversion of control a plane takes place when an intruder modifies the
   operation of the intrusion detector to force false negatives to occur.
   These negatives prevent the interconnection device (router) from
   performing its function as in serving packets or frames containing
   certain protocols. This is not very secure when "speed" is used as the
   only decision criteria as it provides the intruder with an open door to
   alert the permission rules installed by the administrator. These
   modifications could in turn permit, deny or re-route traffic in
   intruder's favour. As a preventive measure, routers may need to verify
   the authenticity of many Link State Updates (LSU) and some routers such
   as border routers may need to sign many LSU, using efficient Message
   Authentication for Link State Routing.  However, the reduced speed is
   the cost burden.

   Lack of consistent and timely management and control plane
   configurations can be considered a form of subversion or routing threat.
   Good security administration is labour-intensive, and therefore
   organizations often find it difficult to maintain the security of a
   large number of internal machines. To protect their machines from
   outside subversion, organizations often erect an outer security wall or
   "perimeter". Machines inside the perimeter communicate with the rest of
   the Internet only through a small set of carefully managed machines
   called "firewalls". Firewalls may operate at the application layer, in
   which case they are application relays, or at the IP layer, in which
   case they are firewall routers. 


5.1 Network Mapping Threats

   Based on a simple set of inputs, computers can generate graphical and
   quantitative representations of informal knowledge networks within an
   organization. 

   If there were no preventive measures in place, network map knowledge
   obtained by unauthorized access to intelligence can be costly and
   expensive threats.  Motivation for snooping can range from curiosity to
   voyeur tendencies. The threat with router plane data snooping is the
   fact that it looks to historical information to be an indication of what
   will happen in the future. The principal threat aspect is that the
   snooped data can be used to develop a network topology. When
   unauthorized attackers develop a model, they attempt to create one that
   will be relevant for all situations going forward.  Although these
   models may not be exact for every situation, they can be applied with a
   reasonable amount of certainty without introducing any biases based on
   past information.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 17]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

5.2 Promiscuous Mode and Network Topology

   Corrupting the router's data plane affords the opportunity to capture
   network traffic for analysis. Used to identify security risks and/or to
   monitor employees' activities (such as Web sites visited), a snoop
   program puts network interfaces into promiscuous mode. Promiscuous mode
   allows the system to access all the data in each network packet versus
   only routing-related information, including those packets intended for
   other computers.  

   In a network, promiscuous mode allows a network device to intercept and
   read each network packet that arrives in its entirety. This mode of
   operation is sometimes given to a network snoop server that captures and
   saves all packets for analysis, for example, monitoring network usage.
 
   In Ethernet local area network environments, promiscuous mode creates a
   threat since every data packet transmitted can be received and read by a
   network adapter. Promiscuous mode must be supported by each network
   adapter as well as by the input/output driver in the host operating
   system. Promiscuous mode is the opposite of non-promiscuous mode for
   obvious reasons.  When a data packet is transmitted in non-promiscuous
   mode, all the LAN devices "listen to" the data to determine proper and
   correct network address delivery. The data packet is passed onto the
   next LAN device until the device with the correct network address is
   reached. This is legitimate and correct routing operation.


5.3 Instability in Unicast Routing Protocols 

   Instability is considered a potential negative effect of Unicast
   Routing.  While not a security threat issue per se, it is worth noting
   that if unicast routing is unstable, then the actual routing protocol
   that source or receiver is using will be subject to the same
   instability. 

   Both internal and external unicast routing can be weakly protected with
   keyed MD5 [RFC1828], as implemented in an internal protocol such as OSPF
   [RFC2382] or in BGP [RFC2385]. More generally, IPSEC [RFC1825] could be
   used to provide protocol integrity for the unicast routing system.

6.0 Multicast Routing Protocol Consideration

   This section describes router-to-router threat models specific to
   multicast routing protocols. As directed by the RPSEC Working Group
   charter, host-to-router protocols such as the Internet Group Management
   Protocol [IGMP] are specifically excluded.  Likewise, the distribution
   of multicast keying material is excluded since it is being addressed in
   other Working Groups. The specific goal of this section is to provide a
   common basis for discussion between security and routing experts on
   securing multicast aspects of routing systems

   Multicast communication may be specifically targeted by security
   threats, due to its potential for communicating with large numbers of
   receivers simultaneously.  An attacker may attempt to use multicast
   sessions in order to spread specific data to recipients, or may use
   multicast traffic patterns to overload links as a denial-of-service
   (DOS) attack.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 18]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   In general, multicast routing updates can be fabricated, modified,
   replayed, deleted, and snooped. For example, unauthorized nodes can
   simply participate in the multicast routing protocol dialog when no
   access control mechanisms are defined for the protocol.  Non-routing
   devices can masquerade as an authorized router and inject spurious
   routing updates, perhaps using source routing attacks or TCP session
   hijacking attacks. Communication links can be compromised by an intruder
   to facilitate the manipulation of routing messages. Individual routers
   can be attacked and compromised to run modified software, or use a
   modified configuration.

   Although it is possible to run some multicast protocols independent of
   unicast routing, it is usually expected that multicast routing protocols
   will operate on routers which are simultaneously performing unicast
   routing.  Thus it is important to consider multicast routing security
   issues within the larger context of overall routing protocol security.
   The various multicast routing protocols have varied interactions with
   unicast routing. 

6.1 Core and Source-based Trees

   In general, multicast routing is accomplished by constructing a tree of
   network links connecting multicast source(s) with receivers.  The basic
   approaches are core-based trees and source-based trees.  Significant
   work has been done on core-based tree (CBT) architectures (i.e., 
   [RFC 1949] [RFC 2189] [RFC 2201], etc.), but this multicast
   architecture has not been widely deployed to date.

   Source-based tree multicast routing protocols have been more widely
   implemented and deployed, and will be the initial focus of this section.
   In particular, the following multicast protocols are considered:

   * Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol (DVMRP) 
   * Protocol-Independent Multicast (PIM) (Sparse Mode [RFC 2362] or 
     Dense mode)
   * Multicast-Enabled Open Shortest Multicast routing protocols
   
   Source-based multicast trees are either built by a distance-vector style
   algorithm, which may be implemented separately from the unicast routing
   algorithm (as is the case with DVMRP), or the multicast tree may be
   built using the information present in the underlying unicast routing
   table, as is the case with PIM-DM. The other algorithm used for building
   source-based trees is the link -state algorithm, as used in M-OSPF. 

   The method of building trees for specific multicast groups (i.e.,
   prune/join messages) leads to the potential for DOS attacks in some
   multicast routing protocols.  For example, with DVMRP, even routers that
   do not lead to group members incur significant state overhead due to the
   need to maintain information regarding prune messages for each active
   multicast group in the routing domain (potentially in the Internet).
   Spurious creation of multicast groups, if allowed to proceed without
   control, could potentially overload routers.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols         [Page 19]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

   With M-OSPF, scaling issues have restricted its use for inter-domain or
   large-scale backbone implementations.  The flooding (or reliable
   broadcasting) of group membership information appears to be the
   predominant factor preventing the link state multicast algorithm from
   being applicable over the wide-area.  The other limiting factor is the
   processing cost of the Dijkstra calculation to compute the shortest-path
   tree for each active source
 

6.2 Multicast and Unicast Threats

   The paragraphs below are applicable to most unicast routing security, as
   well as to multicast routing security.

   From the viewpoint of security, perhaps the most important way in which
   multicast routing differs from unicast routing is the concept of
   multicast groups.  A multicast group contains one or more senders, and
   one or more receivers.  (Receivers may also be senders in the
   generalized case.) Each group may have a different topology, depending
   on its current membership. Each router participating in the multicast
   tree must maintain state information for each active multicast group.
   In some architecture such as PIM-DM, even routers which are not actively
   participating in the multicast tree must maintain state information on
   active groups within the routing domain.

   Multicast routing protocols are at least as susceptible as unicast
   routing protocols to security threats.  In general, multicast routing
   updates can be fabricated, modified, replayed, deleted, and snooped. For
   example, unauthorized nodes can simply participate in the multicast
   routing protocol dialog when no access control mechanisms are defined
   for the protocol.  Non-routing devices can masquerade as an authorized
   router and inject spurious routing updates, perhaps using source routing
   attacks or TCP session hijacking attacks. Communication links can be
   compromised by an intruder to facilitate the manipulation of routing
   messages. Individual routers can be attacked and compromised to run
   modified software, or use a modified configuration.

   Just as with unicast routing, the key vulnerabilities of multicast
   routing lie in the introduction of misleading routing information,
   through non-existent (black hole) or incorrect routes, or in
   intercepting the routing information for malicious purposes.  Incorrect
   routing information can form the basis for DOS attacks, while
   intercepting routing information (particularly group membership
   information) can reveal compromising topological information.

   Denial-of-service attacks may come either from senders or receivers in
   the multicast model.  That is, if uncontrolled, senders may create large
   numbers of multicast groups, thus potentially creating a processing
   burden on multicast routers throughout the domain.  Receivers, if
   uncontrolled, may join large numbers of multicast groups, thus causing
   the establishment of paths from the senders in each group to the
   receiver, as well as causing the flow of packets for each of the groups
   to converge on the receiver.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 20]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002

7.0 Security Considerations

   This entire informational draft RFC is security related. Specifically,
   it addresses security of routing protocols as associated with threats to
   those protocols.   In a larger context, this work builds upon the
   recognition of the IETF community that signalling and control/management
   planes of networked devices need strengthening.  Routing protocols can
   be considered part of that signalling and control plane.  However, to
   date, routing protocols have largely remained unprotected and open to
   malicious attacks.  This document discusses inter and intra domain
   routing protocol threats as we know them today and lays the foundation
   for a future draft which fully discusses security requirements for
   routing protocols.


8.0 Acknowledgements

   This draft would not have been possible save for the excellent efforts
   and team work characteristics of those listed here.

   Ayman Musharbash - Nortel Networks
   Paul Knight - Nortel Networks
   Elwyn Davies - Nortel Networks
   Ameya Dilip Pandit - Graduate student - University of Missouri
   Senthilkumar Ayyasamy - Graduate student - University of Missouri

   In addition, thanks to following individuals for their comments:

   Marc DesRosiers - Nortel Networks
   Lawrence Dobranski - Nortel Networks
   Tim Gage - Cisco Systems
   Frank Horsfall - Nortel Networks
   Mike Lee - Nortel Networks
   James Ng - Cisco Systems 
   Alvaro Retana - Cisco Systems
   Bing Wen - Nortel Networks 
   Russ White - Cisco Systems
   Zhong Lin Zhou - Cisco Systems 

9.0	Author's Addresses

   Dennis Beard
   Nortel Networks
   Box 3511, Stn C
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
   K1Y 4H7
   Email: beardd@nortelnetworks.com

   Yi Yang
   Cisco Systems
   7025 Kit Creek Road
   RTP, NC 27709
   Email: yiya@cisco.com <mailto:yiya@cisco.com>


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols        [Page 21]

Internet Draft	draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt  October 2002


10.0 Appendix I - References

   References used in section 2:

   [SEC-GLOSS] R.Shirey, Internet Security Glossary, RFC 2828, May 2000

   [DV-SECURITY] B.R.Smith, S.Murthy, and J.J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, Securing
   Distance-Vector Routing Protocols, Symposium on Network and Distributed
   System Security 1997, Feb. 1997

   [PROTO-VULN] E.Rosen, Vulnerabilities of Network Control Protocols: An
   Example, Computer Communication Review, Jul. 1981

   References used in section 4.1:
   [BYZANTINE]  http://www.lcs.mit.edu/publications/specpub.php-id=997
   Perlman's Thesis on Byzantine robustness

   [OSPF-SIG]  http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2154.html RFC 2154, OSPF with
   Digital Signatures

   [OSPFv2]  http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2328.html RFC 2328, OSPF v2

   [SENSOR-IDS]  Sensor-Based Intrusion Detection for Intra-Domain
   Distance-Vector Routing, Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer
   and Communication Security (CCS'02), Washington, DC, November 2002 

   [DOS-IDS]  S.Cheung et. al., Protecting Routing Infrastructures from
   Denial of Service using co-operative intrusion detection, In Proceedings
   of the 1995 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

   [DIST-MONINTOR]  K.A. Bradley et. al., A distributed Network Monitoring
   approach

   Reference used in section 4.3:

   [ATTACK-LS]  An Experimental Study of Insider Attacks in a Link State
   Routing Protocol, S.F. Wu B. Vetter, F. Wang. In 5th IEEE International
   Conference on Network Protocols, Atlanta, GA, 1997. 

   References used in section 6:
   [IGMP] Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2 (RFC 2236)
 
   [PIM-SM] Protocol Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol
   Specification (RFC 2362)
 
   [THREATS] - Multicast-Specific Security Threats and Counter-Measures; A.
   Ballardie and J. Crowcroft; In Proceedings "Symposium on Network and
   Distributed System Security", February 1995, pp.2-16.
   (ftp://cs.ucl.ac.uk/darpa/IDMR/mcast-sec-isoc.ps.Z) 

   Scalable Multicast Key Distribution (RFC 1949)
 
   Core Based Trees (CBT) Multicast Routing Architecture (RFC 2201)
 
   Core Based Trees (CBT version 2) Multicast Routing -- Protocol
   Specification -- (RFC 2189) 

   Interoperability Rules for Multicast Routing Protocols (RFC 2715)
 
   IPv4 Multicast Routing MIB (RFC 2932)
 
   Protocol Independent Multicast MIB for IPv4 (RFC 2934) 
   Historical IETF Routing references:

   http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1825.txt
   http//www.research.att.com/~smb/papers/ipext.pdf

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Beard/Yang	Known Threats to Routing Protocols          [Page 22]


