

ENUM Working Group                                           A. Johnston
Internet-Draft                                                       MCI
Expires: August 17, 2005                               February 13, 2005


        IANA Registration for ENUMservices conf-web and conf-uri
                  draft-johnston-enum-conf-service-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document registers the 'ENUMservices' 'conf-web' with the
   'http:' and 'https:' URI schemes, and 'conf-uri' using the URI
   schemes 'sip:', 'sips:', and 'h323:' as per the IANA registration
   process defined in the ENUM specification RFC3761.  These
   ENUMservices indicate that the telephone number is associated with a
   conference and provide additional information and ways to participate
   in the conference.



Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          ENUM conf-web & conf-uri           February 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conference Web Page Service Registration . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2   Web Service Registration with 'http:' and 'https:' . . . .  3
   3.  Conference URI Service Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2   Conference URI Service Registration with 'sip:',
           'sips:', 'h323:', and 'xmpp:'  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  7



































Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          ENUM conf-web & conf-uri           February 2005


1.  Introduction

   ENUM  is a system that takes E.164 numbers, converts them into domain
   names, and resolves them to URIs using DNS.

   This document registers 'ENUMservices' according to the guidelines
   given in RFC3761 to be used for provisioning in the services field of
   a NAPTR resource record to indicate what class of functionality a
   given end point offers.  The registration is defined within the DDDS
   (Dynamic Delegation Discovery System) hierarchy, for use with the
   "E2U" DDDS Application defined in RFC3761.

   The following 'ENUMservices' are registered with this document:
   'conf-web'    and 'conf-uri'.  These services provide URIs that can
   be registered against an E.164 number which is related to a
   conference.  The 'conf-web' service provides a web page which
   provides additional information.  The 'conf-uri' service provides a
   Conference URI related to the E.164 number which can be used in place
   of the E.164 number to participate in the conference.

   The service parameters defined in RFC3761 allow therefore a 'type'
   and a 'subtype' to be specified.  Within this set of specifications
   the convention is assumed that the 'type' (being the more generic
   term) is defining the service and the 'subtype' is defining the URI
   scheme.

2.  Conference Web Page Service Registration

2.1  Introduction

   The ENUMservices registered in this section indicate that the
   resource identified by the associated HTTP or HTTPS URI is a source
   of information about the conference identified by the E.164 number.

   Today, conferences that have a web component for configuration,
   status, and presentations sharing need to use another mechanism to
   map the HTTP URI to the conference E.164 dial in number.  This
   ENUMservice registration will automate this process.

2.2  Web Service Registration with 'http:' and 'https:'

   Enumservice Name: "conf-web"

   Enumservice Type: "conf-web"

   Enumservice Subtype: "http", "https"

   URI Scheme: 'http:', 'https:'



Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          ENUM conf-web & conf-uri           February 2005


   Functional Specification:

   This ENUMservice indicates that the resource identified by the
   associated URI scheme is capable of being a source of information
   about the conference.

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'ENUMservice'.
   However, the general considerations of Section 5 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author:

   Alan Johnston (for author contact detail see Author's Address
   section)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None

3.  Conference URI Service Registration

3.1  Introduction

   The ENUMservices registered in this section indicate that the
   resource identified by the conference URI is a "focus" as defined in
   the SIP Conferencing framework.  Note that the URI scheme itself may
   be a SIP [2], SIPS, H323 [3], or another URI scheme suitable for
   participating in a multimedia conference.

   It is useful in many conferencing scenarios to learn that a telephone
   number is associated with a conference prior to establishing the
   session.  It may influence the endpoint, mode, and means of
   establishing the session.  This mechanism provides an automated means
   to do so.

3.2  Conference URI Service Registration with 'sip:', 'sips:', 'h323:',
    and 'xmpp:'

   Enumservice Name: "conf-uri"

   Enumservice Type: "conf-uri"

   Enumservice Subtype: "sip", "sips", "h323"

   URI Scheme: 'sip:', 'sips:', 'h323:'



Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          ENUM conf-web & conf-uri           February 2005


   Functional Specification:

   This ENUMservice indicates that the resource identified by the
   associated URI scheme is a focus.  A focus is defined for SIP in [4]
   and [5], and generalized for other signaling protocols in [6].

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'ENUMservice'.
   However, the general considerations of Section 5 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author:

   Alan Johnston (for author contact detail see Author's Addresses
   section)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None

4.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Rich Shockey, Henry Sinnreich, and Orit Levin for their
   encouragement and discussions about the work.

5.  Security Considerations

   The publication of URIs using these ENUMservice tags provides
   information that the telephone number is associated with a
   conference.  If this information is not public information then these
   URIs should not be published.

   The specific security considerations associated with conferencing are
   discussed in the SIP Conferencing and Centralized Conferencing
   Working Group (XCON) documents.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the 'conf-web' and 'conf-uri' ENUMservice
   according to specifications and guidelines in RFC 3761 and the
   definitions in this document.

7.  Informative References

   [1]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)



Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          ENUM conf-web & conf-uri           February 2005


        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [3]  Levin, O., "H.323 Uniform Resource Locator (URL) Scheme
        Registration", RFC 3508, April 2003.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the Session
        Initiation Protocol",
        Internet-Draft draft-ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework-03,
        October 2004.

   [5]  Johnston, A. and O. Levin, "Session Initiation Protocol Call
        Control - Conferencing for User Agents",
        Internet-Draft draft-ietf-sipping-cc-conferencing-06, November
        2004.

   [6]  Barnes, M. and C. Boulton, "A Framework and Data Model for
        Centralized Conferencingg",
        Internet-Draft draft-barnes-xcon-framework-01, December 2004.


Author's Address

   Alan Johnston
   MCI
   100 South 4th Street
   St. Louis, MO  63102

   Email: alan.johnston@mci.com



















Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          ENUM conf-web & conf-uri           February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Johnston                 Expires August 17, 2005                [Page 7]


