Internet-Draft                                                T. Theimer
Expires April 2000                                              J. Klink
                                                                 Siemens
                                                            October 1999


             Requirements for OAM Functionality in MPLS

                <draft-theimer-mpls-oam-requ-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This draft discusses the motivation for MPLS OAM functionality and
   possible requirements for OAM in MPLS networks. Examples of OAM
   functions include support for fault management, continuity checks,
   loopbacks, performance monitoring and protection switching. Such
   capabilities may be useful in many applications of MPLS networks, but
   a detailed set of requirements is currently not available. Further
   discussion and input is solicited, in particular from network
   operators and service providers.


1. Introduction

   OAM (Operation, Administration and Maintenance) functionality is
   important in public networks for ease of network operation, for
   verifying network performance and to reduce network operating costs.
   OAM functionality is especially relevant for networks in which
   Quality of Service is an important issue. OAM functions have
   therefore been defined e.g. for SONET/SDH and also for ATM networks.
   MPLS, as one of the key technologies for scalable next-generation
   networks providing QoS and supporting a diverse range of network
   services, will most likely require some basic OAM functionality as
   well.

                                                                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft        OAM Requirements for MPLS             October 1999


   MPLS OAM functionality is not seen as a substitute for physical layer
   (e.g. SONET/SDH) OAM functionality. However, MPLS layer OAM functions
   may nevertheless be desirable in addition to physical layer OAM: They
   will be required whenever OAM functionality is needed that permits
   differentiation per individual LSP. For example:

   - monitoring of connectivity, availability or performance of an
     individual LSP
   - MPLS protection switching for an individual LSP

   This draft intends to initiate a discussion on requirements for OAM
   functionality in MPLS, with the ultimate goal to identify a set of
   basic OAM functions and the protocol extensions needed for an
   interoperable implementation of these functions. Note that we do not
   intend to simply adopt the OAM functions and procedures previously
   defined for other technologies (in particular ATM), as this would
   probably lead to very complex and expensive implementations. It is
   therefore very important to carefully define the OAM requirements for
   MPLS, focusing primarily on those  issues where market demand is
   already beginning to appear.


2. Motivation and Requirements for OAM Functionality in MPLS

   OAM functionality may be useful in MPLS for the following reasons
   (this list is clearly not exhaustive, and requires further work to
   describe each requirement in more detail):


2.1. It allows the Operator to verify whether Quality of Service
guarantees committed in SLAs (Service Level Agreements) are in fact
being met by the label switched path (LSP).

   Associated requirements:
   - in-service verification of LSP availability (whether an LSP is _up_
     or _down_) and error performance (counting of lost frames)
   - in-service verification of delay and delay variation
   - in-service verification of connection throughput guarantees.


2.2. It allows the Operator to improve network reliability.

   Associated requirements:
   - LSP failure detection and automatic rerouting
   - MPLS protection switching


2.3. It allows the Operator to reduce network operating costs. Long term
statistics show that the costs of operating a public network are higher
than the initial installation costs.



Theimer & Klink           Expires April 2000                    [Page 2]
Internet-Draft        OAM Requirements for MPLS             October 1999

   Associated requirements:
   - tools for fast and efficient fault detection and fault localization
     (related to individual LSPs)
   - tools for efficient network setup and configuration.


2.5. It allows the Operator to improve traffic flow/distribution through
the network.

   Traffic engineering requirements have already been addressed in [3],
   and work is currently in progress in the IETF.


2.6. It gives support for improved accounting/billing procedures.

   Associated requirements:
   - measurement of throughput per connection for throughput based
     billing
   - detection of violations to an SLA traffic contract that can be
     given consideration for billing.


3. Examples of MPLS OAM Functionality

   Some examples of MPLS OAM functionality that may be used to address
   the above requirements are listed below:


3.1. Fault Management/Continuity Check

   OAM functionality could be defined to provide alarm information in
   cases where an MPLS path is _down_ or interrupted. This information
   could be propagated downstream along the MPLS path. Such
   functionality is particularly important when LSPs are manually
   configured in each node rather than established through a signalling
   protocol. Protocols such as LDP already provide similar functionality
   for the control plane path, covering severe errors such as total node
   or link failures. However, some error scenarios cannot be detected
   through these control plane mechanisms, and would also require inband
   monitoring capabilities within an LSP.

   One key application for such a function would be the in-service
   verification of MPLS path availability (continual monitoring whether
   the path is _up_ or _down_), enabling an Operator to verify whether
   Service Level Agreements with high availability guarantees are being
   met. Another possible application is as a trigger for MPLS protection
   switching.


3.2. Loopbacks

   OAM loopback packets could be defined, that would be looped back to
   the source of the loopback request at different nodes within an LSP

Theimer & Klink           Expires April 2000                    [Page 3]
Internet-Draft        OAM Requirements for MPLS             October 1999

   (similar to a _ping_ function). This could be used to enable
   verification of correct connectivity/configuration of the LSP prior
   to its being taken into service. It could also be used to localise
   faults along an LSP.


3.3. Performance Monitoring

   OAM functionality could be defined to continually monitor the
   performance of an MPLS path, e.g. with respect to lost packets.
   Possible applications for this function include:

   - triggering of an alarm if a performance threshold is exceeded
   - performance statistics per individual LSP
   - triggering of MPLS protection switching if a _signal degrade_
     situation is detected.


3.4. MPLS Protection Switching

   Work on MPLS protection switching has already been started, e.g. [1]
   and [2]. MPLS OAM functionality may be defined to support MPLS
   protection switching. Basic functionality that will probably need to
   be supported for this is:

   - Detection of failure situations (_hard_ or _soft_ failures) and
     propagation of this information to the MPLS protection domain
     source/sink. OAM functions for Fault Management/Continuity Check
     and Performance Monitoring (see above) could be used to achieve
     this.
   - Communication between protection domain source and sink in order to
     coordinate protection switching operations.


4.  Areas for Standardisation

   Depending on the detailed list of OAM requirements and their
   relevance, extensions to existing protocols and/or some new protocols
   may have to be defined to support OAM functions in MPLS. Examples
   include extensions to TE-RSVP [4] and CR-LDP [5] to enable and
   control OAM capabilities for selected LSPs, and to forward error
   notification messages.

   In some cases it may also be required to introduce an OAM indicator
   in the MPLS header. This OAM indicator would enable a simple
   differentiation between user packets and OAM packets in equipment
   supporting MPLS. Further discussion is required to clarify the need
   for such an OAM indicator and to identify a suitable encoding.






Theimer & Klink           Expires April 2000                    [Page 4]
Internet-Draft        OAM Requirements for MPLS             October 1999

5. References

   [1] K. Owens, C. Huang: Protection/Restoration of MPLS Networks.
       Work in progress <draft-makam-mpls-protection-00.txt>, June
       1999.

   [2] D. Haskin, R. Krishnan: A Method for Setting an Alternative
       Label Switched Paths to Handle Fast Reroute. Work in Progress
       <draft-haskin-mpls-fast-reroute-01.txt>, June 1999.

   [3] D. Awduche, et al: _Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over
       MPLS. RFC 2702, September 1999.

   [4] D.O. Awduche, et al: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels. Work in
       progress <draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-tunnel-04.txt>, September
       1999.

   [5] B. Jamoussi, et al: Constraint-Based LSP Setup using LDP. Work
       in progress <draft-ietf-mpls-cr-ldp-03.txt>, October 1999.



6. Authors' Addresses

                Thomas Theimer
                Siemens AG
                Hofmannstr. 51
                81359 Munich, Germany
                Email: Thomas.Theimer@icn.siemens.de

                Joachim Klink
                Siemens AG
                Hofmannstr. 51
                81359 Munich, Germany
                Email: Joachim.Klink@icn.siemens.de



















Theimer & Klink           Expires April 2000                    [Page 5]