



Network Working Group                                       E. Lear, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                            March 19, 2014
Intended status: Informational
Expires: September 20, 2014


              Internet Technology Adoption and Transition
                        draft-iab-itat-report-00

Abstract

   This document provides an overview of a workshop held by the Internet
   Architecture Board (IAB) on Internet Technology Adoption and
   Transition (ITAT).  The workshop was hosted by the University of
   Cambridge in Cambridge on December 4th and 5th of 2013.  The goal of
   the workshop was to facilitate adoption of Internet protocols,
   through examination of a variety of economic models, with particular
   emphasis at the waist of the hourglass.  This report summarizes
   contributions and discussions.  As the topics were wide ranging,
   there is no single set of recommendations for IETF participants to
   pursue at this time.  Instead, in the classic sense of early
   research, we note areas that deserve further exploration.

   Note that this document is a report on the proceedings of the
   workshop.  The views and positions documented in this report are
   those of the workshop participants and do not necessarily reflect IAB
   views and positions.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 20, 2014.

Copyright Notice





Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Organization of This Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Motivations and Review of Existing Work . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Economics of Protocol Adoption  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  When can bundling help adoption of network
           technologies or services? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Internet Protocol Adoption: Learning from Bitcoin . . . .   5
     3.3.  Long term strategy for a successful deployment of
           DNSSEC - on all levels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.4.  Framework for analyzing feasibility of Internet
           protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.5.  Best Effort Service as a Deployment Success Factor  . . .   7
   4.  Innovative / Out There Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  On the Complexity of Designed Systems (and its effect
           on protocol deployment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  Managing Diversity to Manage Technological
           Transition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  On Economic Models of Network Technology Adoption,
           Design, and Viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Making Standards Better . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Standards: A love/hate relationship with patents  . . . .   9
     5.2.  Bridge Networking Research and Internet
           Standardization: Case Study on Mobile Traffic
           Offloading and IPv6 Transition Technologies . . . . . . .   9
     5.3.  An Internet Architecture for the Challenged . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Other Challenges and Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.1.  Resilience of the commons: routing security . . . . . . .  10
     6.2.  Getting to the next version of TLS  . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Outcomes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.1.  Work for the IAB and the IETF . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.2.  Potential for the Internet Research Task Force  . . . . .  11
     7.3.  Opportunities For others  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12



Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   9.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. Attendees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   11. IAB Members at Time of Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Appendix A.  Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

1.  Introduction

   [Ed: this is adapted from our call for papers.]

   The Internet is a complex ecosystem that encompasses all aspects of
   society.  At its heart is a protocol stack with an hourglass shape,
   and IP at its center.  Recent research points to possible
   explanations for the success of such a design and for the significant
   challenges that arise when trying to evolve or change its middle
   section, e.g., as partially evident in the difficulties encountered
   by IPv6.  We have a number of other key examples to consider,
   including the next generation of HTTP and WebRTC.  The eventual
   success of many if not all of these protocols will largely depend on
   our understanding of not only what features and design principles
   contribute lasting value, but also on how (initial) deployment
   strategies can succeed in unlocking that value to foster protocol
   adoption.  The latter is particularly important in that most if not
   all Internet protocols exhibit significant externalities that create
   strong barriers to adoption, especially in the presence of a well-
   established incumbent.  Taking into account RFC 5218 on what makes a
   protocol successful, this workshop sought to explore how the complex
   interactions of protocols design and deployment affect their success.
   One of the workshop's goals was, therefore, to encourage discussions
   to develop an understanding of what makes protocol designs successful
   not only in meeting initial design goals but more importantly in
   their ability to evolve as these goals and the available technology
   change.  Another equally important goal was to develop protocol
   deployment strategies that ensure that new features can rapidly gain
   enough of a foothold to ultimately realize broad adoption.  Such
   strategies must be informed by both operational considerations and
   economic factors.

   Participants this workshop consisted of operators, researchers from
   the fields of computer science and economics, as well as engineers.
   Contributions were wide ranging.  As such, this report makes few if
   any recommendations for the IETF to consider, although there are
   some.





Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


1.1.  Organization of This Report

   This report records our discussions.  At the end of the workshop we
   reviewed potential follow-up items.  These will be highlighted at
   each point during the report, and a summary is given at the end.

   Section 2 discusses the economics of protocol adoption.  Section 3
   delves into an examination of recent operational challenges and some
   success stories.  Section 4 examines different views of success
   factors.  Finally section 5 summarizes views of the participants, and
   identifies a few key insights.

2.  Motivations and Review of Existing Work

   Our workshop began with an introduct that asks the question: is the
   neck of the Internet hourglass closed for business?  We have numerous
   instances where progress has been slow, the three biggest that come
   to mind being IPv6 [RFC2480], SCTP [RFC4960], and DNSSEC [RFC4034].
   The impact of DNSSEC is of particular interest, because it is relied
   upon for the delivery of other services, such as DANE [RFC6698] as
   well as application discovery mechanisms[refneeded].  Thus slowdown
   at the neck of the glass can have an impact closer to the lip.

   Even when we consider the classic neck of the hourglass to be IP and
   transport layers, it was suggested that the hourglass might extend as
   high as the application layer.


           ______________________
           \                    /
            \   Applications   /
             \                /
              \              /
               \            /
                \__________/
                 | HTTP(s)|  Has the neck moved?
                 |________|
                /          \
               /  TCP/IP    \
              /______________\
             /     MPLS/      \
            /     Framing      \
           /____________________\
          /      Physical        \
         /________________________\






Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   This idea was rebutted by the argument that protocols do continue to
   evolve, that protocols like SMTP and IMAP in the applications space
   have continued to evolve, as has the transport layer.

   We moved on to a review of [RFC5218] which discusses protocol success
   factors.  This work was presented in an IETF plenary some time ago,
   and was the basis for this ongoing work.  There were two clear
   outcomes from the discussion.  The first was that successive Internet
   Architecture Boards should review and consider that document in the
   context of evaluating birds of a feather (BoF) session proposals at
   the IETF, so that any working group proposal is carefully crafted to
   address a specific design space and provide positive net value.
   Another aspect was to continue work on tracking the value specific
   works in terms of success, wild success, or failure.  On that last
   point, failure remains difficult to judge, particularly at the neck
   of the hourglass.

3.  Economics of Protocol Adoption

   Several papers were submitted that looked at economic aspects of
   protocol adoption.

3.1.  When can bundling help adoption of network technologies or
      services?

   Economics of bundling is a long studied field, but not as applied to
   protocols.  It is relevant to the IETF and inherent to two key
   notions: layering and "mandatory to implement".  Two current examples
   include DANE atop DNSSEC and WebRTC atop SCTP.  The workshop reviewed
   a model [Weber13] that examines the concept that bundling of
   technologies can lead to several possible outcomes, which includes
   more or less adoption of both.  This will depend on a number of
   factors, including the costs, benefits, and externalities associated
   with adopting each.  The work we considered involved two independent
   technologies.  One question was what happens where one technology
   depends on the other.  That is directly tied to "mandatory to
   implement" discussions within the IETF.  That is a matter for follow-
   on work.  IETF participants can provide researchers anecdotal
   experience to help improve models in this area.

3.2.  Internet Protocol Adoption: Learning from Bitcoin

   We considered an examination of protocol success factors in the
   context of Bitcoin[Bohme13].  Here, there were any number of barriers
   to success, including adverse press, legal uncertainties, glitches
   and breaches, previous failed attempts, and speculative attacks,
   amongst others.  Bitcoin has thusfar overcome these barriers thanks
   to several key factors:



Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   o  First, there is a built-in reward system for early adopters.
      Participants are monetarily rewarded at an exponentially declining
      rate.

   o  There exist exchanges or conversion mechanisms to directly convert
      bitcoin to other currencies.

   o  Finally, there is some store fo value in the currency itself.

   The first two of these factors may be transferrable to other
   approaches.  That is- one key protocol success factor is direct
   benefit to the participant.  Another key protocol success factor is
   ability to interface with other systems for mutual benefit.

   A key message from this presentation is that if a protocol imposes
   externalities or costs on other systems, find a means to establish
   incentives for those other players for implementation.  As it
   happened we had a limited example of how to do this that is directly
   relevant to the IETF.

3.3.  Long term strategy for a successful deployment of DNSSEC - on all
      levels

   We reviewed the approach Sweden's .SE registry has taken to improving
   deployment of DNSSEC[Lowinder13].  .SE has roughly 1.5 million
   domains.  IIS manages the ccTLD.  They made the decision to encourage
   deployment of DNSSEC within .SE.  They began by understanding who
   their stakeholders were, and examined financial, legal, and technical
   aspects to deployment.  As they began their rollout, they charged
   extra for DNSSEC.  As they put it, this didn't work very well.

   They went on to fund development of OpenDNSSEC to remove technical
   barriers to deployment at end sites, noting that tooling was lacking
   in this area.  Even with this development, more tooling is necessary,
   as they point out a need for APIs between the signing zone and the
   registrar.

   To further encourage deployment, the government of Sweden provided
   financial incentives to communities to see that their domains were
   signed.  .SE further provided an incentive to registrars to see that
   their domains were signed.  In summary, .SE examined all the players
   and provided incentives for each to participate.









Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   The workshop discussed whether or not this model could be applied to
   other domains.  .SE was in a position to effectively subsidize DNS
   deployment because of their ability to set prices.  This may be
   appropriate for certain other top level domains, but it was pointed
   out that the margins of other domains do not allow for a cost
   reduction to be passed on at this point in time.

3.4.  Framework for analyzing feasibility of Internet protocols

   One of the goals of the workshop was to provide ways to determine
   when work in the IETF was likely to lead to adoption.  We considered
   an interative approach that combines value net analysis, deployment
   environment analysis, and technical architecture analysis that leads
   to feasibility and solution analysis[Leva13].  This work provided an
   alternative to RFC 5218 that had many points in common.  The case
   study examined was that of MPTCP.  Various deployment challenges were
   observed.  First and foremost, increasing bandwidth within the
   network seems to decrease attractiveness of MPTCP.  Second, the
   benefit/cost tradeoff by vendors was not considered attractive.
   Third, not all parties may agree on the benefits.

   Solutions analysis suggested five separate approaches to improve
   deployment, including open source, lobbying of various implementors,
   proxy deployment, and implementation by parties where they own both
   ends of a connection.

3.5.  Best Effort Service as a Deployment Success Factor

   When given the choice between vanilla and chocolate, why not choose
   both?  We considered an approach that became a recurring theme
   throughout the workshop, which was to examine when it was necessary
   to make a choice between technologies, but rather to implement
   multiple mechanisms to achieve adoption[Welzl13].  The workshop
   discussed the case of Skype, where it will use the best available
   transport mechanism to improve communication between clients, rather
   than to tie fate to any specific transport.  The argument goes that
   such an approach provides a means to introduce new transports such as
   SCTP.  This would be an adaptation of "Happy Eyeballs" [RFC6555].

4.  Innovative / Out There Models

   There were several approaches presented that examined how we look at
   protocol adoption.

4.1.  On the Complexity of Designed Systems (and its effect on protocol
      deployment)





Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   We reviewed a comparison between the hourglass model and what systems
   biologists might call the bowtie model[Meyer13].  The crux of this
   comparison is that both rely on certain building blocks to accomplish
   a certain end.  In the case of our hourglass model, IP sits notably
   in the center, whereas in the case of systems biology, as adenosine
   triphosphate (ATP) is the means by which all organisms convert
   nutrients to usable energy.

   We also examined the notion of "robust yet fragile", which examines
   the balance between the cost of implementing robust systems versus
   their value.  That is, highly efficient systems can might prove
   fragile in the face of failure or hard to evolve.

   The key question asked during this presentation was how we could
   apply what has been learned in systems biology or what do the
   findings reduce to for engineers?  The answer was that more work is
   needed.  The discussion highlighted the complexity of the Internet in
   terms of predicting network behavior.  As such, one promising area to
   examine may be that of network management.

4.2.  Managing Diversity to Manage Technological Transition

   We considered the difference between planned versus unplanned
   technology transitions[Kohno13].  They examined several transitions
   at the link, IP, and application layers in Japan.  One key claim in
   the study is that there is a phase difference in the diversity trend
   between each layer.  The statistics presented show that indeed HTTP
   is the predominant substrate for other applications.  Another point
   made was that "natural selection" is a strong means to determine
   technology.

   Along these lines there were two papers submitted that examined the
   formation and changes to the hourglass in the context of evolutionary
   economics.  Unfortunately the presentor was unable to attend due to
   illness.  The work was discussed at the workshop, and there were
   different points of views as to the approach.

4.3.  On Economic Models of Network Technology Adoption, Design, and
      Viability

   We considered how network protocol capabilities enable certain sorts
   of services that are beneficial to consumers and service providers.
   This model looks at smart data pricing (SDP) in which some behavior
   is desired and rewarded through a pricing model.[Sen13] The example
   given was use of time-dependent pricing (TDP) and demonstrated how a
   service provider was able to load shift traffic to off-peek periods.
   Explict Congestion Notification (ECN) and RADIUS were used by the
   project alongside a simple GUI.  This sort of work may prove useful



Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   to service providers as caching models evolve over time.  The
   question within the room is how will protocol developers consider
   these sorts of requirements.

5.  Making Standards Better

   There were several papers that focused on how standards are produced.

5.1.  Standards: A love/hate relationship with patents

   One of the biggest barriers to deployment is that of the unseen
   patent by the non-practicing entity (NPE).[Lear13] While this problem
   is relatively well understood by the industry, the discussion looked
   at patents as a means to improve interoperability.  Those who hold
   patents have the ability to license them in such a way that a single
   approach is the result.

5.2.  Bridge Networking Research and Internet Standardization: Case
      Study on Mobile Traffic Offloading and IPv6 Transition
      Technologies

   Not for the first time there was a presentation and discussion about
   the gap between the research community and standards organizations.
   Two cases were examined: mobile offloading and IPv6 transition
   technologies.[Ding13] In the case of mobile offloading, a mechanism
   was examined that required understanding of both 3GPP and IETF
   standards.  Resistance in both organizations was encountered.  In the
   3GPP, the problem was that the organization already had an offloading
   model in play.  In the IETF, the problem was a lack of understanding
   of the interdisciplinary space.  The researchers noted that in the
   case of the IETF, they may have taken the wrong tact by having jumped
   into the solution without having fully explained the problem they
   were trying to solve.  In the case of IPv6 transition technologies
   researchers encountered a crowded field and not much appetite for new
   transition technologies.

   The workshop discussed whether the standards arena is the best venue
   or measurement of success for researchers.  The IRTF is meant to
   bridge academic research and the IETF.  As we will discuss below,
   several avenues for continued dialog are contemplated.

5.3.  An Internet Architecture for the Challenged

   We held a very provocative discussion about whether the existing
   Internet architecture serves the broadest set of needs.  Three
   specific aspects were examined: geographic, technical, and socio-
   economic.  Researchers presented an alternative hourglass or protocol
   architecture known as Lowest Common Denominator Networking (LCDNet)



Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   that re-examines some of the base assumptions of the existing
   architecture, including its "always on" nature.[Sathiaseelan13]

   The workshop questioned many of the baseline assumptions of the
   researchers.  In part this may have been due to constrained
   discussion time on the topic, where a fuller explanation was
   warranted.

6.  Other Challenges and Approaches

   We held a number of other discussions about different approaches to
   technology adoption.  We should highlight that a number of papers
   were transmitted to the workshop on routing security, two of which
   were not possible to present.

6.1.  Resilience of the commons: routing security

   We discussed a presentation on the tragedy of the commons in the
   context of global inter-domain routing[Robachevsky13].  The "Internet
   Commons" is a collection of networks that we depend on but do not
   control.  The main threat to the commons in the context of BGP is
   routing pollution, or unwanted or unnecessary routing entries.  The
   Internet Society has been working with service providers to improve
   resiliency by driving a common understanding of both problem and
   solution space, and developing a shared view with regard to risk and
   benefits, with the idea being that there would be those who would
   engage in reciprocal cooperation with the hopes that others would do
   similarly in order to break the tragedy.

   What was notable in discussion was that there was no magic bullet to
   addressing the resiliency issue, and that this was a matter of
   clearly identifying the key players and convincing them that their
   incentives were aligned.  It also involved developing approaches to
   measure resiliency.

6.2.  Getting to the next version of TLS

   Originally the workshop had planned to look at the question of
   whether we could mandate stronger security.  This evolved into a
   discussion about getting to the next version of Transport Layer
   Security (TLS), and what challenges lie ahead.  It was pointed out
   that there were still many old versions of TLS in existence today,
   due to many old implementations.  In particular, it was pointed out
   that a substantial amount of traffic is still encrypted using triple
   DES.

   One concern about the next generation is that perfect could become
   the enemy of good.  Another point that was made was that perhaps a



Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   testing platform might help interoperability.  Finally, there was
   some discussion about how new versions of TLS get promoted.

7.  Outcomes

   This wide ranging workshop discussed many aspects that go to the
   success or failure of the work of the IETF.  While there is no single
   silver bullet that we can point to for making a protocol successful,
   the workshop did discuss a number of outcomes and potential next
   steps.

7.1.  Work for the IAB and the IETF

   The IAB's role in working group formation consists of providing
   guidance to the IESG on which birds of a feather sessions should be
   held, review of proposed working group charters, and shepherding some
   work so that it can reach a suitable stage for standardization.  In
   each of these stages the IAB has an opportunity to apply the lessons
   of RFC 5218, as well as other work such as the notion of bundling
   choices, when members give advice.

   In addition to working group creation, the IAB has an opportunity to
   track and present protocol success stories, either through wikis or
   through discussion at plenary sessions.  For instance, there is much
   interest at the moment of this report in Bitcoin, its success, and
   what parallels and lessons can be drawn.  Specifically it would be
   useful to track examples of first mover advantages.

   Finally, one area that the IETF may wish to consider, relating
   specifically to DNSSEC, as raised by our speakers was standardization
   of the provisioning interface of DNSSEC (DS keys) between parent and
   child zone.  Contributions in this area would be welcome.

7.2.  Potential for the Internet Research Task Force

   There are at least two possible activities that the IRTF might wish
   to consider.  The first would be a research group that considers
   protocol alternatives and recommendations that might be useful in
   areas where environments are constrained, due to bandwidth or other
   resources.  Such a group has already been proposed, in fact.

   The second possibility is a more general group that focuses on
   economic considerations relating to Internet protocol design.  In
   particular there were a number of areas that were presented to the
   working group that deserve further investigation, and could use
   collaboration between researchers, engineers, and operators.  Two
   examples include work on bundling as well as systems biology.




Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


7.3.  Opportunities For others

   Incentive models often involve many different players.  As we
   considered work in the workshop, our partners such as ICANN, and the
   RIRs can continue to play a role in encouraging deployment of
   protocols through their policies.  Their members can also participate
   in any activity of the IRTF that is related to this work.

   Specifically, RIRs have a specific role to play in encouraging
   security fo the routing system, and ICANN has a specific role to play
   in securing the domain name service.

   The suggestion was made that the IETF working groups could leverage
   graduate students in many Universities around the world in helping
   review documents (drafts, RFCs etc).  This would serve as a source of
   education in real world processes to students, and would engage the
   research community in IETF processes more thoroughly, as well as
   providing a scale-out resource for handling the IETF review workload.
   Several attendees who have such students were prepared to try this
   out.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document does not discuss a protocol.  Security for the workshop
   itself was excellent.

9.  Acknowledgments

   The IAB would like to thank the program committee, who consisted of
   Roch Guerin, Constantine Dovrolis, Hannes Tschofenig, Joel Halpern,
   Eliot Lear, and Richard Clayton.

   A special debt of gratitude is owed to our hosts, Ross Anderson and
   Richard Clayton for arranging an excellent venue for our discussions.

10.  Attendees

   The following people attended the ITAT workshop:

   Aaron Yi Ding, Adrian Farrel, Andrei Robachevzsky, Arjuna
   Sathiaseelan, Bjoern Zeeb, Dave Meyer, Dave Thaler, Dongting Yu,
   Eliot Lear, Elwyn Davies, Erik Nordmark, Hannes Tschofenig, Joel
   Halpern, Jon Crowcroft, Lars Eggert, Martin Stiemerling?, Michael
   Welzl, Michiel Leenaars, Miyo Kohno, Rainer Bohme, Richard Clayton,
   Roch Guerin, Ross Anderson, Russ Housley, Sam Smith, Sean Turner,
   Soumya Sen, Spencer Dawkins, Steven Weber, Tapio Levae, Toby
   Moncaster, Tony Finch




Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


11.  IAB Members at Time of Approval

   Russ Housley (chair)

   Jari Arkko

   Mary Barnes

   Mark Blanchet

   Joel Halpern

   Ted Hardie

   Joe Hildebrand

   Eliot Lear

   Xing Li

   Erik Nordmark

   Andrew Sullivan

   Dave Thaler

   Brian Trammell

   Lars Eggert (IRTF Chair)

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5218]  Thaler, D. and B. Aboba, "What Makes For a Successful
              Protocol?", RFC 5218, July 2008.

12.2.  Informative References

   [Bohme13]  Bohme, R., "Internet Protocol Adoption: Learning from
              Bitcoin", December 2013.

   [Ding13]   Yi Ding, A., Korhonen, J., Savolainen, T., Kojo, M.,
              Tarkoma, S., and J. Crowcroft, "Bridge Networking Research
              and Internet Standardization: Case Study on Mobile Traffic
              Offloading and IPv6 Transition Technologies", December
              2013.




Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   [Kohno13]  Kohno, M., Asaba, T., and F. Baker, "Managing Diversity to
              Manage Technological Transition", December 2013.

   [Lear13]   Lear, E. and D. Mohlenhoff, "Standards: a love/hate
              relationship with patents", December 2013.

   [Leva13]   Leva, T. and H. Soumi, "Framework for analyzing
              feasibility of Internet protocols", December 2013.

   [Lowinder13]
              Eklund Lowinder, A.M. and P. Wallstrom, "Long term
              strategy for a successful deployment of DNSSEC - on all
              levels", December 2013.

   [Meyer13]  Meyer, D. M., "On the Complexity of Engineered Systems
              (and its effect on protocol deployment)", December 2013.

   [RFC2480]  Freed, N., "Gateways and MIME Security Multiparts", RFC
              2480, January 1999.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4960]  Stewart, R., "Stream Control Transmission Protocol", RFC
              4960, September 2007.

   [RFC6555]  Wing, D. and A. Yourtchenko, "Happy Eyeballs: Success with
              Dual-Stack Hosts", RFC 6555, April 2012.

   [RFC6698]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schlyter, "The DNS-Based Authentication
              of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, August 2012.

   [Robachevsky13]
              Robachevsky, A., "Resilience of the commons: routing
              security", December 2013.

   [Sathiaseelan13]
              Sathiaseelan, A., Trossen, D., Komnios, I., Ott, J., and
              J. Crowcroft, "An Internet Architecture for the
              Challenged", December 2013.

   [Sen13]    Sen, S., "On Economic Models of Network Technology
              Adoption, Design, and Viability", December 2013.






Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                ITAT Report                     March 2014


   [Weber13]  Weber, S., Guerin, R., and J. C. Oliveira, "When can
              bundling help adoption of network technologies or
              services?", December 2013.

   [Welzl13]  Welzl, M., "The "best effort" service as a deployment
              success factor", December 2013.

Appendix A.  Changes

   This section to be removed prior to publication.

   o  00 Initial Revision.

Author's Address

   Eliot Lear (editor)
   Richtistrasse 7
   Wallisellen, ZH  CH-8304
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 44 878 9200
   Email: lear@cisco.com




























Lear                   Expires September 20, 2014              [Page 15]
