draft-satish-l2-mobilereq-01.txt

  Informational                                      Satish Jamadagni
                                            Tata Consultancy Services


   Internet Draft                                         
   Document: draft-satish-l2-mobilereq-01.txt         
   July 2003                                                        
                                                         
                                                   
                                                         
               L2 considerations for optimized IP mobility

    
                            Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. This is an individual
   draft for consideration by the seamoby Working Group.
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Abstract 

IP mobility protocols have traditionally been designed to be
independent of any L2 considerations.  A critical factor in achieving
good performance for IP mobility protocols is its closeness to an L2
handover. Handover occurs when a Mobile Node moves from one radio
access Point to another. If the new radio access point is associated
with a new subnet, the routing reachability change will have to reflect
at the access routers. Better synchronization between L2 handover and
L3 handover are still more important when supporting fast handoff
between two wireless domains. This draft discusses the L2 handover
steps and the possible coupling of L2 and L3 layers to support optimize
layer 3 handover. This draft also explores the location information as
a possible L2 trigger to support optimized L3 handover. Also an L2
trigger message format is defined which can be handled at L3
independent of other protocol considerations.


Satish                                                [Page 1]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003

It is emphasized that the L2 considerations for optimized IP mobility
work should serve well the objectives of 4G (All IP wireless) as well
as Software Defined Radio (SDR) or the multi mode handover scenarios.



    Table of Contents
    
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Terminology
3.0 The meaning of an L2 trigger
4.0 Decomposition of the L2 handoff process to identify L2
     triggers
    4.1. L2 handoff Initiation stage
    4.2. L2 handoff decision stage
    4.3. L2 handoff execution stage   
    4.4. Information in an L2 trigger    
5.0  Location trigger as an L2 Trigger
6.0 Using L2 Triggers in combination with application triggers
7.0 The L2 message format considerations
8.0 Summary
9.0  References
10.0 Author's Addresses




1.0 Introduction

An important consideration in the design of IP mobility protocols is
handover. A moving Mobile Node (MN) may irregularly need to change the
radio Access Point (AP) with which it is communicating. The change in
L2 connectivity to a new AP may cause a change in IP routing
reachability change and this requires updation of routing information at
the access routers (ARs). Even if no change in subnet occurs, the Aps
may still need to communicate the change in on-link reachability to the
local AR. For a handover to occur, candidate APs must be identified and
a target AP must be selected. Once the initial identification and
decision are complete, the handover process can begin. 
    
Several protocol designs have been advanced for Mobile IP that seek
to reduce the amount of handover latency at L3. These protocols depend
on timely information from the L2 protocol about the progress of L2
handover. L2 handover progress information also affects context
transfer [11] and candidate access router discovery [12]. Context
transfer involves moving context information (QoS, header compression,
authentication, etc.) from the old AR to the new AR. By moving such
context information, the ARs can avoid requiring the MN to set up all
the context information from scratch. This considerably reduces the
amount of time necessary to set up basic network service on the new
subnet. Synchronization between L2 & L3 can happen as the L2 handover
progresses. If handover progress information is available from L2, all
L3 activities including context transfer and handover process can be

Satish                                                [Page 2]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003

pipelined instead of waiting for crisp L2 events. This document
discusses requirements on underlying systems for supporting optimized
IP mobility. Apart from the possible L2 triggers listed in [7],
this draft suggests location information as a serious potential
L2 trigger in bringing about optimized IP mobility as emerging
3G & WLAN stds support location measurements at L2.


2.0 Terminology

The following terms are used in this document.
    
Access Point (AP):
           A Layer 2 (L2) access entity, e.g. wireless base transceiver
stations. Its primary function is to provide Mobile Nodes (MNs) an L2
wireless link.
   
Access Router (AR):
        A Layer 3 (L3) IP router, residing in an access network. An AR
is the first hop router for a MN.


L2 Handover:
        Change of MN's link layer connection from one AP to another.

L3 Handover:
         Change of MN's routable address from one AR to another.



3.0 The meaning of an L2 trigger

Theoretically speaking L2 and L3 can be loosely or tightly coupled. The
IP layer has emerged independent of L2 considerations. L2 triggers in
the context of this document are still in the scope of a loosely
coupled interaction between L2 and L3 with L3 supporting a few
additional L2 trigger handling capabilities and the L3 handover
mechanisms also (along with the regular MIP related mechanisms) on
these triggers. A tight coupling can be defined as both L2 and L3 being
reflective or a single handover entity controlling both the L2 and L3
handovers with a possible non-compliance to existing (as we know of it
today) L2 and L3 handover mechanisms (cross-layer control). Such a
tight coupling will be relevant in the future within the scope of the
all IP wireless (4G) with inter-technology support when a L2 trigger
from one mode can possibly be consumed by another mode within a
handheld terminal or may be within a network.

The information carried & the consumption of L2 triggers can vary
depending on the nature of handover control i.e. whether the handover
is a Mobile Controlled (MCHO), Network Controlled (NCHO), Mobile
Assisted (MAHO) or a Network Assisted (NCHO) handover. The relevance or



Satish                                                [Page 3]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003


importance of L2 triggers is much greater for a soft handover scenario
(make before break scenario) than for a hard handover (break before
make scenario).

The nature of L2 considerations being discussed for optimized IP
mobility should include
1. possible location based handovers when possible location information
   is available in a network, example: in 3G terminals with location
   measurement and reporting capability as well as L3s which are
   location aware [9] [10]
2. Inter-technology handover scenarios with the L2 trigger generated in
      one mode is consumed by another mode (or a mode controller with a
      subsequent reaction in another mode).


4.0 Decomposition of the L2 handoff process for identifying L2 triggers
   This section deals with decomposing the L2 handoff process to
understand the L2 triggers that can facilitate better L3 handover. An
initial set of L2 triggers has been identified in [7] and the set of
triggers provided in this draft can be seen as a continuation of that
work.

Three steps are identified in the L2 handoff process and appropriate
triggers are defined:
1.The L2 handoff initiation stage,
2.The L2 handoff decision stage and
3.The L2 handoff execution stage.

The above decomposition specifies three L2 triggers that go beyond the
basic L2 "Link-Up" and "Link-down" notifications. The identification of
intermediate states in L2 handoff provides for notifications which can
help pipeline the L3 handover process. The time span between a L2
handoff initiation and an actual L2 handoff (execution) can be
substantial and depends on the actual theresholding (number of beacons
from a target access point before which a handover decision is arrived
at) or any Quality of Service based algorithms that might be used for
L2 handover.

L2 trigger |  When generated      | L3 followup   |     Parameters
-----------|----------------------|---------------|-----------------
L2 handoff |                      |               | Handoff Initiation
initiation |                      |               | cause
           |    QoS degradation   |Ex:L3 candidate| Ex: QoS degradation
           |    with active       | access router |  at the MN L2
           |  signal or beacon    |scanning &     |
           |     measurement      | table updation|
           |                      |               |
----------------------------------------------------------------------
L2 handoff |                      |               |
decision   |                      | identify      |
           | L2 handover decision | appropriate   |
           |  to a specific AP    | Target router |

Satish                                                [Page 4]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003



           |                      |               |
----------------------------------------------------------------------
L2 handoff | Reassociation start  | possible L3   |    
execution  |  with possible       | auth &        |   
           | authorization &      | authorization |   
           | authentication       | procedures    | 
           |                      |               | 
           |                      |               | 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------


4.1. L2 handoff Initiation stage

The Initiation phase identifies the need for handover and subsequently
initiates it. L2 handover initiation triggers can originate from an MN
or the AP. The MN L2 initiation may be due to a perceived degradation
in QoS. The AP initiation may be to serve any time dependent load
factors. The reasons for a handover initiation can be any of the
following: Availability, Congestion, Effective S/R, Emergency service,
Interference, Loading, Macro/Micro/Pico - Operator policy like handover
slow moving users to a pico cell and fast moving users to larger cells,
Security levels, Network forced maintained, QoS (delay, delay
variation), location etc.

L2 handoff initiation triggers can be used by L3 for fast handoff
initiation. L3 fast handoff initiation may include identification of
Candidate Access Routers (CARs) for handoff. Here L2 handoff initiation
trigger is a notification to L3 sent at the start of the L2 handoff
initiation. This trigger can be indicative of the L2 handoff threshold
crossing.


4.2. L2 handoff decision stage

The L2 handover decision phase compares information from a variety of
sources with recorded user preferences and network policy. It also
involves a playoff between options to identify the best available
handover option taking into consideration user preference and network
policy. It then notifies the handoff execution module for an L2 handoff
execution. L2 decision trigger can be used by the L3 to proceed from a
to CAR discovery phase to a Target Access Router (TAR) identification
phase.

4.3. L2 handoff Execution stage

The objective of the handover execution phase is to change mode (in a
multi mode scenario) or network conforming to the details resolved to
in the decision phase. This stage typically involves authorization or
reauthorization and authentication as well as connection change or
radio access node change. Further it also involves control point
transfer signaling and security related signaling.

Satish                                                [Page 5]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003


The L2 handoff execution trigger can be used by the L3 to complete any
L3 authorization and authentication formalities. It can also act as a
conformation to any L3 pre-registration [REFERENCE] that might have
been initiated. This signal can also act as a time reference to take a
decision on whether to fall back on the pre-registration and opt for a
post registration in case of the combined fast handoff method.


5. Location trigger as an L2 trigger

Recently there has been much interest in location tracking and usage of
such information for a host of applications. The 3GPP forum is
specifying location measurements and location-based services. [10]
specifies a Location Configuration Information (LCI) format under
control of the end device. Location information interpretation logic
could reside at the terminal or at a server for retrieval by the end
device. An important feature of the LCI is its inclusion of a
resolution parameter for each of the dimensions of location. The LCI
includes latitude, longitude and altitude with resolution indicators
for each, as well as for the datum of the location.

Location or service location based handovers are a serious possibility
in a multi-mode or heterogeneous access service area. Handovers based
on location information will use location information for handover
initiations. Typically such location measurements will be achieved by a
L2 entity (The RRC in a 3G terminal). Such information can be used by
the L3 to optimize handovers. An L2 trigger should thus have provision
to accommodate location information. The location information will be
part of the L2 handover initiation trigger if the L2 handover was
initiated based on the location. This location information will be used
by a L3 component (location aware) to converge on a target access
router faster.


6.0 Using L2 Triggers in combination with application triggers

In a heterogeneous wireless access environment, the L2 handoff causes
can be very many. In such a scenario it is always advantageous to
provide as elaborate an L2 trigger as possible. This is the primary
motivation for suggesting additional L2 triggers as detailed in the
previous sections. For example if the time interval between an L2
initiation trigger and a decision trigger is large such time can be
used by the MN to achieve a CAR updation.

Apart from L2 triggers the preliminary set of multimode handsets that
are being made available commercially are provided with a simple user
programmable interface to specify which mode to use. Such a simple
interface can be made sophisticated to include greater programmability
by specifying location information where a specified mode could be
used. In such a scenario the L2 triggers will be used with some
application or user specified logic.


Satish                                                [Page 6]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003


A better handshake between L2 & L3 can be visualized when a set of QoS
parameters can be exchanged to achieve a coordinated handover for a
specified QoS objective for example L3 location triggers [9] could be
used to force a L2 link handover. It is asserted in this draft that the
L2 triggers will have to be as comprehensive as possible with
considerations & thoughts to the emerging all IP wireless handover
scenarios. An elaboration of such considerations will be part of future
work.


7.0 The L2 trigger message type considerations

Primarily 2 message types will have to be defined
1. One which registers the scope of an L3 interest or capabilities in
   handling the details provided in an L2 trigger
2. The other would be a message format describing the set of L2 trigger
   parameters which includes message type, QoS parameters, location
   information and formats etc.


8.0. Summary
Current trends in wireless networking suggest a trend towards and all
IP networks consisting of a variety of heterogeneous wireless Access
points. A change in wireless AP, either between an AP supporting one
wireless link technology and an AP supporting another, or between two
APs supporting the same wireless technology, necessarily results in a
change in the on-subnet reachability.

In this draft three new L2 triggers are suggested with the primary idea
of facilitating pipelining of L2 and L3 handovers for example the L2
decision stage trigger can ease the L3 decision process i.e. the target
access router can be indicated in the L2 decision stage trigger. The
need for a finer granularity of L2 triggers for L3 handover support is
also motivated by Candidate access router discovery and context
transfer issues. Candidate access router discovery is an important
issue for fast handoff initiation [12]. L2 triggers can be used to
initiate the Candidate access router discovery. An L2 decision handoff
notification with the decision information (which carries the domain
address to which the handover has to occur) can allow L3 handover to
proceed with out the CAR discovery process. An L2 initiation trigger
can be used as an initiation for CAR discovery operation. A finer L2
trigger granularity can also facilitate sensible context caching
algorithms.


Context transfer (CT) is aimed at supporting seamless mobility between
two ARs that provide access to a mobile node. Approaches toward a CT
framework are well described in [11]. Conceptually, CT can take place
before, during, or after handover. Exactly when CT takes place is highly
dependent on some available triggers and L2 triggers makes up for the
lack of any other form of triggers.


Satish                                                [Page 7]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003



8.0 References

1. Perkins, C., ed., "IP Mobility Support," RFC 2002, October, 1996.

2.  El-Malki, K., et. al., "Low Latency Handoff in Mobile IPv4,"
draft-ietf-mobileip-lowlatencyhandoffs-v4-01.txt, a work in progress.

3.  Tsirtsis, G., et. al. "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6,"
draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-01.txt, a work in progress.

4.  N Montavone et al, MIPv6 for multiple interfaces,
draft-montavont-mobileip-mmi-0o.txt, work in progress.
 
5. "Recommended Practice for Multi-Vendor Access Point
Interoperability via an Inter-Access Point Protocol Across
Distribution Systems Supporting IEEE 802.11 Operation," IEEE Std
802.11f/D1, DRAFT.

6 Kamel Baba et al, Fast Handoff l2 Trigger API,
draft-singh-l2trigger-api-00.txt, a work in progress

7 Alper E. Yegin, et. al., "Supporting Optimized handover for IP
mobility Requirements for underlying systems,
"draft-manyfolks-l2-mobilereq-02.txt, a work in progress.

8. R.J Jayabal, Context transfer and fast Mobile Ipv6 Interactions in
a layer-2 source triggered anticipative handover, draft-rjaya-ct-fmip6
-l2st-ant-ho-00.txt, a work in progress.

9.  M. Ylianttila, et. al., "Considerations on IP Spatial Location
Protocol Requirements, " draft-ylianttila-isl-prot-req-00.txt",a work
in progress.

10. J. Polk et al, Location Configuration Information for GEOPRIV, 
draft-ietf-geopriv-dhcp-lci-option-01.txt, a work in progress.

11. Sayed, H., et. al., "General Requirements for a Context Transfer
Framework," draft-hamid-seamoby-ct-reqs-01.txt, a work in progress.

12. Trossen, D., et. al., "Issues in Candidate Access Router Discovery
for Seamless IP Handoffs,"
draft-ietf-seamoby-CARdiscovery-issues-00.txt, a work in progress.










Satish                                                [Page 8]
Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003




9.0 Author's Addresses

Satish Jamadagni,
Tata Consultancy Services
11th Floor, "INNOVATOR", ITPL
Sadaramangala Industrial Area,
Whitefield Road, Bangalore - 560066
Ph: +91-80-8410085 Ext : 320
Fax:+91-80-8410114
Email: satish_jamadagni@blore.tcs.co.in



Internet Draft        L2 considerations for..        July 2003

