





INTERNET-DRAFT                                                S. Legg
draft-legg-ldap-acm-admin-00.txt                  Adacel Technologies
Intended Category: Standards Track                  February 22, 2002


                 Access Control Administration in LDAP

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this document is unlimited.  Comments should be sent
   to the LDUP working group mailing list <ietf-ldup@imc.org> or to the
   author.

   This Internet-Draft expires on 22 August 2002.


1. Abstract

   This document adapts the X.500 directory administrative model for use
   by the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol.  The administrative
   model partitions the Directory Information Tree for various aspects
   of directory data administration, e.g. subschema, access control and
   collective attributes.  The generic framework that applies to every
   aspect of administration is described, along with the particular
   definitions that support Access Control administration.  This
   document does not define a particular access control scheme.



Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and  "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2. Table of Contents

   1. Abstract ....................................................    1
   2. Table of Contents ...........................................    2
   3. Introduction ................................................    2
   4. Directory Administrative Model ..............................    3
      4.1 Administrative Areas ....................................    3
      4.2 Autonomous Administrative Areas .........................    3
      4.3 Specific Administrative Areas ...........................    4
      4.4 Inner Administrative Areas ..............................    5
      4.5 Administrative Entries ..................................    5
   5. Access Control Administrative Model .........................    5
      5.1 Access Control Administrative Areas .....................    6
      5.2 Access Control Scheme Indication ........................    6
      5.3 Access Control Information ..............................    7
      5.4 Access Control Subentries ...............................    7
      5.5 Applicable Access Control Information ...................    8
   6. Security Considerations .....................................    8
   7. Acknowledgements ............................................    9
   8. Normative References ........................................    9
   9. Informative References ......................................    9
   10. Intellectual Property Notice ...............................    9
   11. Copyright Notice ...........................................   10
   12. Author's Address ...........................................   11


3. Introduction

   This document adapts the X.500 directory administrative model [X501]
   for use by the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
   [RFC2251].  The administrative model partitions the Directory
   Information Tree (DIT) for various aspects of directory data
   administration, e.g. subschema, access control and collective
   attributes.

   Section 4, in conjunction with [SUBENTRY], provides the definitions
   for the generic parts of the administrative model that apply to every
   aspect of directory data administration.

   Section 5 provides the definitions to support the administration of
   Access Controls, but does not define a particular access control
   scheme (see [BAC]).




Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


   Schema definitions are provided using LDAP description formats
   [RFC2252].  Note that the LDAP descriptions have been rendered with
   additional white-space and line breaks for the sake of readability.

   Other aspects of administration that conform to the administrative
   model described in Section 4 are described elsewhere, e.g.
   collective attribute administration is described in [COLLECT].

   This document is derived from, and duplicates substantial portions
   of, Sections 4 and 8 of [X501].


4. Directory Administrative Model

   This section describes the means by which administrative authority is
   aportioned and exercised in the DIT.


4.1 Administrative Areas

   An administrative area is a subtree of the DIT considered from the
   perspective of administration.  The root entry of the subtree is an
   administrative point.  An administrative point is represented by an
   entry holding an administrativeRole attribute [SUBENTRY].  The values
   of this attribute identify the kind of administrative point.


4.2 Autonomous Administrative Areas

   The DIT may be partitioned into one or more non-overlapping subtrees
   termed autonomous administrative areas.  It is expected that the
   entries in an autonomous administrative area are all administered by
   the same administrative authority.

   An administrative authority may be responsible for several autonomous
   administrative areas in separated parts of the DIT but it SHOULD NOT
   arbitrarily partition the collection of entries under its control
   into autonomous administrative areas (thus creating adjacent
   autonomous areas administered by the same authority).

   The root entry of an autonomous administrative area's subtree is
   called an autonomous administrative point.  An autonomous
   administrative area extends from its autonomous administrative point
   downwards until another autonomous administrative point is
   encountered, at which point another autonomous administrative area
   begins.





Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


4.3 Specific Administrative Areas

   Entries in an administrative area may be considered in terms of a
   specific administrative function.  When viewed in this context, an
   administrative area is termed a specific administrative area.

   Examples of specific administrative areas are subschema specific
   administrative areas, access control specific areas and collective
   attribute specific areas.

   An autonomous administrative area may be considered as implicitly
   defining a single specific administrative area for each specific
   aspect of administration.  In this case, there is a precise
   correspondence between each such specific administrative area and the
   autonomous administrative area.

   Alternatively, for each specific aspect of administration, the
   autonomous administrative area may be partitioned into
   non-overlapping specific administrative areas.

   If so partitioned for a particular aspect of administration, each
   entry of the autonomous administrative area is contained in one and
   only one specific administrative area for that aspect, i.e. specific
   administrative areas do not overlap.

   The root entry of a specific administrative area's subtree is called
   a specific administrative point.  A specific administrative area
   extends from its specific administrative point downwards until
   another specific administrative point of the same administrative
   aspect is encountered, at which point another specific administrative
   area begins.  Specific administrative areas are always bounded by the
   autonomous administrative area they partition.

   Where an autonomous administrative area is not partitioned for a
   specific aspect of administration, the specific administrative area
   for that aspect coincides with the autonomous administrative area.
   In this case, the autonomous administrative point is also the
   specific administrative point for this aspect of administration.  A
   particular administrative point may be the root of an autonomous
   administrative area and may be the root of one or more specific
   administrative areas for different aspects of administration.

   It is not necessary for an administrative point to represent each
   specific aspect of administrative authority.  For example, there
   might be an administrative point, subordinate to the root of the
   autonomous administrative area, which is used for access control
   purposes only.




Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


4.4 Inner Administrative Areas

   For some aspects of administration, e.g. access control or collective
   attributes, inner administrative areas may be defined within the
   specific administrative areas, to allow a limited form of delegation,
   or for administrative or operational convenience.

   An inner administrative area may be nested within another inner
   administrative area.  The rules for nested inner areas are defined as
   part of the definition of the specific administrative aspect for
   which they are allowed.

   The root entry of an inner administrative area's subtree is called an
   inner administrative point.  An inner administrative area (within a
   specific administrative area) extends from its inner administrative
   point downwards until a specific administrative point of the same
   administrative aspect is encountered.  An inner administrative area
   is bounded by the specific administrative area within which it is
   defined.


4.5 Administrative Entries

   An entry located at an administrative point is an administrative
   entry.  Administrative entries MAY have subentries [SUBENTRY] as
   immediate subordinates.  The administrative entry and its associated
   subentries are used to control the entries encompassed by the
   associated administrative area.  Where inner administrative areas are
   used, the scopes of these areas may overlap.  Therefore, for each
   specific aspect of administrative authority, a definition is required
   of the method of combination of administrative information when it is
   possible for entries to be included in more than one subtree or
   subtree refinement associated with an inner area defined for that
   aspect.


5. Access Control Administrative Model

   An access control scheme describes the means by which access to
   directory information, and potentially to access rights themselves,
   may be controlled.  This section describes the administrative
   framework for access control schemes in general.

   Two access control schemes known as Basic Access Control and
   Simplified Access Control are defined by [BAC].  Other access control
   schemes MAY be defined by other documents.





Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


5.1 Access Control Administrative Areas

   The specific administrative area for access control is termed an
   Access Control Specific Area (ACSA).  The root of the ACSA is termed
   an Access Control Specific Point (ACSP) and is represented in the DIT
   by an administrative entry which includes accessControlSpecificArea
   as a value of its administrativeRole operational attribute.

   An ACSA MAY be partitioned into subtrees termed inner administrative
   areas.  Each such inner area is termed an Access Control Inner Area
   (ACIA).  The root of the ACIA is termed an Access Control Inner Point
   (ACIP) and is represented in the DIT by an administrative entry which
   includes accessControlInnerArea as a value of its administrativeRole
   operational attribute.

   An administrative entry can never be both an ACSP and an ACIP.  The
   corresponding values can therefore never be present simultaneously in
   the administrativeRole attribute.

   Each entry necessarily falls within one and only one ACSA.  Each such
   entry may also fall within one or more ACIAs nested inside the ACSA
   containing the entry.

   An ACSP or ACIP has zero, one or more subentries that contain Access
   Control Information (ACI).


5.2 Access Control Scheme Indication

   The access control scheme (e.g. Basic Access Control [BAC]) in force
   in an ACSA is indicated by the accessControlScheme operational
   attribute contained in the administrative entry for the relevant
   ACSP.

   The LDAP description [RFC2252] for the accessControlScheme
   operational attribute is:

      ( 2.5.24.1 NAME 'accessControlScheme'
          EQUALITY objectIdentifierMatch
          SYNTAX 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.38
          SINGLE-VALUE USAGE directoryOperation )

   An access control scheme conforming to the access control framework
   described in this document MUST define a distinct OBJECT IDENTIFIER
   value to identify it through the accessControlScheme attribute.

   Only administrative entries for ACSPs are permitted to contain an
   accessControlScheme attribute.  If the accessControlScheme attribute



Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


   is absent from a given ACSP, the access control scheme in force in
   the corresponding ACSA, and its effect on operations, results and
   errors, is implementation defined.

   Any entry or subentry in an ACSA is permitted to contain ACI if and
   only if such ACI is permitted by, and consistent with, the access
   control scheme identified by the value of the accessControlScheme
   attribute of the ACSP.


5.3 Access Control Information

   There are three categories of Access Control Information (ACI):
   entry, subentry and prescriptive.

   Entry ACI applies to only the entry or subentry in which it appears,
   and the contents thereof.  Subject to the access control scheme, any
   entry or subentry MAY hold entry ACI.

   Subentry ACI applies to only the subentries of the administrative
   entry in which it appears.  Subject to the access control scheme, any
   administrative entry, for any aspect of administration, MAY hold
   subentry ACI.

   Prescriptive ACI applies to all the entries within a subtree or
   subtree refinement of an administrative area (either an ACSA or an
   ACIA), as defined by the subtreeSpecification attribute of the
   subentry in which it appears.  Prescriptive ACI is only permitted in
   subentries of an ACSP or ACIP.  Prescriptive ACI in the subentries of
   a particular administrative point never applies to the same or any
   other subentry of that administrative point, but does apply to the
   subentries of subordinate administrative points, where those
   subentries are within the subtree or subtree refinement.


5.4 Access Control Subentries

   Each subentry which contains prescriptive ACI MUST have
   accessControlSubentry as a value of its objectClass attribute.  Such
   a subentry is called an access control subentry.

   The LDAP description [RFC2252] for the accessControlSubentry
   auxiliary object class is:

      ( 2.5.17.1 NAME 'accessControlSubentry' AUXILIARY )

   A subentry of this object class MUST contain at least one
   prescriptive ACI attribute of a type consistent with the value of the



Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


   accessControlScheme attribute of the corresponding ACSP.

   The subtree or subtree refinement for an access control subentry is
   termed a Directory Access Control Domain (DACD).  A DACD can contain
   zero entries, and can encompass entries that have not yet been added
   to the DIT, but does not extend beyond the scope of the ACSA or ACIA
   with which it is associated.

   Since a subtreeSpecification may define a subtree refinement, DACDs
   within a given ACSA may arbitrarily overlap.


5.5 Applicable Access Control Information

   Although particular items of ACI may specify attributes or values as
   the protected items, ACI is logically associated with entries.

   The ACI that is considered in access control decisions regarding an
   entry includes:

   (1) Entry ACI from that particular entry.

   (2) Prescriptive ACI from access control subentries whose DACDs
       contain the entry.  Each of these access control subentries is
       necessarily either a subordinate of the ACSP for the ACSA
       containing the entry, or a subordinate of the ACIP for an ACIA
       that contains the entry.

   The ACI that is considered in access control decisions regarding a
   subentry includes:

   (1) Entry ACI from that particular subentry.

   (2) Prescriptive ACI from access control subentries whose DACDs
       contain the subentry, excluding those belonging to the same
       administrative point as the subentry for which the decision is
       being made.

   (3) Subentry ACI from the administrative point associated with the
       subentry.


6. Security Considerations

   This document defines a framework for employing an access control
   scheme, i.e. the means by which access to directory information and
   potentially to access rights themselves may be controlled, but does
   not itself define any particular access control scheme.  The degree



Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


   of protection provided, and any security risks, are determined by the
   provisions of the access control schemes (defined elsewhere) making
   use of this framework.


7. Acknowledgements

   This document is derived from, and duplicates substantial portions
   of, Sections 4 and 8 of [X501].


8. Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2251]  Wahl, M., Howes, T. and S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory
              Access Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997.

   [RFC2252]  Wahl, M., Coulbeck, A., Howes, T. and S. Kille,
              "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3): Attribute
              Syntax Definitions", RFC 2252, December 1997.

   [SUBENTRY] Zeilenga, K. and S. Legg, "Subentries in LDAP",
              draft-zeilenga-ldap-subentry-xx.txt, a work in progress,
              January 2002.


9. Informative References

   [RFC2028]  Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in
              the IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October
              1996.

   [BAC]      Legg, S., "Basic and Simplified Access Control in LDAP",
              draft-legg-ldap-acm-bac-xx.txt, a work in progress,
              February 2002.

   [COLLECT]  Zeilenga, K., "Collective Attributes in LDAP",
              draft-zeilenga-ldap-collective-xx.txt, a work in progress,
              January 2002.

   [X501]     ITU-T Recommendation X.501 (02/2001), Information
              technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory:
              Models


10. Intellectual Property Notice



Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                 [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. [RFC2028]
   Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementors or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


11. Copyright Notice

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT        Access Control Administration    February 22, 2002


12. Author's Address

   Steven Legg
   Adacel Technologies Ltd.
   405-409 Ferntree Gully Road
   Mount Waverley, Victoria 3149
   AUSTRALIA

   Phone: +61 3 9451 2107
     Fax: +61 3 9541 2121
   EMail: steven.legg@adacel.com.au








































Legg                     Expires 22 August 2002                [Page 11]

