
Internet-Draft                                   Christopher Laforet
Expires: July 10, 2004                               Geoffrey Deasey
                                                       Netpath, Inc.
                                                        January 2004


            Enhancing SMTP Mail Services To Minimize SPAM
               draft-laforet-deasey-imxrecords-00.txt                                 


Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with     
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering      
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and working groups. Note that other      
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six      
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents      
at anytime. It is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference      
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at      
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at    
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

Unwanted Email ("SPAM") is a constantly growing scourge of the 
Internet.  SPAM takes full advantage of the open system that was 
created in the spirit of cooperation that represents the original 
underpinnings of the Internet.

Understanding that making airtight mail systems without completely 
destroying old software, the authors of this proposal considered the 
continued operation of these legacy systems while tightening up the 
current standards.  This new proposal calls for a new DNS resource 
record type and a new standard of operation for organization mail-
exchangers.  Using this new resource record along with other standard 
DNS resources provides system operators to minimize exploitable inbound 
SPAM pathways into their systems.


1. Introduction

SPAM, the affectionate name for unwanted Email, causes headaches for 
many system operators worldwide.  SPAM's ubiquitous nature consumes 
resources like bandwidth and mail-server disk space and CPU cycles for 
almost every system attached to the Internet.  End users are completely 
tired of the useless waste of time that SPAM represents.  System 
operators constantly battle problems that the constant additional Email 
burden places on their mail servers.  Tremendous amounts of money is 
spent on solutions to stop or minimize SPAM.

Much SPAM makes it into the system because mail exchangers (MX) 
scattered through the Internet are compromised into participating in 
the distribution of unwanted Email.  This happens because network MX 
servers have to accept all mail bound for their Email clients 
regardless of the source client for such mail.  In other words, any 
Internet client currently can connect to an MX computer and deliver 
Email destined for a user on that server.

This proposal seeks to institute a change in the way MX servers accept 
mail.  The underlying policy change proposed herein is for MX servers 
to only accept mail from its internal clients or other MX servers.  
This will minimize the potential of SPAM from passing freely through 
the network since most servers permit relaying.  It would also permit 
cracking down on SPAM senders in a more timely manner if all systems 
would follow this proposal since any outbreaks would be limited to 
being within a system administrator's purvey.


2. New DNS Resource Record Type

This proposal requires a new DNS record type to supplement MX records.  
We propose a new type that we call IMX (Internal Mail Exchanger).  This 
new RR type can be used to flag IP addresses of MX servers sitting 
within the border of an organization that may not receive mail from the 
Internet but which may relay mail from the inside of the organization 
to other border MX servers located on the Internet.  A good example of 
this may be a busy ISP that has servers that receive and relay mail 
from its customer base to the outside world.


3. MX Server Protocol

MX servers scattered throughout the Internet should change their 
philosophy to not accept mail from any client unless the mail client 
resolves as a mail exchanger or as a client internal to its own system.  
This is the reason we proposed the IMX DNS RR type, to enhance the 
ability to resolve a server as being an MX yet not to identify it to 
the world as a legitimate outside mail exchanger.

The MX should reverse the client connection and determine if it matches 
an MX or IMX for the client domain or is one of its internal clients.  
If it does not resolve to either of these, then the connection needs to 
be ended with a 421 error rather than a standard 220 acceptance 
greeting.

If the sending client's system does not support IMX and the server 
cannot determine that it is a legitimate sender, the recipient will 
shut out its ability to send mail.  The sending system's System 
Administrator can resolve this in one of three ways:

A.	Add the IMX records into the DNS and use a version of Bind that 
will support IMX tags;
B.	Make internal outbound Email migrate to a registered MX server 
from internal MX servers; or
C.	Add the server as MX records into the DNS.

The recipient system mail servers would adamantly refuse to accept mail 
from any client that is not an MX.  The worst consequence is that Email 
may be bounced by a non-compliant system.  


4. References

RFC 2821 "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol"
RFC 1035 "DOMAIN NAMES - IMPLEMENTATION AND SPECIFICATION"


5.  Authors' Addresses

   Christopher Laforet
   Netpath, Inc.
   2260 S. Church St, Suite 601
   Burlington, NC 27215, USA
   Phone: 336/226-0425
   Email: laforet@netpath.net

   Geoffrey Deasey
   Netpath, Inc.
   2260 S. Church St, Suite 601
   Burlington, NC 27215, USA
   Phone: 336/226-0425
   Email: deasey@netpath.net
   



