
Network Working Group                            Stephen Deering (cisco)
Internet Draft                                      Deborah Estrin (USC)
                                                  Dino Farinacci (cisco)
                                                      Van Jacobson (LBL)
                                                       Ahmed Helmy (USC)
                                                     David Meyer (cisco)
                                                      Liming Wei (cisco)

draft-ietf-pim-v2-dm-01.txt                            Nov 3, 1998




   Protocol Independent Multicast Version 2 Dense Mode Specification



   Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet  Draft.   Internet  Drafts  are  working
   documents  of  the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. (Note that other groups may  also  distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts).

   Internet Drafts are draft  documents  valid  for  a  maximum  of  six
   months.  Internet  Drafts  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to  use  Internet
   Drafts  as  reference  material  or  to  cite  them  other  than as a
   ``working'' draft'' or ``work in progress.''

   Please check the I-D abstract  listing  contained  in  each  Internet
   Draft  directory  to  learn  the  current status of this or any other
   Internet Draft.


















Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 1]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


1 Introduction

  This specification defines a multicast routing algorithm efficient for
  multicast  groups  that are densely distributed across a network. This
  protocol does not have a topology discovery mechanism often used by  a
  unicast  routing protocol. It employes the same packet formats sparse-
  mode PIM [PIMSM] uses. This protocol is  called  dense-mode  PIM.  The
  foundation of this design was largely built on Deering's early work on
  IP multicast routing [Deering91].

2 Terminology

  The key words ``MUST'', ``MUST NOT'', ``REQUIRED'', ``SHALL'', ``SHALL
  NOT'',  ``SHOULD'',  ``SHOULD  NOT'',  ``RECOMMENDED'',  ``MAY'',  and
  ``OPTIONAL'' in this document are to be interpreted  as  described  in
  RFC 2119.

3 Glossary




      Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) / RPF interface / RPF lookup


           RPF is a multicast forwarding mode where  a  data  packet  is
           accepted  for  forwarding  if  it is received on an interface
           used to reach the source in unicast.  The  interface  passing
           this check is called the RPF interface.

           An RPF lookup for a source returns the RPF interface and  the
           next-hop  information,  as  if a route lookup is done for the
           source on a unicast routing table.


      Topology Discovery Mechanism/Protocol


           This mechanism provides  sufficient  topological  information
           for  a  router  to  determine  whether  a  neighbor system is
           upstream with respect to each multicast source. Some topology
           discovery  mechanism  can  also  determine  if  a neighbor is
           downstream with respect to each multicast source. An existing
           unicast  routing  protocol or a clone of it is sometimes used
           for this purpose (such as in DVMRP[DVMRP]). When a  multicast
           routing protocol has a topology discovery mechanism built-in,
           the topology discovery mechanism is sometimes referred to  as
           the  unicast  routing part of the protocol (even though it is



Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 2]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


           not used for forwarding unicast packets).



4 PIM-DM Protocol Overview

  Dense-mode  PIM  assumes  that  when  a  source  starts  sending,  all
  downstream  systems  want  to  receive multicast datagrams. Initially,
  multicast datagrams are flooded to all areas of the network.  If  some
  areas  of  the  network do not have group members, dense-mode PIM will
  prune off the forwarding branch by setting up prune state.  The  prune
  state  has  an  associated  timer,  which on expiration will turn into
  forward state, allowing data to go down the branch previously in prune
  state.

  The prune state contains source and group address information. When  a
  new member appears in a pruned area, a router can ``graft'' toward the
  source for the group, turning the pruned branch into forward state.

  The forwarding branches form a tree rooted at the  source  leading  to
  all members of the group. This tree is called a source rooted tree.

  The broadcast of datagrams followed by pruning of unwanted branches is
  often  referred  to  as  a broadcast-and-prune cycle, typical of dense
  mode protocols. The broadcast-and-prune mechanism in  dense  mode  PIM
  uses  a  technique  called  reverse  path forwarding (RPF), in which a
  multicast datagram is forwarded if the receiving interface is the  one
  used to forward unicast datagrams to the source of the datagram.

  Compared with  multicast  routing  protocols  with  built-in  topology
  discovery  mechanisms  (e.g.  DVMRP  with its own RIP-like ``unicast''
  routing protocol), dense mode PIM has simplified design,  and  is  not
  hard-wired  into  a  specific  type  of  topology  discovery protocol.
  However, such  simplification  does  incur  more  overhead  and  cause
  broadcast-and-prune  to  occur  on some links that could be avoided if
  sufficient topology information is available, e.g. to  decide  whether
  each  interface  leads  to  any  downstream neighbors for a particular
  source. We chose to accept the additional overhead  in  favor  of  the
  simplification  and  flexibility gained by not depending on a specific
  type of topology discovery protocol.



  In  relation  to  sparse-mode  PIM,  dense-mode  PIM  differs  in  two
  essential  ways:  1)  there  are  no  periodic joins transmitted, only
  explicit triggered grafts/prunes, and 2) there is no Rendezvous  Point
  (RP).




Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 3]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


5 Protocol Description

  Dense mode PIM initiates forwarding state in  routers  when  a  source
  begins  to send. A source does not give any prior notifications to the
  network when it sends multicast datagrams to a group G. If a receiving
  router does not already have a forwarding entry, it creates it for the
  source and group G. This forwarding entry is called a (S,G) entry.  It
  includes  the  following  contents: source address, group address, the
  incoming interface, a list of outgoing interfaces, a few flags  and  a
  few  timers.  The incoming interface for (S,G) is determined by an RPF
  lookup in the unicast routing table. The (S,G) outgoing interface list
  contains  interfaces that have PIM routers present or host members for
  group G.

  If a router creates a (S,G) entry with  an  empty  outgoing  interface
  list after receiving a multicast datagram, it must trigger a PIM-Prune
  message toward the source S. This type of entry is called  a  negative
  cache  entry. Negative cache entries can be found on leaf routers with
  no local group members,  or  on  routers  where  prune  messages  were
  received  from  downstream  routers that caused the outgoing interface
  list to become NULL.

  Dense mode PIM routers  send  periodic  Hello  messages  out  of  each
  interface  and  keep  track  of  neighbors  based  on  received  Hello
  messages. The Hello message  has  a  Holdtime  field  that  tells  the
  neighbor  to delete neighbor information if it is not refreshed before
  expiration.

  The following sections describe in detail how leaf network is  defined
  and  detected;  how  pruning is done on multi-access LANs; and actions
  related  to  new  members  joining  an  existing  group;  issues  with
  designated   router  election;  parallel  path  resolution;  multicast
  forwarding entry expiration and the adaptation to topology changes.


5.1 Leaf network detection

  In dense mode PIM,  prune  state  is  first  instantiated  on  routers
  connected  to  leaf  networks  without  group  members. A network on a
  router interface is deemed a leaf if there is no other  PIM  neighbors
  on  that  network.  The  notion of leaf network here might be slightly
  different from that defined in other protocols.   [*]
_________________________
[*] E.g. In DVMRP a leaf network for a  source  is  de-
fined as one without downstream neighbor DVMRP routers.
Each DVMRP router is able to decide whether  it  has  a
downstream  DVMRP neighbor with respect to each source.
This is due to the RIP-like mechanism used in  its  to-



Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 4]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


  A router determines it is a leaf by not receiving PIM Hello  messages.
  A  leaf router can detect that there are no members downstream when it
  is the only router on a network and  there  are  no  IGMP  Host-Report
  messages   received  from  hosts.  A  router  should  not  populate  a
  forwarding  entry's  outgoing  interface  list  with  a  leaf  network
  interface without downstream members.

  It should be noted that a non-leaf router in  PIM  dense-mode  is  not
  necessarily a non-leaf node on a particular multicast forwarding tree.
  There are topologies where two parallel routers  are  connected  to  a
  common  LAN  where  none  of the routers uses the other one to reach a
  source. Therefore both routers will be leaves of any forwarding  trees
  rooted  at  the  source.  When there are no group members on this LAN,
  both routers must not forward packets onto it. This is achieved by  an
  assert process. Please see section 5.5 for more details.

  A dense mode PIM implementation must take proper actions when  a  non-
  leaf  router  becomes  a leaf router. When the last PIM neighbor on an
  interface goes away  and  turns  the  connected  subnet  into  a  leaf
  network,  the  router  should  delete that interface from the outgoing
  interface lists of all groups without attached group members.

5.2 Pruning of branches

5.2.1 Pruning on multi-access LANs and prune-override

  To avoid PIM-Prune message storms, PIM-Prune messages must not be sent
  on  LANs  in  response  to  each  received  multicast  packet  that is
  associated with an existing negative cache entry.

  A prune is sent upstream when a router creates a (S,G) entry  with  an
  empty  outgoing  interface  list,  or when the outgoing interface list
  becomes empty.   [*]

  Prune information  is  flushed  periodically.  This  causes  multicast
  datagrams  to  be  sent in RPF mode again which in turn triggers prune
  messages.

  When a prune message is sent onto an upstream LAN,  it  is  data  link
  multicast  and  IP  addressed  to  the  all  PIM routers group address
  224.0.0.13. The router to process  the  prune  will  be  indicated  by
  inclusion  of  its address in the "Address" field of the message. This
  address is obtained by an RPF look up for the source. When  the  prune
_________________________
pology discovery (or ``unicast routing'') protocol.
[*]  I.e. the set of forwarding interfaces in the  out-
going interface list is NULL.




Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 5]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


  message is sent, the expected upstream router will schedule a deletion
  request  of  the  LAN from its outgoing interfaces for the (S,G) entry
  from the prune list. The suggested delay time before  deletion  should
  be greater than 3 seconds. The default prune delay time is 3 seconds.

  Other routers on the LAN will hear the prune message and respond  with
  a  join  if  they  still  expect multicast datagrams from the expected
  upstream router. The PIM-Join message is data link  multicast  and  IP
  addressed  to the all PIM routers group address 224.0.0.13. The router
  to process the join will be indicated by inclusion of its  address  in
  the  "Address"  field  of the message. The address is determined by an
  RPF lookup for the source. When the expected router receives the  join
  message,  it  will cancel the deletion request. This process is called
  prune-override.

  Routers that need to send prune-override joins will randomly  generate
  a  join  message  delay  timer. If a join is heard from another router
  before a router sends its own, it will cancel sending  its  own  join.
  This  will  reduce  control traffic on the LAN. The maximum join delay
  timer should be equal to or smaller than the prune delay timer  value.
  The default is 3 seconds.

  If the expected upstream router does not receive any PIM-Join messages
  before  the  scheduled  expiration  time  for the deletion request, it
  prunes the outgoing LAN interface from the (S,G) multicast  forwarding
  entry.

  However, if the prune-override join message is lost, the deletion will
  occur  and  there  will be no data delivery for the amount of time the
  interface remains in prune state. To reduce the  probability  of  this
  occurance,  a  router that has scheduled to prune the interface off is
  required to immediately send a prune onto the  interface.  This  gives
  other  routers another chance to hear the prune, and to respond with a
  join.

  Additionally, equal-cost paths leading to a  LAN  presents  a  special
  case  for  join/prune processing. When an upstream router is chosen by
  an RPF lookup there may be equal-cost paths to reach the  source.  The
  higher  IP  addressed  system is always chosen. If the unicast routing
  protocol does not store all available equal-cost paths in the  routing
  table,  the  "Address"  field  may  contain  the  address of the wrong
  upstream router. To avoid this  situation,  the  "Address"  field  may
  optionally  be  set  to  0.0.0.0 which means that all upstream routers
  (the ones that have the LAN as an outgoing  interface  for  the  (S,G)
  entry) may process the packet.






Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 6]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


5.2.2 Pruning a Point-to-point link

  PIM-Prune messages received on a point to point link are  not  delayed
  before  processing  as  they are in the LAN procedure. If the prune is
  received on an interface that is in the outgoing interface list, it is
  deleted immediately.

  Prunes  may  be  rate-limited  on  point-to-point  interfaces  when  a
  multicast  datagram  is received for a negative cache entry, or if the
  point-to-point  interface  receiving  the  datagram  is  not  the  RPF
  interface toward the source.



5.3 New members joining an existing group

  If a router is directly connected to a host that  wants  to  become  a
  member  of  a  group,  the  router may send a PIM-Graft message toward
  known sources. This allows join  latency  to  be  reduced  below  that
  indicated  by  the  relatively large timeout value suggested for prune
  information.

  The host indicates its interest in group G by sending an IGMP  report.
  If  a receiving router has state for group G, it adds the interface on
  which the IGMP Report or PIM-Graft was received for all known (S,G)'s.
  If  the  (S,G)  entry  was  a negative cache entry, the router sends a
  PIM-Graft message upstream toward S.

  A router receiving the PIM-Graft message adds the  received  interface
  into  the matching (S,G) entry's outgoing interface list. If the entry
  transitions to forward state due to this added outgoing interface, the
  router must send a PIM-Graft message toward the source.

  Routers with no group state do nothing on  receipt  of  IGMP  reports,
  since   dense-mode   PIM  will  deliver  multicast  datagrams  to  all
  interfaces when creating state for a group.


  PIM-Graft message is  the  only  PIM  message  that  uses  a  positive
  acknowledgment strategy. Senders of PIM-Graft messages unicast them to
  their upstream RPF neighbors. The neighbor processes  each  (S,G)  and
  immediately acknowledges each (S,G) in a PIM-GraftAck message. This is
  relatively easy, since the receiver simply  changes  the  PIM  message
  type  from Graft to Graft-Ack and unicasts the original packet back to
  the source. The sender periodically retransmits the PIM-Graft  message
  for  any  (S,G)  that  has not been acknowledged. The interval between
  each retransmission is 3 seconds. Note that the sender need not keep a
  retransmission  list  for each neighbor since PIM-Grafts are only sent



Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 7]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


  to the RPF neighbor. Only the (S,G)  entry  needs  to  be  tagged  for
  retransmission.


5.4 Designated Router Election

  Dense mode PIM itself does not  need  the  function  of  a  designated
  router  (DR).  But  a  DR  is needed on multi-access LANs running IGMP
  version 1, which relies on a routing protocol to select a query router
  for  the  purpose  of sending IGMP Host-Query messages. Dense-mode PIM
  designated router (DR) election has the same procedure sparse-mode PIM
  uses.

  Each PIM router connected to  a  multi-access  LAN  should  periodicly
  transmit  PIM-Hello  messages onto the LAN. The period is specified as
  [Hello-Timer] in the sparse mode specification (default  30  seconds).
  The  highest  IP  addressed  router becomes the DR. The discovered PIM
  routers should be timed out after 105 seconds (the [Neighbor-Timer] in
  the PIM-SM specification]. If the DR goes down, a new DR is elected.

  DR election is only necessary on multi-access networks.


5.5 Parallel paths to a source

  Two or more routers may receive the same multicast datagram  that  was
  replicated  upstream.  In  particular,  if two routers have equal cost
  paths to a source and are connected on a common multi-access  network,
  duplicate  datagrams  will  travel downstream onto the LAN. Dense-mode
  PIM will detect such a situation and will not let it persist.

  If a router receives a multicast datagram on an outgoing interface  on
  a  multi-access  LAN,  the  packet must be a duplicate. In this case a
  single forwarder must be elected. Using PIM Assert messages  addressed
  to  224.0.0.13  on  the  LAN,  upstream  routers  can decide which one
  becomes the forwarder. Downstream routers listen  to  the  Asserts  so
  they  know  which  one  was elected (typically this is the same as the
  downstream router's RPF neighbor  but  there  are  circumstances  when
  using different unicast protocols where this might not be the case).

  The upstream router elected is the one that has the best metric to the
  source.  When  a packet is received on an outgoing interface, a router
  will send an Assert packet on the LAN indicating what metric  it  uses
  to reach the source of the data packet. If metrics are comparable, the
  router with the best metric will become  the  forwarder.  Incomparable
  metrics will be discussed later in this section when metric preference
  is described. All other upstream routers  will  delete  the  interface
  from their outgoing interface list. The downstream routers also do the



Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 8]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


  comparison in case the forwarder is different than the  RPF  neighbor.
  This  is  important  so  downstream  routers send subsequent Prunes or
  Grafts to the correct neighbor.

  Associated with the metric is  a  metric  preference  value.  This  is
  provided  to  deal  with  the  case where the upstream routers may run
  different unicast routing protocols. The  numerically  smaller  metric
  preference  is  always  preferred.  The  metric  preference  should be
  treated as  the  high-order  part  of  an  Assert  metric  comparison.
  Therefore,  a  metric  value can be compared with another metric value
  provided both metric preferences are the same. A metric preference can
  be  assigned  per  unicast routing protocol and needs to be consistent
  for all PIM routers on the LAN.

  Asserts are rate-limited. The recommended minimum interval between two
  subsequent  asserts  out the same outgoing interface of an (S,G) entry
  is 1 second.

  The following Assert rules must be observed:

  Multicast packet received on outgoing interface:


 1    Do unicast routing table lookup on source  IP  address  from  data
      packet.

 2    Send Assert on interface for source IP address from  data  packet.
      The  assert message includes metric preference of routing protocol
      and metric from routing table lookup.


 3    If route is not found, Use metric  preference  of  0x7fffffff  and
      metric 0xffffffff.



  Asserts received on outgoing interface:


 1    Compare metric received in Assert with  the  one  you  would  have
      advertised  in  an Assert. If the value in the Assert is less than
      your value, prune the interface. If the value  is  the  same,  and
      your address is less than the Assert sender, prune the interface.

 2    If you have won the election  and  there  are  directly  connected
      members  on the LAN, keep the interface in your outgoing interface
      list. You are the forwarder for the LAN.




Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei             [Page 9]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


 3    If you have won the election but there are no  directly  connected
      members on the LAN, schedule to prune the interface. The LAN might
      be a stub LAN with no members (and no downstream routers).  If  no
      subsequent  Joins  are  received,  delete  the  interface from the
      outgoing interface list. Otherwise  keep  the  interface  in  your
      outgoing interface. You are the forwarder for the LAN.


 4    The assert winner sends an assert with its own metric on the  LAN,
      so that all other routers know who the winner is.


  Asserts received on incoming interface:


 1    Downstream routers  will  select  the  upstream  router  with  the
      smallest  metric  as  their  RPF  neighbor. If two metrics are the
      same, the highest IP address is chosen to break the tie.

      If the upstream router selected is different from the RPF neighbor
      selected  natively,  it  should  start  an Assert-Timer. When this
      timer expires, it restores the RPF information obtained by the RPF
      lookup.

 2    If the downstream  routers  have  downstream  members,  they  must
      schedule  a  join  to inform the upstream router packets should be
      forwarded on the LAN. This will cause the  upstream  forwarder  to
      cancel its delayed pruning of the interface.


 3    Whent he assert state times out, the downstream router may  switch
      from the assert winner to the original RPF neighbor, if different.



5.6 Timers in Multicast Forwarding Entries

  An (S,G) entry  has  a  number  of  associated  timers.  One  for  the
  multicast  routing  entry itself, one for each pruned interface in the
  outgoing interface list and one to time out information about upstream
  assert  winner  (Assert_timer). An outgoing interface in forward state
  does not time  out  or  change  state  without  external  events.  The
  outgoing interface stays in forward state in the list as long as there
  is a group member connected, or there is  a  downstream  PIM  neighbor
  that  has  not  sent  a prune to it. The interface is deleted from the
  outgoing interface list if it is on a leaf network  and  there  is  no
  connected member. The interface timer for a pruned interface should be
  started with the holdtime in the prune message (also  referred  to  as



Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 10]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


  the prune timer).

  When a (S,G) entry is in forwarding state, its expiration timer is set
  to   [Data-Timeout],   as  specified  in  the  companion  sparse  mode
  specification [PIMSM], which is 210 seconds by default. This timer  is
  restarted  when  a  data packet is being forwarded. The (S,G) entry is
  deleted if this timer expires.


  Once all interfaces in the outgoing interface  list  are  pruned,  the
  (S,G)'s  expiration  timer  should  be  set to the maximum prune timer
  among all its outgoing interfaces. During this time the entry is known
  as a negative cache entry.

  If the prune timers on different outgoing  interfaces  are  different,
  the  pruned  interface  with  the  shortest remaining timer may expire
  first and turn the negative cache entry into  forwarding  state.  When
  this  happens,  a  graft should be triggered upstream. When a negative
  cache entry turns into a forward entry,  the  entry  timer  should  be
  restarted  with  the  default  expiration  timer. Once the (S,G) entry
  times out, it will be recreated when the next multicast packet or join
  arrives.

  The prune message sent upstream contains a holdtime. Its default value
  is  [Data-Timeout],  except when the Assert timer is also running, the
  holdtime in the prune message is set to the smaller value between  the
  prune  holdtime  the system uses, and the remaining assert timer value
  before its expiration. The Assert Timer  is  started  with  a  default
  value of 210 seconds.


5.7 Adapting to unicast route changes

  When unicast route changes occur, the RPF  interface  for  many  (S,G)
  entries  will  also  change.  The  following  should  be  done for the
  affected entries:


 1    A prune should be sent toward the old incoming interface;

 2    A graft should be sent to the new RPF neighbor.










Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 11]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


6 Packet Formats

  This section describes the details  of  the  packet  formats  for  PIM
  control messages.

  All PIM control messages have protocol number 103.

  Basically,  PIM  messages  are  either  unicast  (e.g.  Registers  and
  Register-Stop),  or  multicast  hop-by-hop  to `ALL-PIM-ROUTERS' group
  `224.0.0.13' (e.g. Join/Prune, Asserts, etc.).


  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |PIM Ver| Type  |   reserved    |           Checksum            |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+





    PIM Ver
          PIM Version number is 2.


    Type  Types for specific PIM messages.  PIM Types are:



       0 = Hello
       1 = Register
       2 = Register-Stop
       3 = Join/Prune
       4 = Bootstrap
       5 = Assert
       6 = Graft (used in PIM-DM only)
       7 = Graft-Ack (used in PIM-DM only)
       8 = Candidate-RP-Advertisement



    Reserved
          Set to zero. Ignored upon receipt.


    Checksum
          The checksum is the  16-bit  one's  complement  of  the  one's



Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 12]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


         complement  sum  of  the  entire PIM message. For computing the
         checksum, the checksum field is zeroed.



     { For all the packet format details, refer to the  PIM  sparse-mode
     specification.}

6.1 PIM-Hello Message

  It is sent periodically by PIM routers on all interfaces.

6.2 PIM-SM-Register Message

  Used in sparse-mode. Refer to PIM sparse-mode specification.

6.3 PIM-SM-Register-Stop Message

  Used in sparse-mode. Refer to PIM sparse-mode specification.

6.4 Join/Prune Message

  It is  sent  by  routers  toward  upstream  sources.  A  join  creates
  forwarding  state  and a prune destroys forwarding state. Refer to PIM
  sparse-mode specification.

6.5 PIM-SM-Bootstrap Message

  Used in sparse-mode. Refer to PIM sparse-mode specification.

6.6 PIM-Assert Message

  The PIM-Assert message  is  sent  when  a  multicast  data  packet  is
  received  on an outgoing interface corresponding to the (S,G) or (*,G)
  associated with the source. This message is used  in  both  dense-mode
  and  sparse-mode  PIM.  For  packet  format,  refer to PIM sparse-mode
  specification.


6.7 PIM-Graft Message

  This message is sent by a downstream router to a neighboring  upstream
  router  to reinstate a previously pruned branch of a source tree. This
  is done for dense-mode groups only.  The  format  is  the  same  as  a
  Join/Prune  message, except that the value in the type field is 6. The
  source address hsould be included in teh join section of the  message.
  The holdtime field is unused, and is ignored when a graft is received.




Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 13]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998


6.8 PIM-Graft-Ack Message

  Sent in response to a received Graft message. The  Graft-Ack  is  only
  sent  if  the  interface  in  which  the Graft was received is not the
  incoming interface for the respective (S,G). This is done  for  dense-
  mode groups only. The format is the same as Join/Prune message, except
  that the value of the message type field is 7. The  ``Encoded-Unicast-
  Upstream  Neighbor  Address'' field is unused and needs not be checked
  when this message is received. The holdtime field  in  the  packet  is
  ignored when received.


7 Acknowledgement

  Thanks to Manoj Leelanivas, Sangeeta Mukherjee, Nitin  Jain  and  many
  members of the PIM/IDMR working group for their helpful comments.

8 References

  [Deering91]  S.E.   Deering.   Multicast   Routing   in   a   Datagram
  Internetwork.  PhD  thesis,  Electrical  Engineering  Dept.,  Stanford
  University, December 1991.

  [DVMRP]  RFC  1075,  Distance  Vector  Multicast   Routing   Protocol.
  Waitzman, D., Partridge, C., Deering, S.E, November 1988

  [PIMSM] Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse-Mode (PIM-SM):  Protocol
  Specification.  D.  Estrin,  D.  Farinacci,  A.  Helmy,  D. Thaler, S.
  Deering, M. Handley, V. Jacobson, C.  Liu,  P.Sharma,  L.  Wei  draft-
  ietf-idmr-pim-sm-specv2-00.txt.

  [PIMARCH] An Architecture for Wide-Area Multicast Routing, S. Deering,
  D.  Estrin,  D.  Farinacci,  V. Jacobson, G. Liu,L. Wei, USC Technical
  Report, available from authors, Nov 1996.

  [RFC1112] Host Extensions for IP Multicasting, Network Working  Group,
  RFC 1112, S. Deering, August 1989


9 Security Considerations

  Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

10 Authors' Addresses







Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 14]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998



Stephen Deering
Cisco Systems Inc
170 West Tasman Drive,
San Jose, CA 95134
deering@cisco.com

Deborah Estrin
Computer Science Department/ISI
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
estrin@usc.edu

Dino Farinacci
cisco Systems Inc
170 West Tasman Drive
San Jose, CA 95134
dino@cisco.com


Van Jacobson
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
1 Cyclotron Road
Berkeley, CA 94720
van@ee.lbl.gov

Ahmed Helmy
Computer Science Department
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
ahelmy@catarina.usc.edu


David Meyer
cisco Systems, Inc
170 West Tasman Drive
San Jose, CA95134
meyer@cisco.com

Liming Wei
cisco Systems Inc
170 West Tasman Drive
San Jose, CA 95134
lwei@cisco.com







Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 15]





Internet Draft   PIM Version 2 Dense Mode Specification         Nov 1998





















































Deering,Estrin,Farinacci,Jacobson,Helmy,Meyer,Wei            [Page 16]


