


Network Working Group                                          B. Fenner
Internet-Draft                                      AT&T Labs - Research
Obsoletes: 1264 (if approved)                              July 11, 2006
Intended status: Informational
Expires: January 12, 2007


                          RFC 1264 is Obsolete
                     draft-fenner-obsolete-1264-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   RFC 1264 was written during what was effectively a completely
   different time in the life of the Internet.  It prescribed rules to
   protect the Internet against new routing protocols that may have
   various undesirable properties.  In today's Internet, there are so
   many other pressures against deploying unreasonable protocols that we
   believe that existing controls suffice, and the RFC 1264 rules just
   get in the way.



Fenner                  Expires January 12, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            RFC 1264 is Obsolete                 July 2006


1.  Introduction

   RFC 1264 [RFC1264] describes various rules to be applied when
   publishing routing protocols on the IETF Standards Track, including
   requirements for implementation, MIBs, security, etc.  These rules
   were written in an attempt to protect the Internet from incomplete or
   unscalable new protocols.

   Today, one of the big problems the IETF faces is timeliness.
   Applying additional rules to a certain class of protocols hurts the
   IETF's ability to publish specifications in a timely manner.

   The current standards process [RFC2026] already permits the IESG to
   require additional implementation experience when it appears to be
   needed.  We do not need any more rules than that.  RFC 2026 says:

      Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
      required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
      Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
      usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed
      Standard designation.

      The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
      prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
      materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
      behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
      Internet.


2.  RFC 1264 is Obsolete

   Therefore, this document reclassifies RFC 1264 as historic.  While
   that does not prohibit the Routing Area Directors from requiring
   implementation and/or operational experience under the RFC 2026
   rules, it removes the broad, general requirement from all routing
   documents.


3.  Working Group Procedures

   Some working groups within the Routing Area have developed
   procedures, based on RFC 1264, to require implementations before
   forwarding a document to the IESG.  This action does not prevent
   those working groups from continuing with these procedures if the
   working group prefers to work this way.  We encourage working groups
   to put measures in place to improve the quality of their output.

   RFC 1264 required a MIB module to be in development for a protocol;



Fenner                  Expires January 12, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            RFC 1264 is Obsolete                 July 2006


   this is still encouraged in a broad sense.  This is not meant to be
   limiting, however; protocol management and manageability should be
   considered in the context of current IETF management protocols.  In
   addition, [I-D.farrel-rtg-manageability-requirements] contains a
   description of a "Manageability Requirements" section; this is not
   currently a requirement but should be considered.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


5.  Security Considerations

   While RFC 1264's rules placed additional constraints on the security-
   related contents of an RFC, current policies (e.g., the requirement
   for a Security Considerations section) suffice.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Alex Zinin and Bill Fenner spent a great deal of time trying to
   produce an updated version of the RFC 1264 rules that would apply to
   today's Internet.  This work was eventually abandoned when it was
   realized (after much public discussion at Routing Area meetings,
   Internet Area meetings, and on the Routing Area mailing list) that
   there was just no way to write the rules in a way that advanced the
   goals of the IETF.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1264]  Hinden, R., "Internet Engineering Task Force Internet
              Routing Protocol Standardization Criteria", RFC 1264,
              October 1991.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.







Fenner                  Expires January 12, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            RFC 1264 is Obsolete                 July 2006


7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.farrel-rtg-manageability-requirements]
              Farrel, A., "Requirements for Manageability Sections in
              Routing Area Drafts",
              draft-farrel-rtg-manageability-requirements-01 (work in
              progress), October 2005.


Author's Address

   Bill Fenner
   AT&T Labs - Research
   1 River Oaks Place
   San Jose, CA  95134-1918
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 493-8505
   Email: fenner@research.att.com
































Fenner                  Expires January 12, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            RFC 1264 is Obsolete                 July 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Fenner                  Expires January 12, 2007                [Page 5]


