

       Internet Engineering Task Force                                 SIP WG
       Internet Draft                                      Gearhart/van Wijk/
       Document: <draft-gearhart-sip-deaf-req-00.txt>               Sinnreich
       November 2000                                           Ericsson/WCOM
       Expires: April 2001


         A Proposed Set of Requirements for SIP Support for Deaf or Speech
                                 Impaired Customers


       Status of this Memo

          This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
          all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

          Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
          Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
          other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
          Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
          six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
          documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
          as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
          progress."

          The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

          The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


       1. Abstract

          SIP is attracting more and more attention as a valuable tool to
          enable and support voice and multimedia communications over the
          Internet.  However, a significant number of potential customers
          for SIP-based services are for various reasons unable to, or
          choose not to, use voice communication technologies. This document
          offers a proposed set of requirements and identifies some of the
          key issues that need resolution to allow full accessibility for
          this group to SIP-based Internet communications. This document is
          intended to continue the discussion begun in a previous draft (see
          Acknowledgements) and to lay a foundation for design and
          implementation discussions in future drafts.


       2. Terminology and Conventions Used in This Document

          In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
          "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",
          "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC



       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 1 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


          2119 [2] and indicate requirement levels for compliant SIP
          implementations.

          For the purposes of this document, the term ôUser Equipmentö
          (ôUEö) will be used to represent the Deaf individual and his/her
          SIP-enabled UA end-user equipment;  this could be a TTY[3], a
          personal computer or PDA, a specially equipped mobile phone, video
          phone, etc.

          The term ôuserö, in this document, shall be understood to mean a
          Deaf/deaf/hard-of-hearing individual.


       3. Introduction

          The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)[4] is used to initiate,
          modify, and terminate interactive sessions between sets of users.
          Typically these are voice sessions, described by the Session
          Description Protocol (SDP)[5]. However not all customers or
          potential customers have access to these SIP services.
          Specifically, people who consider themselves culturally Deaf[6],
          audiologically deaf[7], hard of hearing, speech impaired or
          disabled, etc., on either a temporary or permanent basis, are
          unable to participate in these voice-based communications.

          For the purposes of this document, this group of people will be
          referred to collectively as "Deaf" individuals.  Also, the term
          ôASLö (American Sign Language)[8], is used in this document to
          refer to the natural signed language used by culturally Deaf
          people in the United States and parts of Canada and Mexico.  For
          Deaf individuals in other countries, ôASLö when used in this
          document should be understood to refer to the local sign language
          used by those people.  Also, since Deaf people can and do use
          various types of manual communications systems in addition to ASL
          û such as Signed English û for this document the term ôASLö will
          be assumed to cover all forms of manual communications.

          Within the Public Switched Telephone System (PSTN), services have
          been defined that allow for access to circuit switched voice
          services by these customers. We believe it is important to offer
          these services in an IP context. The flexibility of SIP affords us
          the ability to both offer and improve on these services, and to
          offer more extensive forms of universal service access to this
          group of customers.  This is a formative time for the future of
          IP-based communications and as such it is an appropriate time to
          ensure that such requirements as are necessary to ensure full
          accessibility by all customers are included in planning the new 3G
          network.


       4. Purpose and Scope



       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 2 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


          This document offers a proposed set of requirements and attempts
          to identify issues that need resolution to allow full
          accessibility for all customers to SIP-based Internet
          communications.

          It will outline a few possible scenarios that enable universal
          access of voice and multimedia sessions, initiated by SIP, to
          users who are Deaf. These services are generally enabled by
          baseline SIP[1], or through the use of the caller preferences
          specification[9].  No additional extensions are proposed here in
          order to support universal access.


       5. Background

          In the current telephony world, most Deaf individuals have access
          to either standalone or PC-based TTY devices.  These text-based
          devices or software packages are adequate for communication with
          other Deaf individuals or with hearing individuals that have
          similar devices or software.  In addition, most if not all states
          in the United States have state-sponsored Relay service, in which
          a human operator with both standard telephone equipment and TTY
          devices acts as a go-between ("relay operator" or interpreter),
          allowing a Deaf  person with a TTY to place or receive calls from
          hearing individuals with standard telephones.  Individuals with
          speech difficulties that render it impossible for the individual
          to use ordinary voice-enabled devices can use the same TTY
          equipment and relay services.

          Introduction of the relay service has been a great benefit to both
          Deaf and hearing people because it has enabled communication
          between them, where, prior to this time, it was difficult or
          impossible.  It has provided independence to Deaf people, allowing
          them to communicate on their own terms rather than being forced to
          rely on hearing friends to act as telephone interpreters.

          In recent years, other technology such as two-way email pagers
          have become available that provide portable communications for
          Deaf people in a manner similar to cellular telephones for hearing
          people. These have provided a great benefit to Deaf people,
          allowing them the ease of near-instant communications that hearing
          people now take for granted. Some email pager services have also
          supported interface with other devices such as TTYs and FAX.  In
          addition, most European GSM phones offer SMS (short message
          service) for exchanging short messages to other GSM subscribers.
          This will also allow Deaf people to communicate near-instantly.

          Most recently, the advent of video relay services has provided
          ways for Deaf individuals to converse with hearing individuals
          using their most natural means of communication, visual, through
          the use of an oral or sign language interpreter.  The human
          interpreter is typically physically located at the relay center


       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 3 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


          and provides interpreting services via video connection to the
          Deaf person and voice connection to the hearing person.

          Much of what is included in this draft presupposes at least a
          superficial knowledge on the part of the reader of the Deaf world
          and the communication problems that have been endemic in that
          population since the creation of voice-only, long-distance
          communications.  This may not be realistic, so the authors
          recommend the following books as supplemental readings for those
          readers who would like to know more.

          1. Baker, Charlotte, and Robbin Battison.  "Sign Language and the
          Deaf Community:  Essays in Honor of William Stokoe".  National
          Association of the Deaf, June 1980.

          2. Moore, Matthew, et al.  "For Hearing People Only:  Answers to
          Some of the Most Commonly Asked Questions About the Deaf
          Community, Its Culture, and the æDeaf RealityÆ".  MSM Productions
          Ltd., 2nd Edition, September 1993.

          3. Padden, Carol, and Tom Humphries.  "Deaf in America: Voices
          from a Culture". Harvard University Press, Reprint September 1990.

          4. Stokoe, William.  "Sign and Culture:  A Reader for Students of
          American Sign Language".  Linstok Press, June 1980.



       6. General Requirements

          This section contains a list of general requirements that have
          been identified as important to ensure full accessibility to the
          3G networks of the future.  The relay center described above is a
          key part of the proposed solution.

          1.              The UE MUST be able to receive relay calls any time and any
             location.  This capability is already included in SIP. The user
             preferences in the REGISTER will indicate what relay
             requirements are desired (at minimum text support MUST be
             supported). Upon logging in, the UE SHOULD be able to
             automatically download all user settings.

          2.              The UE MUST be able to set up user preferences easily to
             specify language, mode of relay (such as:  ASL/video to/from
             speech, text to/from video or speech, also as an extended
             service English to i.e. Spanish text, relay can cross language
             barriers if supported). This is pre-set, but it can be
             overruled by one button or via a short list with alternative
             options. The UE and relay center SHOULD be able to
             enable/deliver services like a "real-time closed captioning"
             where the UE receives the video/audio of a caller/called, but
             the relay center will translate the audio and display the text


       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 4 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


             as subtitles. This will also offer possibilities like
             commercial translation service (via voice-over or text).

          3.              The UE MUST be able to receive the correct Caller-ID of the
             caller that calls the DP via the relay and not the relay's
             Caller-ID (note: this is the caller ID and not the SIP Call-
             ID).

          4.              The UE MUST be able to specify which pre-defined numbers
             require the use of relay service and which are direct calls
             (TTY to TTY, video to video) and do not require relay.

          5.              The UE MUST be able to download and upload the user settings
             and the address book, which should be stored as a database file
             at a centrally located server, which can be the relay center or
             the home provider of the UE.

          6.              It SHOULD be possible for a user to store user preferences and
             settings on a web service, similar to the ôMy Yahooö type
             service, to allow the user access to his/her personal profile
             and services from any web-enabled device.

          7.              The UE SHOULD be able to poll for the nearest Relay Proxy to
             reduce data traffic and reduce the cost of network usage. Also
             the UE MUST be able to change Relay service centers at any time
             (preferably via a menu with the relay service centers listed).

          8.              The UE SHOULD be able to use the relay service centers list to
             sequence the relay centers in a preferred position:  which to
             use first for outgoing calls and automatically move on to the
             next in the list if it is busy or does not support the required
             services.

          9.              Relay centers SHOULD be able to advertise the services they
             have and update for new services, perhaps via a central
             registration (voluntarily) or via dialing into an info number.
             The UE should be able to dial automatically to such info
             numbers. This would stimulate competition between relay
             centers, which will lead to lower service prices and/or more
             different kind of services.

          10.  The UE SHOULD be able to hide from the callee that a relay
             center is being used. This means the user SHOULD be able to
             place the call as if the UE is actually calling the callee
             directly, while the relay center working transparently. This
             requires the relay center to act like a proxy.

          11.  Relay centers SHOULD be able to act as an answering machine
             and provide message services. The UE SHOULD have the capability
             to retrieve messages (answering machine mode). The UE SHOULD
             have a pre-configurable setting that automatically connects a
             calling party to the relay center for answering machine service


       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 5 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


             when the user does not want to receive incoming calls. This
             happens transparently without extra handling of the caller.
             Voice messages left for the UE MUST be interpreted at the relay
             center into the format designated by the UE (email, IM, video
             clip, etc.) and transmitted to the UE on demand or when the UE
             registers.  Note:  This ôanswering serviceö would also be a
             possible commercial service for non-Deaf users.

          12.  The UE MUST be able to distinguish non-relay calls from relay
             calls and direct TTY calls, if this number is NOT listed in the
             address book (which stores the number and options for direct UE
             to UE calls such as TTY to TTY, which do not require a relay
             center). A message will be sent to the originator of the call
             (183 Deaf USER RELAY call only).  Depending on technological
             advances and the user's preferences, instead of the UE
             returning a 183 message, the UE MAY rapidly connect to the
             relay center and accept the call as if there is NO relay center
             in between (STEALTH mode; invisible relay services for the
             caller, in this way the user can conceal his/her hearing
             status). This should be seen as a separate service and possibly
             charged extra due the speed of accepting the call (minimal
             delay on picking-up) and extra effort to be invisible to the
             caller. Special hardware and software may be required for
             computer run speech to text conversion (this may require
             specialized relay centers).  Note: this service can be used
             selectively for certain callers, and other callers are just
             notified by the 183 message.

          13.  The UE MUST be able to place calls transparently, the DP does
             not have to call the relay center first and then tell the phone
             number etc to call. It will be done automatically. A number
             will first checked in the address book in case of direct calls
             not requiring a relay center, if not, the UA will connect to
             the relay center and call the callee automatically. Ordering
             Pizza for example.

          14.  The UE SHOULD be able to place calls anonymously, a ôcloakö
             option that prevents the relay service to receive the caller-ID
             etc. In cloak mode, the UE sends a modified INVITE to the relay
             service with a random caller-ID and a tag indicating that this
             is an anonymous call. The relay center proxies MUST hide all
             via and route-record headers so that the call cannot be traced.
             The relay center MUST be required to make sure that there is no
             trace from the center to the UE.


       7. Security Considerations

          Because an interpreter is generally required when a Deaf
          individual has a conversation with a non-deaf individual, whether
          in person or using a medium such as the telephone, interpreters
          are privy to a great deal of private information.  For this


       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 6 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


          reason, both the Deaf and interpreter communities are vitally
          interested in the ethics and professionalism of the interpreter.
          Interpreters in the United States that are certified by the
          organizations recognized by the Deaf Community, such as the
          National Association of the Deaf (NAD[10]) and the Registry of
          Interpreters for the Deaf (RID[11]), are required as part of their
          certification to support the Codes of Ethics of their
          organizations.

          Hence these requirements:

          All relay operators and other interpreters or organizations
          involved in relaying calls SHALL be required to subscribe to a
          generally accepted Code of Ethics for interpreters. As an example,
          the Code of Ethics required for membership in RID is as follows:

               ôThe Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Inc. has set
               forth the following principles of ethical behavior to protect
               and guide interpreters and transliterators and hearing and
               deaf consumers. Underlying these principles is the desire to
               insure for all the right to communicate.

               ôThis Code of Ethics applies to all members of the Registry
               of Interpreters for the Deaf, Inc. and to all certified non-
               members.

               1.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall keep all assignment-
                  related information strictly confidential.

               2.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall render the message
                  faithfully, always conveying the content and spirit of the
                  speaker using language most readily understood by the
                  person(s) whom they serve.

               3.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall not counsel, advise or
                  interject personal opinions.

               4.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall accept assignments
                  using discretion with regard to skill, setting, and the
                  consumers involved.

               5.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall request compensation
                  for services in a professional and judicious manner.

               6.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall function in a manner
                  appropriate to the situation.

               7.                   Interpreters/transliterators shall strive to further
                  knowledge and skills through participation in workshops,
                  professional meetings, interaction with professional
                  colleagues, and reading of current literature in the



       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 7 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000


                  field.

               Interpreters/transliterators, by virtue of membership or
               certification by the RID, Inc., shall strive to maintain high
               professional standards in compliance with the Code of Ethics.

               This Code of Ethics is widely accepted and supported as a
               standard within the American Deaf community and the American
               community of interpreters.  More information on RID can be
               found from the organizationÆs web site, see reference [10].

          In addition to the standards required for individual relay
          operators, interpreters, and companies that provide relay
          services, the actually transmissions MUST be secured.  One option
          for this could be IPSEC.

          An extension to the requirement for ôcloakingö: relay
          operators/interpreters MAY act on behalf of the user, at the
          request of the user.  For example, the user can ask the operator
          to call a company to file a complaint.  This requires
          confidentially and an extension to the usual role of an
          interpreter.



       8. References and Footnotes

       [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
            9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

       [2]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement
            levels".  Request for Comments 2119, Internet Engineering Task
            Force. March 1997.

       [3]  TTY: an acronym for a text telephone device used by Deaf
            individuals to communicate via telephone systems;  commonly
            referred to as a ôTDDö by the hearing community.

       [4]  M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
            Session Initiation Protocol". Request for Comments 2543,
            Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1999.

       [5]  M. Handley and V. Jacobson. "SDP: Session Description Protocol."
            Request for Comments 2327, Internet Engineering Task Force,
            April 1998.

       [6]  "Culturally Deaf" individuals are people who have some degree of
            hearing loss but consider themselves as Deaf, not "hearing
            impaired". They tend to identify themselves as members of the
            American Deaf Culture, a unique cultural minority in America.
            See [8] for more details.



       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 8 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000




       [7]  "Audiologically deaf" individuals are people who have some
            degree of hearing loss but who tend to identify themselves as
            "hearing impaired" and as members of the majority hearing
            culture in America, not as part of Deaf Culture. See [8] for
            more details.


       [8] "American Sign Language":  the natural manual language used by
            the members of Deaf Culture in America.  For a more in-depth
            description of this language and its central role in the Deaf
            Community in America, see the text "_American Sign Language: A
            Teacher's Resource Text on Grammar and Culture_" by Charlotte
            Baker-Shenk and Dennis Cokely.  See also the suggested readings
            listed in the Background section of this document.

       [9]  H. Schulzrinne and J. Rosenberg, "SIP caller preferences and
            callee capabilities," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task
            Force, July 2000.  Work in progress.

       [10] National Association of the Deaf.  A national organization of,
            for, and operated by Americans who are Deaf or deaf.  Organized
            in 1880, it is "the oldest and largest organization representing
            people with disabilities in the United States.  The NAD
            safeguards the accessibility and civil rights of 28 million deaf
            and hard of hearing Americans in a variety of areas including
            education, employment, health care and social services, and
            telecommunications. A private, non-profit 501(c)(3)
            organization, the NAD is a dynamic federation of 51 state
            association affiliates, sponsoring and organizational
            affiliates, and direct members."  See "www.nad.org" for more
            information on this organization.

       [11] Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf (RID).  A national,
            professional organization of interpreters and transliterators
            for the Deaf in America.  "The philosophy of RID is that
            excellence in the delivery of interpretation and transliteration
            services among people who are Deaf, or Hard of Hearing, and
            people who are hearing, will ensure effective communication. As
            the professional association for interpreters and
            transliterators, the RID serves as an essential arena for its
            members in their pursuit of excellence.  It is the mission of
            the Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Inc., to provide
            international, national, regional, state, and local forums and
            an organizational structure for the continued growth and
            development of the professions of interpretation and
            transliteration of American Sign Language and English."   See
            "www.rid.org" for detailed information on this organization.





       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                             [Page 9 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000



       10  Acknowledgments

          The authors would like to acknowledge Jonathan Rosenberg, et al,
          for the initial draft "SIP Enabled Services to Support the Hearing
          Impaired" [Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, July
          13, 2000.  Work in progress], which began the analysis that has
          led to this document.

          The authors would also like to thank the following Deaf
          individuals, professional interpreters, and others who have
          contributed to the development of this document:
             Mr. Charles Estes, WCom
             Ms. Helene Cohen-Gilbert, Coordinator, Collin County Community
                     College:  Interpreter Preparation Program û Deaf.
             Mr. Grant Laird,
             Mr. Brenden Gilbert




       11. Author's Addresses


          Cathy Gearhart
          Ericsson, Inc.
          P.O. Box 833675, M/S L-04
          Richardson, TX 75083-3875
          email: cathy.gearhart@ericsson.com

          Arnoud van Wijk
          Ericsson EuroLab Netherlands BV
          P.O. Box 8
          5120 AA Rijen
          The Netherlands
          Fax: +31-161-247569
          email: Arnoud.van.Wijk@eln.ericsson.se

          Henry Sinnreich
          MCI Worldcom
          400 International Parkway
          Richardson, Texas 75081
          email:henry.sinnreich@wcom.com











       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                            [Page 10 of 11]

       SIP for Deaf and Speech Impaired Customers               November 2000



       Full Copyright Statement

          "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
          This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
          to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
          explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared,
          copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
          restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
          and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
          works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any
          way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the
          Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
          for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
          procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards
          process must be followed, or as required to translate it into







































       Gearhart/van Wijk/Sinnreich                            [Page 11 of 11]
