

Network Working Group                                                 
Internet Draft                                                        
Document: draft-luciani-ppvpn-vpn-discovery-01.txt                    
                                                                      
James Luciani                                             Matt Squire 
Crescent Networks                                   Hatteras Networks 
                                                                      
Marty Borden                                         Cedell Alexander 
Atrica                                                    Olen Stokes 
                                                     Extreme Networks 
Pierre Lin                                                            
Yipes                                                   Juha Heinanen 
                                                                Telia 
Loa Andersson                                                         
Utfors                                                    Ryan Brooks 
                                                  Time Warner Telecom 
Giles Heron                                                           
PacketExchange Ltd.                                                   
                                                       September 2001 
 
 
                      Using DNS for VPN Discovery 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 Abstract 
    
   Virtual private networks are becoming a common service offered by 
   service providers.  There are many technologies over which to 
   implement a VPN service, ranging from IPSec to GRE to MPLS.  A 
   common requirement of the VPN methodologies is the need to discover 
   all of the sites, or at least all the provider equipment associated 
   with the sites, that are in a particular VPN.   DNS provides a 
   simple and commonly available means for site discovery that is 
   independent of any signaling protocol. 
    
  
                                                              [Page 1] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
1  Introduction 
    
   Virtual networking services are being offered by more and more 
   Service providers. There are many flavors of VPNs available in the 
   market today, depending on the customer requirements and provider 
   abilities.  There are a variety of data encapsulations used to 
   transport data between customer sites.  VPNs may be offered as Layer 
   2 or Layer 3 services.  VPNs may be based on an overlay model or a 
   virtual router model.  Other variations are possible.   
    
   A VPN consists of a set of customer sites interconnected by one or 
   more provider networks, providing the semblance of private 
   connectivity between the sites over either a private or public 
   backbone network.  The following terminology will be used 
   throughout. Customer edge equipment (CE) is located at each customer 
   site and potentially operated independently from the service 
   provider equipment, and may be operated by the customer.  The CE 
   equipment is connected to provider edge equipment (PE) that sits at 
   the boundary of the provider network.  The PE equipment surrounds a 
   core provider equipment (P).  This is depicted in Figure 1. 
    
    
         A---|------|       |-----|        |------|---A  
             |  PE  |-------|  P  |--------|  PE  |  
         A---|------|       |-----|        |------|---B  
                |                              |  
                |                              |  
                |       Service Provider       |  
                |       Backbone Network       |  
                |                              |  
                |          |------|            |  
                |----------|  PE  |------------|  
                           |------|  
                            | | |  
                            | | |  
                            A A B  
        
                   A: Company A Virtual Network  
                   B: Company B Virtual Network 
 
                 Figure 1. Virtual Network Model 
    
   Each PE supporting a particular VPN must be in a multi-access 
   network with all other PEs supporting that same VPN.   
    
   There is a concept called Pseudo Wires (PW), where L2 data packets 
   are carried in a point-to-point fashion transparently across a 
   network [pwe3].  There is also the concept of a Virtual Private LAN 
   Service [TLS] wherein an Ethernet virtual 802.1d bridge is simulated 
   for a given set of users.  A VPLS delivers a layer 2 broadcast 
   domain that is fully capable of learning and forwarding on Ethernet 
   MAC addresses, and is closed to a given set of users.  All of these 
   services would benefit from a common set of mechanisms and functions 
  
                                                              [Page 2] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
   in order to promote interoperability and co-existence. In this 
   document the term ôVPNö is used to address L2 and L3 VPNs, as well 
   as the PWs and VPLS. 
    
   Certain base functions are common to many of the technologies used 
   to build VPNs.  Two such functions are Discovery and Signaling: 
     * Discovery.  An optional but incredibly beneficial function where 
       a PE device involved in a particular VPN discovers the other PE 
       equipment in that VPN. 
     * Signaling.  In many cases, a signaling protocol is required 
       between PE equipment so that particular data flows can be 
       identified and correlated with the VPN.   
    
   These functions can be and are implemented in many and various ways.   
    
   To date, proposals for discovery have focused on piggy-backing VPN 
   information on BGP and IGP routing protocols.   This method has the 
   unfortunate effect of increasing the size of routing tables within 
   the set of affected provider domains, even for those devices that 
   are not involved in the VPN.  This increase in size may be quite 
   significant in some cases.   
    
   There are other disadvantages to linking discovery and signaling to 
   each other, and to an existing routing protocol.  Routing changes or 
   recalculations could interfere with the discovery and signaling 
   functions of VPNs.  When PE equipment is connected with explicitly 
   routed LSPs, for example, such interference is completely 
   unwarranted.  Likewise, VPN changes (adding or deleting VPN support) 
   impact routing, as this information must be propagated across the 
   network via the routing protocol.    
    
   Signaling between PE equipment is required to identify which tunnels 
   are used for which VPNs, to correlate two unidirectional tunnels 
   together to form a bi-directional virtual link, and to give some 
   indication on how to mux/demux traffic from multiple VPNs onto a 
   single tunnel.  VPN signaling enhancements have been proposed for 
   LDP, RSVP-TE, CR-LDP, BGP, and OSPF.  Note that correlating two 
   unidirectional tunnels is only applicable when the underlying data 
   transport technology is MPLS.   
     
    
    
    
    
    
1.1 Specification of Requirements 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT","SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
    
 
  
                                                              [Page 3] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
2  Heirarchical VPN Identifiers 
    
   It is highly desirable to use hierarchical identifiers to identify 
   VPN specific information.  Hierarchical identifiers permit each 
   organization to guide the use of its own identifier space. 
   DNS names satisfy a hierarchical naming scheme, and they have an 
   advantage over numeric schemes in that the user can often infer 
   semantics from the identifier (e.g., bobsVpn.serviceProvider.net 
   versus <AS 10, ID 64>). 
    
    
3  Using DNS for Discovery 
    
   DNS provides mechanisms to resolve a DNS name into a set of IP 
   addresses.  Normally, these addresses are interpreted as an 
   ôanycastö identifier, i.e., any of the addresses can be used to 
   provide connectivity to the named service. When using DNS for VPN 
   resolution, *all* of the addresses are used and are taken to 
   identify the set of PE equipment that supports the named VPN.  Thus, 
   when a PE 10.1.1.1 resolves bobsVpn.serviceProvider.net into 
   {10.1.1.1, 10.2.1.1, 10.5.1.1}, that PE has the IP addresses of the 
   other PEs serving customer sites in bobsVpn.serviceProvider.net.   
   The PE can then initiate signaling to these other addresses in order 
   to establish the bi-directional tunnel for data transfers.   
    
   [HEINVC] and [HEINETH] describe directory/DNS based approaches 
   which, in conjunction with LDP, enable PE discovery and label 
   distribution for unidirectional VC based VPNs and Ethernet based 
   VPNs respectively. 
    
    
4  Interactions with Signaling 
    
   Current signaling proposals use some variation of a VPN identifier 
   to indicate the VPN that will be used on that specific data channel.  
   These VPN identifiers are of fixed length and potentially with some 
   semantic interpretation.  In LDP, this VPN identifier (the VC ID) is 
   unique to a pair of PE devices, not globally unique, and not unique 
   to a single PE.  Thus coordination of the VC IDs is required.   
    
   Although DNS discovery can be used without modifications to 
   signaling, configuration is reduced if the identifiers used in 
   signaling matches the identifier used in discovery.  Without 
   signaling enhancements, the VPN DNS name must be mapped to the VPN 
   identifier via manual configuration.  Note that this is still 
   preferable to no discovery at all as using DNS names still provides 
   a mechanism to add and delete customer sites to particular VPNs.  
   The <vpn name, vpnid> mapping issue might also be resolved by 
   including the VPNID (route distinguisher) in the name, e.g., 
   64.10.vpn.isp.fi. 
    
   Some guidelines when using DNS with an explicit signaling protocol 
   are: 
  
                                                              [Page 4] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
     1.         Resolvers SHOULD refresh VPN DNS names resolved for VPN 
        purposes before their TTL expires.  It may be desirable to set 
        the TTL=0 in the A record in order to guarantee an authorative 
        up to the minute response to a DNS query. 
     2.         A PE MUST use the address as identified in the A record of the 
        DNS entry as its source address when signaling other PE 
        equipment in the VPN. 
     3.         If a PE receives a signaled request from a PE not currently in 
        the set of PE addresses associated with a VPN, the PE SHOULD 
        re-request the DNS information for the VPN DNS name.  If the 
        requestor source IP address is still not in the list of A 
        records, the request SHOULD be rejected.  If the requestor 
        source IP address is in the list of A records, the request 
        SHOULD be accepted.   
     4.         When a refresh or new query results in any A records to which 
        the local PE is not currently connected to for this VPN, and 
        which is not one of its own IP addresses, the local PE 
        equipment SHOULD initiate signaling to those newly discovered 
        addresses.  
     5.         When a signaled request to a PE device that was listed in the A 
        records for a VPN DNS name is rejected by the destination, the 
        request should be retried using exponential backoff.   
     6.         All client interactions with a DNS server SHOULD attempt to use 
        UDP initially.  If the DNS response comes back with the TC bits 
        set then the client MUST attempt to use TCP in order to obtain 
        the entire list of A records.  
    
   As a potential modification to the above approach, it might be 
   preferable to design a new resource record type which is explicitly 
   designed to apply to the semantics of DNS based VPN discovery.  This 
   is for further study. 
    
   As a general note on doing name resolution across providers, 
   concerns about ownership of the namespace should be somewhat allayed 
   by the fact that even if a VPN spans multiple providers and ASes, it 
   tends to be "owned" by one organization.  That may be one of the 
   service providers or the customer himself.   
    
    
5  Examples 
    
   [MARTINI] provide mechanisms for forming a point-to-point L2 VPN 
   between two sites.  In the proposal, each side must be configured 
   with the address of the other endpoint of the tunnel, a VC ID, and a 
   group ID.  The VC ID and group ID have no semantics, they are used 
   simply to identify the two unidirectional components of a logical 
   bi-directional link. The group ID has additional function in the 
   wildcard removals of associations, but that function is not 
   applicable to this discussion. At the PE equipment, a particular VPN 
   (VLAN, DLCI, etc.) is associated with the tunnel definition 
   (endpoint, VC ID, group ID) via configuration.   
    
  
                                                              [Page 5] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
   Unfortunately, the VC ID and group ID are not hierarchical, and thus 
   if when crossing administrative boundaries its conceivable that 
   matching numbers are not available in all domains.  Thus the short 
   flat VC ID space is very limited.  Coordination among the domains 
   managing the edge devices is required. 
    
   When generalizing [MARTINI] to a full mesh topology, the problem of 
   configuring the peers becomes more problematic as each peer must be 
   configured with the address of every other.  Additionally, the 
   configuration of more PEs must be correlated in the group and VC 
   IDs.   
    
   It would be simpler if the PEs could simply be configured with the 
   VPN DNS name, the associated VPN (VLAN, DLCI, etc.), and the group 
   ID.  The peers could then be discovered via DNS resolution, and the 
   VPN DNS name could be used in signaling (instead of the VC ID) to 
   determine the data channels for this VPN.   
    
   Although this section discussed DNS based discovery based on the 
   [MARTINI] techniques, the discovery mechanism is generally 
   applicable to any environment where LDP, CR-LDP, or RSVP-TE is used 
   for signaling (rather than routing protocols as discussed in earlier 
   sections). 
    
    
6  Security Considerations 
    
   A Virtual private network, by its very nature implements a policy, 
   as agreed upon between the customer and provider, that hides 
   information about the customerÆs VPN from others.  It is reasonable 
   to assume that this policy would require restricting anyone other 
   than the customer from deriving that customerÆs sites using 
   mechanisms of the provider.  An even more important security 
   requirement is that a customer not be able to manipulate the site 
   information about another customer.  (It is possible that the 
   provider may wish to allow customers to manipulate their own site 
   information, although this would likely be done through an indirect 
   method.) 
    
     As discovery is only the first step in establishing a VPN, 
   implementing security in discovery in no way secures a VPN.  
   Likewise, not having a secure discovery process does not imply that 
   the VPN is not secure.  In the end, the provider must prevent 
   unauthorized access to the VPN data streams.  Knowing which PEs 
   participate in a VPN has little impact on that security requirement.   
    
   For those providers that wish to secure the discovery process 
   itself, DNS includes many security enhancements.  For example, DNS 
   implementations commonly provide access control lists (ACLs) that 
   could be used to prevent unauthorized sources from resolving 
   particular domains, thus preventing unauthorized sources from 
   obtaining information on DNS membership.  Additionally, DNSSEC 
  
                                                              [Page 6] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
   provides methods to authenticate the validity of DNS information, 
   allowing a resolver to authenticate the information.    
    
   DNS also provides a dynamic update ability that could conceivably be 
   used to provide PE equipment with the ability to register itself 
   with the DNS server upon configuration into a particular VPN.  These 
   possibilities are recognized but not investigated within this draft.   
    
7  Issues  
    
   We list some issues that are not resolved or discussed in this draft 
   that will be considered in future revisions of the draft.  
        * Specific recommendations for TLV formats for LDP, RSVP-TE, 
          and CR-LDP and inter-working with current Martini proposal. 
        * Discuss issues of scale (how many PE sites can be supported)?   
    
    
8  References
 
   [RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
      3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [MARTINI] Martini, Luca, et al., "Transport of Layer 2 Frames Over 
      MPLS", draft-martini-l2circuit-trans-mpls-05.txt, Work in 
      Progress. 
    
   [TLS] Lasserre, Marc, et al., " Transparent VLAN Services over 
      MPLS", draft-lasserre-tls-mpls-00.txt, Work in Progress. 
    
   [PWE3] Xiao, XiPeng, et al.,"Requirements for Pseudo-Wre Emulation 
      Edge-to-Edge (PWE3)",draft-ietf-pwe3-requirements-01.txt, Work in 
      Progress. 
    
   [HEINVC] Heinanen, J., "Directory/LDP Based Unidirectional Virtual 
      Circuit VPNs", draft-heinanen-dirldp-uni-vc-vpns-01.txt, Work in 
      Progress. 
 
   [HEINETH] Heinanen, J., "Directory/LDP Based Ethernet VPNs", draft-
      heinanen-dirldp-eth-vpns-00.txt, Work in Progress. 
    
9  Acknowledgments 
    
    
 
10 Author's Addresses 
    
   Matt Squire 
   Hatteras Networks 
   639 Davis Drive 
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
   Email: msquire@hatterasnetworks.com 
    
   James V. Luciani 
  
                                                              [Page 7] 
                draft-many-ppvpn-VPN-discovery-00.txt  September 2001 
 
 
   Crescent Networks 
   900 Chelmsford 
   Lowell, MA 01851 
   Email: jluciani@crescentnetworks.com 
    
   Marty Borden 
   Atrica, Inc. 
   Email: mborden@acm.org 
    
   Cedell Alexander 
   Olen Stokes 
   Extreme Networks 
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
   Email: calexander@extremenetworks.com, ostokes@extremenetworks.com 
    
   Pierre Lin 
   Yipes Communications, Inc. 
   Email: plin@yipes.com 
    
   Juha Heinanen 
   Telia Finland 
   Email: jh@telia.fi 
    
   Loa Andersson 
   Utfors Research, Architecture and Future Lab (URAX) 
   Utfors AB 
   R…sundav„gen 12 
   Box 525, 169 29 Solna, Sweden 
   Office: +46 8 5270 2000 
   Email: loa.andersson@utfors.se 
    
   Ryan K. Brooks 
   Time Warner Telecom, Inc. 
   3235 Intertech Drive 
   Brookfield, WI 53045 
   Email: ryan@twtelecom.net 
    
   Giles Heron 
   PacketExchange Ltd. 
   The Truman Brewery 
   91 Brick Lane 
   LONDON E1 6QL 
   United Kingdom 
   Tel.: +44 7880 506185 
   Email: giles@packetexchange.net 
  
                                                              [Page 8] 
