


INTERNET-DRAFT                                              Yoram Bernet
Diffserv Working Group                                         Microsoft
Expires: November 1998                                      James Binder
                                                                    3Com
                                                            Steven Blake
                                                                     IBM 
                                                            Mark Carlson
                                                        Redcape Software
                                                            Elwyn Davies
                                                               Nortel UK
                                                            Borje Ohlman
                                                                Ericsson
                                                            Dinesh Verma
                                                                     IBM
                                                              Zheng Wang
                                           Bell Labs Lucent Technologies
                                                            Walter Weiss
                                                     Lucent Technologies

                                                                May 1998


                  A Framework for Differentiated Services


                  <draft-ietf-diffserv-framework-00.txt>


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   This document provides a general description of issues related to the
   definition, configuration, and management of services enabled by the
   differentiated services architecture [DSARCH].  It should be
   considered as a work-in-progress.


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  1]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   Sec. 1 provides a motivation for the deployment of differentiated
   services.  Sec. 2 examines the range of services that are enabled
   by the differentiated services architecture.  Sec. 3 examines
   service instantiation, configuration, and management issues.  Sec. 4
   discusses issues relating to the deployment of differentiated
   services across multiple provider boundaries or end-to-end.  Sec. 5
   addresses interoperability with the Integrated Services.


1.  Motivation

   A service is a contract between a network provider and its customer,
   which outlines the characteristics and behavior of network
   connectivity offered by the provider to the customer.  The network
   provider may be an Internet Service Provider whose customers include
   individual users or corporations, an I/T department within an
   enterprise, or a networking company to which the operations of an
   enterprise network has been outsourced.  Individual users would
   typically access the network at a single point, while businesses may
   have multiple access-points to the network.

   A service level agreement (SLA) may specify different aspects of
   network behavior, such as the security to be expected by the
   customer, constraints on the type and amount of data that can be sent
   on the network, and the performance aspects of communication.  The
   SLA would typically also include a payment/billing scenario as well
   as the performance (both up time as well as throughput) aspects
   expected with the associated contract.

   While services can be differentiated from each other by various
   aspects, we concentrate on service differentiation from the
   performance aspect only in this document.  Traditionally, network
   providers have tended to provide all of their customers with the same
   type of performance (a best-effort service), with most
   differentiation resulting from the pricing structure (business rates
   versus individual rates) or the connectivity structure (dial-in
   access versus leased line T1 access, etc.).  However, the size of the
   Internet continues to grow at an astounding rate, and network
   capacity has become a scarce resource.  Given new types of media and
   the further reliance on the network as a mission critical resource,
   there is a need felt by the network providers to offer different
   types or grades of performance to customers, with network providers
   offering better performance to customers who are willing to pay more.

   The key aspects determining service performance are availability and
   responsiveness.  Availability refers to the ability of a customer to
   maintain connectivity between its access points on the provider
   network, while responsiveness refers to the round-trip delay and
   throughputs seen by the customer on its communication.

   This document presents a framework for service definition and service
   differentiation in the context of a differentiated service domain as


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  2]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   described in [DSARCH].


2.  Services

2.1  Service Categorization

   In order to provide the notion of differentiated services, the
   network provider needs to be able to categorize traffic entering its
   network into multiple categories.  Each of the categories of traffic
   is marked with a codepoint as described in [DSARCH].  These
   codepoints (or per-hop behaviors (PHBs)) in turn can be used to build
   a specific service offered by the Network Provider to the customer.
   Service differentiation may be made along multiple dimensions.

   A provider may offer a customer a service which provides different
   performance assurances to packets being received by the customer from
   the provider network, or to packets being sent from the customer
   network into the provider network, or a combination of the above.  A
   business hosting a web-site might have a contract with its ISP, which
   enables the responses out from the web-server to be carried at a
   better performance level than the default.  One business may not want
   to pay for a better performance level for requests trying to reach
   its server, while a third business may be willing to pay more both
   for its requests as well as responses.   Depending on the type of
   service contract between the customer and the provider, the network
   may control packets being sent into it, packets being sent out of it,
   or both.

   A service may be defined which is dependent on the time-of-day.  A
   customer may want a better performance of service during business
   hours, and may choose to revert to the default behavior during off-
   hours.  A customer may require that a different path be offered to
   its packets which satisfy certain constraints (e.g., a minimum of T1
   capacity along any link connecting the service), or meet certain
   geographical or topological constraints (e.g., packets must not leave
   the boundaries of the United States).

   A service may be defined based on the performance level to be
   expected between a pair of customer access points to the network.
   Thus, one may define a service, which would offer statistical bounds
   on the delay or loss rate to be experienced between two access-
   points.  While such performance bounds may be different for different
   access-points, some providers may choose to offer a service, which
   would provide the minimum acceptable performance among any two points
   on the customer network.

   Such performance assurances may be coupled with constraints on how
   much traffic a customer may inject into the provider's network.

   A service may be defined on the basis of the fault tolerance
   properties that are offered to the customer.  The service may specify


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  3]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   resumption of the service within a certain limit of time, or promise
   upper bounds on the total connectivity downtime over a period of time
   or the amount of traffic which is dropped due to congestion over a
   given period of time.

   Services, as may be obvious from the preceding paragraphs, could be
   quite varied and rich in context.  Different ISP's or vendors may
   offer different types of services to their customers over the
   network.  These diverse services need to be supported and mapped onto
   a few PHBs within the DS domain of the network provider.  In Section
   2.3, we offer some examples of the services that may be offered by a
   network provider, and illustrate how they could be supported using a
   few simple PHBs.

   A service agreement between a customer and a provider is usually
   captured in the form of a SLA.  The SLA is normally in the form of a
   binding business contract, which specifies the features and
   performance requirements of the service provided, as well as traffic
   profiles and/or corresponding packet marking requirements that are
   captured in a traffic conditioning agreement (TCA) [DSARCH].  SLA's
   may be static or dynamic.  Static SLAs, that are the norm at the
   present time, are defined at service initiation time, and do not
   change frequently.  Static SLAs may include the provision of specific
   performance levels to a selected set of applications, time-of-day
   changes in performance requirements, and changes dependent on network
   load, as long as the specific agreement between the customer and
   provider does not change.  Dynamic SLAs, on the other hand, are 
   possibly subject to frequent changes, and may require an automated
   protocol such as the bandwidth broker [BB] or other methods between
   the customer and the network.

2.1.1  Sample SLA

   The following example illustrates a boundary between two networks and
   a simple static SLA:

   The customer's network sends traffic to the provider's network via
   the customer's egress router.  The provider's network receives
   traffic from the customer's network via the provider's ingress
   router.  The SLA takes the following form:

     Service Level Profile

       Premium      R =  100 Kbps, b = 1000 bytes, r = 100 Kbps

       Assured Gold R = 1000 Kbps, b = 1000 bytes, r = 250 Kbps

       (where R: peak rate, b: burst size, r: average rate)

   Some of the characteristics that might be used to describe an SLA
   between a customer and a service provider are discussed in the
   following paragraphs.


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  4]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   2.1.1.1  Qualitative Performance and Quantitative Performance

   SLAs may characterize Performance levels in qualitative (i.e.,
   relative) terms, or in absolute quantitative terms.  An example of a
   qualitative performance guarantee would be "Traffic from stream A
   will be given priority over traffic from stream B".  An example of a
   quantitative performance guarantee would be "Traffic from stream A,
   if provisioned at an average rate of 100 Kbps, with bursts not
   exceeding 64 KB allowed at a peak rate of 1 Mbps, will then have a
   loss rate of no more than 0.001%, when averaged over the interval of
   1 hour".

   2.1.1.2  Throughput Characteristics

   Throughput characteristics (sometimes referred to as Token Bucket
   Models) are another means to define a quantitative SLA.  This model
   could be used to describe a service that guarantees to deliver
   traffic at a certain sustained rate and to accommodate bursts of a
   limited size up to a certain peak rate.

   2.1.1.3  Latency Parameters

   A SLA may define maximum latency (or delay) as well as jitter bounds
   for any packet within a specifically marked traffic stream within a
   certain traffic profile.

   2.1.1.4  Packet Loss (or Drop) Probability

   A service may guarantee a limit on the percentage of packets dropped
   from a certain flow.  Typically, such a service is defined using
   token bucket parameters and a drop probability.

   This is typically a relative contract.  For example - "When traffic
   from flow A conforms to X token bucket parameters, it is 90% less
   likely to be dropped than traffic from flow B.  If it does not
   conform to the profile..."

   2.1.1.5  Additional Performance Parameters

   Additional performance parameters may be offered using
   specific PHBs. differentiated services does not dictate a
   specific set of performance parameters.

2.1.2  Service Constraints

   SLAs may be offered which meet certain constraints in addition to
   those listed above. Two of the most obvious constraints are Locality
   and Time.

   2.1.2.1  Flow Locality-based Constraints

   SLAs may be offered only for communication between specific ingress


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  5]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   and egress points.  Others may allow combinations of various ingress
   or egress points.  For example, services may be offered:

     a. For all traffic between ingress point A and egress point B.

     b. For all traffic originating at ingress A, to any egress
        point.

     c. For all traffic originating at any ingress point, to egress
        point B.

     d. For traffic from the group of ingress points A to the group
        of egress points B.

   2.1.2.2  Time based Constraints

   These SLAs would typically specify a reduced or improved performance
   service for certain hours of the day and/or days of the week or
   month.

2.1.3  Other Service Characteristics

   Although differentiated services focuses primarily on performance
   related characteristics, other non-performance characteristics may be
   offered as part of a contract.

   Examples of these non-performance-based characteristics might
   include: availability and reliability, security (e.g., encryption).

   The SLA shown in Sec. 2.1.1 defines two levels of service to the
   customer at the specific boundary [CLARK].


2.2  Service Provisioning

   In order to support a range of different services, a network would
   map all traffic into one or more of the PHBs that it supports.  One
   of the preconditions for satisfactory performance of the network is
   that the provider provision its network so as to be able to meet the
   performance needs of the customers under normal operating conditions
   according to the negotiated SLAs.  Thus, adequate attention must be
   given to the right selection of the speed of the network links
   available within the DS domain of the network provider.

   The provisioning of the network would be done on the basis of the
   predicted (or contracted) traffic, which the network provider would
   expect from its customers.  The provisioning decision has to take
   into account the needs for traffic belonging to different PHBs.

   Let us examine two simple cases of PHBs that can be supported in the
   provider network.  [DSHEAD] specifies two PHBs, an Expedited
   Forwarding PHB and a Default PHB.  Packets marked with the Expedited


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  6]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   Forwarding PHB are put into a queue which is serviced frequently, and
   packets belonging to the Default PHB are serviced less frequently
   when the Expedited Forwarding queue is non-empty.  Within this
   context, the network may expect a certain amount of traffic marked
   with the Expedited Forwarding PHB between its various access points,
   and a different amount of traffic marked by the Default PHB between
   the different access-points.  In order to meet the desired
   performance goals of the network, the network provider may decide to
   provision the links in its network, or conversely, the SLAs, so that
   the expected load due to Expedited Forwarding traffic on any node/
   link in the network does not exceed a fixed percentage (e.g., 10%),
   and the expected load due to the combined (Expedited Forwarding and
   Default) traffic on any other element does not exceed another
   (higher) percentage (e.g., 90%).  There are well-established tools
   and algorithms, which would enable the network provider to obtain an
   optimum configuration of the network to satisfy these constraints.

   Another PHB case may consist of defining a limited number of output
   queues (e.g., four) at each of the routers in the DS domain.  A
   packet marked with one of the distinct codepoints is placed into one
   of the four queues in the network.  The queues are served using a
   algorithm according to weights which are configured by the network
   provider at the different routers.  The network provider would
   compute the expected distribution of traffic at each of the network
   elements belonging to each codepoint.  It would then assign weights
   at the different routers so that they match the ratio of the
   different traffic load expected at the specific router.  With this
   provisioning of the network, the provider can expect to satisfy the
   average load on the network in a satisfactory manner.

   In either of the two cases (or any other network provisioning case)
   described above, the network provider's predictions of traffic may
   not match the actual usage of the network.   When the actual usage of
   traffic exceeds the provisioned traffic for any specified codepoint,
   the network provider may choose to regulate the amount of traffic
   that could be allowed into the network for a specific codepoint.  The
   excess traffic may be discarded, smoothed, or converted to another
   codepoint, or just billed at a different rate depending on the
   policies adopted by the network provider.

   A network provider would typically run metering and accounting
   software on the access points to estimate the amount of traffic
   flowing between its different customer access-points.   An estimation
   of the these traffic flows can then be used in order to provide
   admission control of traffic belonging to different codepoints in the
   network (assuming some form of admission control protocol or policy
   is in place).

   When the network provider opts to use admission control to limit the
   amount of traffic belonging to different codepoints (and hence
   enforce or validate a given SLA), each access-point has a limit on
   the amount of traffic it can inject into the network.  The limit may


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  7]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   be enforced as an aggregate depending only on the codepoint of the
   traffic entering the network, or enforced on separate traffic streams
   which may be defined by the codepoint of the traffic as well as by
   other header field values, including the destination access-point
   (prefix) of the stream.  Access control on the basis of separate
   traffic flows or streams is better from the perspective of efficient
   network resource usage, but requires the ingress access-point to
   maintain more routing information to determine the egress access-
   point.  The shaping of the traffic based on some form of admission
   control could be distributed to the edges of the network (i.e., host
   or first-hop router) as needed.  If this is done, then minimal state
   is needed within the core of the network while still maintaining the
   SLA.

   In either of the two modes of access-control defined above, the DS
   network needs to determine the amount of bandwidth to be assigned to
   a specific codepoint at each access-node.  The amount of bandwidth
   may be obtained by management software in the network which
   determines the routing topology of the network, obtains the expected
   traffic at each access-point, and determines the correct admission
   control limits for the traffic at each access-point.  A distributed
   version with admission control daemons that track resource usage at
   each of the intermediate routers and hosts participating within the
   DS domain can also be used.


2.3  Service Examples

   In this section, we describe a few service examples, and show how
   some specific PHBs could support them.   We use two simple sets of
   PHBs.  The first set of PHBs consist of two codepoints, one
   specifying Expedited Forwarding behavior and the other specifying a
   Default behavior [DSHEAD].  The second set of PHBs consist of four
   codepoints, each specifying a different queue at each router, the
   queues being serviced on a weighed basis as configured by the network
   provider [DSPREC].

2.3.1  Services Enabled by First set of PHBs.

   The ISP offers three levels of service to the businesses that are
   hosting web-servers on its DS domain.  The "Preferred Service"
   enables users trying to access the business sites with better
   performance for both the request and response of the web-server. The
   "Special Service" enables users trying to access the business sites
   with better performance for the web-responses, while the "Normal
   Service" provides the default performance for both requests and
   responses.

   In order to provide the services using the Expedited Forwarding and
   Default PHBs, the network provider maintains a list of the addresses
   and ports at which the preferred and special clients' web-servers are
   operational.  For all packets in which either the source host/port


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  8]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   combination or the destination host/port combination identifies a
   preferred web-server, the packets are marked with the Expedited
   Forwarding codepoint.  If the source host/port combination indicates
   a special service web-server, the packets are also marked expedited.
   All other packets are marked with the default codepoint.  Using this
   scheme, the right type of performance is given to the customers
   hosting a preferred web-server.

   A second type of classification service may be provided by an ISP to
   its business clients using this PHB set.  For each of the business
   customers, some set of web-sites are identified as being more
   relevant to their business.  The ISP would provide expedited
   forwarding to traffic from the web-sites that are considered relevant
   to its business by the customer.  As opposed to the preferred/special
   service definition presented above, the customer accessing the web-
   site, not the person hosting the web-site, drives the classification.
   Such a marking can be done by supporting a PICS capable web-proxy at
   each ISP access-point which uses a business rating system to classify
   the web-pages into those relevant/irrelevant for a specific customer,
   and marking the packets as Expedited Forwarding/Default
   appropriately.

   Another example of service that can be provided using this is
   preferential service that may be given to "Premium Customers" when
   they use the network provider to provide connectivity between
   different customer premises.  The packets, which contain the source
   or destination addresses of the premium customers, are marked as
   Expedited Forwarding packets while the other packets are marked with
   the default codepoint.  For example, an enterprise with an out-
   sourced VPN which is replicating multiple databases or directories
   across different geographies or other mission critical functions
   across the VPN.

   In this example, all data being transmitted between the mission
   critical replicated servers would be classified as "Preferred
   Service" and given priority across the VPN (similar to a virtual
   leased line).  User traffic from outside the network destined to
   specific servers within the network (i.e., web-servers) might be
   given a different level of access called "Response Service".  This
   service would have other specific characteristics such as minimum
   response time, latency and availability requirements.  Any other
   traffic on the VPN would be marked as "Normal Service" and would be
   considered a best effort service, associated with the default PHB.

2.3.2  Services Enabled by the Second Set of PHBs

   An ISP offers two services to its customer.  The "voice" traffic
   results in a low bandwidth low-delay communication across the ISP
   network.  The "video" traffic results in a high-bandwidth low-delay
   communication across the ISP network.

   The  "data" traffic provides behavior equivalent to that found in


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page  9]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   current IP networks.

   The ISP supports these three modes of services by mapping them into
   the three different queues at each router.  The ISP periodically 
   recomputes the load and routing patterns of its voice and video
   connections, regenerates the weights on each backbone router to
   support this set of services, and reconfigures the router.

   A second service offered by the same ISP is that of a fixed bandwidth
   pipe.  The ISP offers a specific bandwidth between two access-points
   of its customer.  The ISP adjusts the weights of the different queues
   to meet the bandwidth requirements of all the customers passing
   through a router in the appropriate queue.  These weights are only
   recomputed when a new pipe is added or an existing pipe modified or
   deleted.


3.  Service Control Mechanisms

3.1  Service Allocation and Configuration

   Each access-point to a DS domain needs to be configured with the
   appropriate packet classification rules.  At each of the access-
   points, the provider of a specific DS-domain is either a provider to
   a customer, or may be a customer of yet another provider.  The
   support of a SLA requires that the configuration of functional
   components at the boundary be done with parameters that are designed
   to support the required SLA performance levels.  In order to support
   specific services, specific functionality may be required of the
   classifiers, meters, markers, shapers and policers at an access-
   point [DSARCH].

   Boundaries between two DS networks and between a DS and non-DS
   network, are of particular interest.  At each such boundary, at least
   one network is a customer and one is a provider. The provider agrees
   to carry certain subsets of the customer's traffic at certain service
   levels.  This agreement is captured in the form of an SLA.  Specific
   functionality is required at such boundaries, to serve the needs of
   the customer and the provider, subject to the SLA.  This section
   describes the methods by which such functionality may be configured.

3.1.1  Service Allocation

   Two types of SLA may exist, static and dynamic.  A static SLA changes
   infrequently (typically weekly, or monthly) and typically is
   renegotiated by human interaction.  Dynamic SLA's change frequently
   and typically are renegotiated via a machine to machine negotiation
   protocol of some sort.  Note that a static SLA may call for different
   service levels to be supported at different times of day, in which
   case, the service covered by the SLA changes automatically and
   somewhat frequently, however, the agreement itself does not change
   frequently.


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   In order to adhere to a SLA, it is useful to configure certain
   functional components at access-points.  These may include
   classifiers, meters, markers, shapers, and policers, as explained
   below.

   An access-point to a DS domain can run in one of two modes of
   classification, as a microflow or traffic stream classifier (MFC),
   or a bandwidth aggregate classifier (BAC).  As a MFC, the access-
   point classifies microflows (identified by the 5-tuple of src/dest IP
   addresses, src/dest ports and the protocol) or traffic streams 
   (identified by subsets of the 5-tuple) and marks the DS field
   according to the classification rules that are configured for it.  As
   a BAC, the access-point expects that the customer has already marked
   the DS field appropriately after running a MFC function on its own
   behalf, and only looks at the DS field.  Even as a BAC, the access-
   point may choose to remark the DS field as it may check the
   aggregated traffic level associated with the DS field to make sure it
   fits into limits defined for it by the appropriate SLA.  In either of
   the two modes, the access-point can perform the policing function on
   the aggregate stream as a result of the classification process.

   In the first mode, the customer applies no traffic conditioning.
   Instead, the customer contracts with the provider to do per-microflow
   or per-traffic stream classification, marking and policing.  In the
   second mode, the customer applies per-microflow/stream classification
   and marking.  In this case, the provider applies aggregate (per-
   service level) classification and policing, to assure compliance with
   the SLA.  It is assumed that all traffic from a single customer
   arrives at an interface dedicated to the customer.  If multiple
   customers share a single interface, it will be necessary to apply
   additional finer-grain classification for the purpose of
   conditioning.  Provider marking will typically be applied at the
   periphery of the DS domains, where a DS network connects to
   non-DS, stub networks.

   Shaping is not included in the above discussion, but may be
   recommended in the customer's network, or the provider's network or
   both.

   Typically, flows will be shaped within the customer's network.   By
   shaping at the microflow level, the customer can maintain traffic
   separation, ensuring that no microflow will seize more than its share
   of the aggregate DS domain resources guaranteed by the SLA.  By
   shaping at the aggregate stream level, the customer can assure 
   aggregate compliance with the SLA and for example can avoid charges
   that may have been negotiated as part of the SLA for excess traffic.
   However, by shaping at the aggregate stream level only, the customer
   cannot assure traffic separation once the traffic is injected into
   the service provider's network.

   Devices that do full microflow classification will be more complex
   than those that just offer bandwidth aggregation classification


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   support.  The costs associated with these devices will should be
   considered when determining where the classification and flow shaping
   should occur within the DS domain.  In certain cases, the customer
   may contract to have the provider apply microflow or aggregate
   shaping.  This is a form of value-add which providers may offer
   customers that are incapable of providing their own shaping.

   Obviously, wherever shaping is applied at a microflow level,
   microflow classifiers will be required.  Wherever shaping is applied
   at the behavior aggregate (BA) level, BA classifiers will be
   required.  In general, classifiers are required only to support other
   traffic conditioning functionality such as policing, marking, and/or
   shaping.  Subsequent discussion of specific functionality implies the
   co-existence of the appropriate classifier.

   A static SLA with marking performed by customer requires that the
   customer provide an MFC at or before its egress, and the provider
   provide a BA policer at the ingress access-point.  A static SLA with
   provider marking would require that the access-point support a MFC
   and BA policer at the ingress access-point.

3.1.2  Service Configuration

   Configuration requirements may vary depending on several parameters:

   Variations in the distribution of the configured functionality, e.g.,
   use of the MFC mode versus the BA mode, specific functional
   components being configured (policers versus markers), and the nature
   of the SLAs (static versus dynamic).  The functionality and
   operational mode of access-points (egress as well as ingress) need to
   be specified within a DS-domain.

   In order for the classification to work efficiently, it must be
   simple and easy to configure.  Furthermore, the configuration of
   different access-points must be consistent.  Otherwise, the
   performance of the service provided to the different customers may be
   erratic.  For example, assuming the preferred ISP service described
   in Section 2.3.1 is being supported, all the access-points must have
   an entry classifying the same set of sites into its "Preferred"
   class.  Note that consistency does not imply that the configuration
   information is identical for all the access-points.  In the special
   ISP service described in Section 2.3.1, the configuration entry for
   each web-server needs to be only present at the access-point to which
   the web-server is attached.

   The simplest approach to the configuration problem is to ignore it.
   The assumption would be that the ISP would configure each router
   manually, and in a static manner.  This solution requires extensive
   manual upgrade to each ISP router whenever a new service or a
   customer is added or deleted.  The solution would not work well in
   practice.



Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   Another option might be for the DS field to be marked with the
   correct PHB service request by hosts or first-hop routers within the
   CPE and then expedited through the ISP's (and billed based on this
   service) network as described.

   The ideal solution should provide a single administration point where
   the ISP can enter the configuration rules from a centralized site.
   The configuration information should also permit scalability, in that
   a large number of different ingress routers should be capable of
   receiving the configuration information.  At the same time, the
   configuration information should not become a single point of
   failure, which can bring the entire network to a halt.  One solution
   to the configuration problem is a protocol, which permits the
   administration at a single master site, but allows replication to
   several slave/mirror sites, which can be looked up by a large set of
   access-points to permit a scalable operation.

   Another desirable attribute for scalability would be the ability to
   cache a limited set of classification rules and to query other rules
   as and when needed.

   Several alternatives exist for such a configuration policy.  Some of
   these alternatives are outlined below:

   The SNMP MIB approach:

   One may define a diffserv-specific SNMP MIB that needs to be
   supported at each of the access-routers, and can be populated using a
   SNMP manager.  The MIB definition approach would enable a centralized
   administration of the configuration information.

   However, the MIB approach does not enable caching in an efficient
   manner.  Since the MIB for each access-point would have distinct
   entries, consistency would have to be enforced using a layer above
   the SNMP manager.

   The LDAP approach:

   One can store the configuration entries in a directory accessible
   using the LDAP protocol.  The directory is looked up at the
   initialization of the access-point.  Directories permit centralized
   administration at one master site, and support replication to
   different slave sites.  The access-point can also cache portions of
   the classification rules, and can query the appropriate rule when
   they detect the initiation of a new session (e.g. seeing a TCP header
   with the SYN flag).  The directory schemata also permit a way to
   provide configuration information for a group of access-point in a
   single entry, which can provide consistent configuration across
   several access-points.  The one drawback of the directory protocol is
   inadequate support for asynchronous notification, which is currently
   being discussed, in the various working groups.  A tentative schema
   for classification rules using this schema has been proposed in


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   [Ellesson].

   The COPS approach:

   One can extend the policy query protocol for RSVP to provide
   classification information for differentiated services.  COPS
   supports asynchronous notification in a better way but has not yet
   addressed issues of replication of classification rules at different
   sites [COPS].  COPS extensions that support diffserv semantics would
   need to be developed in order to use this approach.

   When dynamic SLA's are being supported, the above mentioned
   configuration approaches need to be augmented with a negotiation
   protocol between the customer and provider network to negotiate the
   current details of the service levels.  To this end, a standard
   protocol is required between customers and providers. Such a protocol
   would enable customers to present requests to providers that would
   result in changes to the SLA.  Entities within the provider's network
   would respond to these requests by determining if the requested SLA
   could be met, adjusting the policers accordingly and responding to
   the customer's request.  The bandwidth broker, as described in [BB]
   is such an entity.

   One realization of such a protocol is RSVP [RSVP].  Other protocols
   could also be devised for this purpose.

   3.1.2.1  Functionality Required at Boundary Equipment

   In the interest of adhering to the SLA, it is useful to configure
   certain functional components at DS boundary nodes.  These may
   include classifiers, markers, meters, shapers and policers as
   described in the following section.

   The following basic combinations of functional components are
   possible:

     Mode              Customer's Egress   Provider's Ingress

     Provider marking  None                MFC, BAC, M, P

     Note: Provider classifies microflows to aggregated service level
     and marks DS field accordingly.  Provider polices based on
     aggregate.

     Customer marking  MFC, M              BAC, P

     Note: Customer classifies microflows to aggregated service level
     and marks DS field accordingly.  Provider polices based on
     aggregate.

     MFC - MF Classifier



Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


     BAC - BA Classifier

     M - Marker

     P - Policer (policing shaper)

   In the first example, the customer applies no traffic conditioning.
   Instead, the customer contracts with the provider to do per-microflow
   classification, marking and policing.  In the second example, the
   customer applies per-microflow classification and marking.  In this
   case, the provider applies aggregate (per-service level)
   classification and policing, to assure compliance with the SLA.  It
   is assumed that all traffic from a single customer arrives at an
   interface dedicated to the customer.  If multiple customers share a
   single interface, it will be necessary to apply additional finer-
   grain classification for the purpose of policing.

   Provider marking will typically be applied at the periphery of the DS
   domains, where a DS network connects to a non-DS, stub network.

   Note that shapers are absent from the table above.  Shapers are not
   strictly required but are recommended, at the customer's network, the
   provider's network, or both.

   Typically, flows will be shaped within the customer's network.  By
   shaping at the microflow level, the customer can maintain traffic
   separation, ensuring that no microflow will seize more than its share
   of the aggregate DS domain resources guaranteed by the SLA.  By
   shaping at the aggregate stream level, the customer can assure
   aggregate compliance with the SLA and for example can avoid charges
   that may have been negotiated as part of the SLA, for excess traffic.
   However, by shaping at the aggregate level only, the customer cannot
   assure traffic separation.

   In certain cases, the customer may contract to have the provider
   apply microflow or aggregate shaping.  This is a form of value-add
   which providers may offer customers that are incapable of providing
   their own shaping.  Obviously, wherever shaping is applied at a 
   microflow level, MF classifiers will be required.  Wherever shaping
   is applied at the behavior aggregate level, BA classifiers will be
   required.  In general, classifiers are required only to support other
   functionality such as meters, markers, or shapers.  Subsequent
   discussion of specific functionality implies the co-existence of the
   appropriate classifier.

   3.1.2.2  Configuration of Functionality at Boundary Equipment

   Configuration requirements may vary depending on the following
   parameters:

     1. Variations in the distribution of configured functionality, as
        described in the previous section.


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


     2. The functional component configured (for example, policing vs.
        shapers vs. markers).

     3. The nature of the SLA (static vs. dynamic).

   This section describes configuration methods subject to the
   variations listed.

   3.1.2.3  Static SLA, Provider Marking

   In this scenario, it is necessary to configure the following
   functional components:

     1. A MF classifier + marker at the provider's ingress node.

     2. A BA policer at the provider's ingress node.

   The SLA specifies the traffic profiles that should be configured per-
   service level for the policer at the ingress node of the provider's
   network.  The format of the information to be configured is tabulated
   in Sec. 2.1.1.  Since the SLA is static, this information changes
   infrequently and likely requires human intervention.

   Therefore, the policer will typically be configured remotely via SNMP
   or via a command-line interface.

   The marker configuration is actually independent of the SLA.

   The customer may contract the provider to mark any service level 
   based on the results of the MF classification.

   Configuring the marker is similar to configuring access lists on
   standard switches and routers.  Such lists take the form of "n-tuple:
   service level", where "-tuple" refers to some combination of possibly
   masked values in packet headers.  Such information is lengthy and
   error prone.  In addition, it is subject to change more frequently
   than a static SLA and, does not require the approval of the provider.

   While it is possible to configure markers using the same static
   methods as used to configure the policers (SNMP and/or command-line
   interfaces), there are strong incentives to provide dynamic marker
   configuration via a standard protocol that is available to the
   customer.  RSVP may be used for this purpose.

3.1.3  Receiver Control

   In differentiated services there are two possible types of receiver
   control.  One,  which has been addressed in a previous section, is
   when the receiver is allowed to control how the marking of the DS 
   field is performed at the sender side.  This can be done either in
   accordance with a static SLA that the user has with the provider, or
   by use of application- or session-level signaling which induces the


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   sender (or a DS edge node) to mark the packets in accordance with the
   receiver's preferences.

   Another type is when the receivers need to control the priority of
   packets that arrive from the network onto his/her access link.  There
   are two reasons why this is important.  One is that it provides
   protection from certain types of denial-of-service attacks.  The
   other is that this is important on low bandwidth access links, in
   particular for mobile IP hosts.

   At the last-hop router, before the egress link, traffic from 
   different sources are merged onto the access link of the receiver
   (destination).  Some packets might have been marked with respect to
   the SLA the receiver has with the ISP, others might not.  To allow
   the receiver to control which traffic gets priority on its access
   link it should be allowed to direct the egress node re-mark (or use
   an alternative PHB than what is in accordance with the marking that
   was made with respect to the sender's SLA) packets at the egress
   node, in accordance with a "receiver marking policy".  This can be
   thought of as a special case of a static or dynamic SLA between a
   downstream network (the ISP) and an upstream network (the receiver). 

   Such a "receiver marking policy" could e.g. state that all IP
   telephony traffic (e.g., identified by a particular source port
   number) should be given priority to all other traffic.

3.1.4  Policy Protocols

   Two types of requests have been described which can result in
   allocation of resources to particular users (at the expense of
   others), and which may result in charges to customers.  The two types
   of requests are requests to mark traffic for prioritized treatment
   (subject to the terms of an existing SLA), and requests to change
   the existing SLA.  These requests should be governed by policy 
   decisions.  Information required to make policy decisions must be
   conveyed to policy servers.  These must reply with approval or
   rejection of the request.  COPS is an example of a policy protocol
   suitable for carrying such requests.


3.2  Requirements for Measurement and Management.

   In order to validate conformance to the specific SLA's within a DS
   domain, the network operator should measure the performance of the
   traffic belong to specific codepoints within its domain.  The
   measurement of traffic can be done in one of two modes:

   Single Point Measurements: These measurements would monitor the
   traffic in the network at a single point in the network.   Such a
   measurement can be done at the access-point of the network after
   classification, and reported to the network management tools using
   RMON MIBs [RMON].  A network operator can also station real-time flow


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   monitors, and collect a more comprehensive record of the type of
   traffic flowing in the network [RTFlow].

   Dual Point Measurements: These measurements would monitor the
   performance of the traffic between ingress access-points and the
   egress access-point within the DS domain.  The measurement of
   performance could be done by means of network performance monitoring
   protocols stationed at the two egress points.  Network performance
   monitoring protocols tend to be relatively heavyweight in their use
   of network bandwidth, and these protocols should be used only when a
   potential violation of the SLA is suspected between the two access-
   points.

   It would be desirable for a DS domain operator to have a continuous
   low-overhead monitoring of the service-levels obtained by packets
   within its domain using a passive monitoring scheme.  When the
   passive monitoring scheme suspects a potential problem, the more
   heavyweight performance monitor can be activated.  A SNMP manager may
   be used as an intermediary to trigger this activation, with the
   passive monitoring protocol generating an SNMP trap on suspicion of
   SLA violation and the manager subsequently activating active
   performance monitoring.


4.  Inter-Domain Considerations and End-to-End Services

   While the differentiated services architecture works very well to
   enable different service level agreements within a single ISP domain
   or in a corporate Intranet, comprehensive service differentiation in
   the Internet requires that there is support for service
   differentiation in a uniform manner across several ISP's.

   In general, communication across the Internet traverses several ISP
   boundaries.  When a browser accesses a web-server, the connection
   traverses the client (browser) network; multiple ISP networks, and
   eventually reaches the server network.  The response from the server
   traverses a (possibly asymmetric) path back to the client host.  In
   these cases, SLAs are usually only specified between the client and
   its ISP, the server and its ISP, and between the neighboring pairs of
   ISP's.  Within this context, one must enable the definition of
   services across the Internet using only bilateral SLAs between the
   adjacent providers.

   In order to appreciate the issues in service definition; let us
   consider the "Preferred Service" web-service described in Section
   2.3.1.  When the preferred service is provided, any client accessing
   the web-server must be provided Expedited Forwarding service for its
   requests as well as its response stream.  As long as the client
   browser connects to the same ISP as the server, the preferred service
   is straightforward to provide.  However, when the client browser is
   connecting to a different ISP, expedited processing for request
   packets is not enabled until they reach the domain of the ISP


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   immediately connected to the server.

   Similarly, the expedited processing for response packets may not be
   honored once the response packets leave the domain of the ISP.

   Some of the methods by which the service concept can be extended
   across multiple ISP's are outlined in the following sections.


4.1  Service Provisioning Across Boundaries

   There are two basic schemes which can be used to provide service
   levels across ISP boundaries.  The first scheme consists of
   negotiating an aggregated bandwidth classification to one neighbor,
   and the second scheme consists of negotiating a microflow or traffic
   stream classification to a neighboring ISP.

   An aggregated bandwidth negotiation is useful in preserving the
   desired service levels of packets that are leaving an ISP DS domain.
   If an ISP A is sending packets into the DS domain of an ISP B, ISP A
   would negotiate a SLA which would honor the DS field marking created
   by ISP A.  As packets enter the domain of ISP A, they would be marked
   with a specific codepoint.  Before the packets leave the domain of
   ISP A and cross over to ISP B, they would be remarked so that DS
   field encoding matches the ones expected by ISP B as per the SLA
   between A and B.

   For example, let us assume that the SLA between A and B
   specifies that A would treat all packets marked for Expedited
   Forwarding with the same PHB as long as the aggregate inbound packet
   rate is less than a certain limit.  For the service category of
   "special service" as described in Section 2.3.1, ISP A would mark all
   response packets originating from the special web-servers for
   Expedited Forwarding. It would also negotiate the SLA with ISP B so
   as to obtain a rate for Expedited packets, which would be adequate to
   meet the demand for its servers.  Since ISP B would carry the packets
   at expedited level through its domain, the special service would be
   provided to all clients accessing either ISP A or B.  A transitive
   agreement between B and other service clients would lead to the 
   service being special to all clients in the Internet.

   For boundaries where the aggregated bandwidth is negotiated, one ISP
   can simply act as the customer of another ISP.  The marking and
   policing scheme would work as for any other DS domain boundary
   situation.

   The aggregated bandwidth negotiation is not adequate for providing
   the preferred service described in Section 2.3.1.

   The packets originating from a client who is connecting to ISP B and
   trying to access a preferred web-server (as defined in ISP B's SLA
   with ISP A) will not receive the Expedited Forwarding treatment in


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   the domain of ISP B since ISP B has no information that allows it to
   treat these packets specially.  The client may have no SLA with ISP
   B.  One of the ways in which ISP A can manage to extend the preferred
   service agreement to clients in the domain of ISP B is to exchange a
   microflow- or traffic stream-level SLA with ISP B.  In this
   negotiation, ISP A would inform ISP B about the set of destination
   addresses (or prefixes) which need to be treated preferentially.  In
    return ISP A would configure all of its access-points to mark the
   packets headed to the preferred service for Expedited Forwarding.

   An ISP may want to choose some other codepoint for marking packets
   belonging to the microflows/streams, which have a SLA with some other
   ISP.  There is also an associated scaling problem with too many
   microflow/stream classifier entries floating across multiple ISP
   boundaries.  The ISP may want to export the microflows/streams
   classifier designations only across a certain number of
   administrative domains, and pay different amounts depending on how
   far the microflow/stream classification negotiation would be carried.
   An ISP may also want to provide different levels of preferred service
   to its web-server customers.  A service where preferred service is
   extended to all the clients in the Internet may cost substantially
   more than a service where preferred service is only extended across
   one or two ISP domains.

4.1.1  Requirements for Service Level Agreements

   Although the differentiated service architecture focuses on
   differentiated treatment within a single domain, it is expected that
   different DS domains will be linked to each other through mutual
   agreements and the DS region will expand in an incremental fashion.
   How two different DS domains are interconnected is governed by the
   SLA between two-DS domains.  The SLA will specify details as to how
   each other's traffic is conditioned at the boundary of the two
   domains, and how packets are re-marked to be promoted or demoted
   within a PHB group.

   A SLA is normally a contract between two DS domains, which specifies
   details of treatment for traffic crossing the boundary of the two
   domains.

   A SLA may contain the following:

   Performance, Security, Availability between the domains: A bilateral
   agreement may dictate when the service is available and what type of
   performance and security are expected when the service is running.

   Rules for traffic conditioning: A SLA should specify how traffic from
   one DS domain will be conditioned crossing the boundary, including
   classification rules (MF classification or BA classification),
   profiles for each PHB, actions for packets out-of-profile (marked
   with a different PHB or shaped/discarded). 



Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   Mapping of PHBs between two domains: If the two DS domains use two
   distinct PHB groups, it may be necessary to establish some rules for
   mapping one PHB to another.

   Location of traffic conditioning: The packets can be conditioned by
   the egress node of one DS domain before the traffic crosses to the
   next DS domain, or by the ingress node of the next domain.

4.1.2  Promotion and Demotion within a PHB group

   When two DS domains use similar PHB groups, packets crossing the
   boundary may be promoted or demoted to use a different PHB with the
   same PHB group.  Such promotion and demotion take place when there is
   a mis-match between the traffic rate specified in the SLA and the
   actual traffic rate.  For example, two ISP's both offer three traffic
   classes: premium, standard and best effort.  If the amount of premium
   traffic crossing the boundary is greater than the rate specified in
   the SLA, some of the premium traffic may be demoted to standard
   class.  On the other hand, if there is less premium traffic than
   specified in the SLA, standard traffic may be promoted to premium.

4.1.3  Mapping of PHBs at Boundaries

   When two DS domains are based on very different PHB groups, the SLA
   has to specify how one PHB in one DS domain is mapped to a PHB in
   another domain.  If the PHBs have different values but similar
   semantics, the mapping may be simple.  However, in some case, the
   mapping can be very difficult.  For example, one DS domain uses
   queueing priorities while the other is based on discard priorities.
   However, in general, a "better" treatment in one PHB group should be
   mapped to another "better" treatment.


4.2  Host Interactions

   In the previous sections, we discuss the differentiated services
   primarily from the perspective of a service provider.  In this
   section we look at how the users can make use of services offered by
   DS-capable networks.  A host which is DS aware is just another DS 
   egress device; not a special case.

4.2.1  Traffic Conditioning for Directly Connected Users

   A user can gain access to a DS-capable network directly or through a
   customer domain.  Users who are directly connected to a DS-capable
   ISP (e.g., a dial-up user) should have a SLA with the ISP.  Complex
   traffic conditioning functions ideally should ideally be performed by
   the hosts of the users rather than the access nodes, which may have
   to handle tens of thousands of users.

   However, mechanisms have to be in place so that the ISPs are assured
   that they can trust the self-policing by the users.


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   Users may have to install DS control software from ISPs.  When a user
   dials in, the authentication process also configures the DS control
   module in the user's host according to the SLA between the user and
   the ISP.  Random checking can also be done to ensure that the SLA is
   maintained.

4.2.2  Service Allocation within Customer Domain

   When users are part of a customer domain, there is an issue of local
   resource allocation.  The customer domain should have a policy as to
   what packets can be set to use a particular PHB group.  Some form of
   allocation, either static or dynamic, is needed in order to share the
   profiles that the customer domain has obtained.  The egress node of
   the customer domain may perform traffic conditioning on the
   aggregated traffic to ensure that the packets crossing the boundary
   to the ISP conforms to the SLA between the customer domain and the
   ISP.

   A number of mechanisms for local allocation have been suggested.  One
   is bandwidth broker, which acts as a central allocation server for
   the customer domain and as a client to request additional resources
   from the ISP [BB].  RSVP may also be adopted as a mechanism for
   requesting bandwidth with the customer domain and the resources to
   the ISP [RSVP].

4.2.3  End-to-End Services

   The differentiated services architecture is designed to be deployed
   incrementally.  ISPs are likely to offer differentiated services
   first within their own networks, and conduct experiments.  Over time,
   ISPs will design business models for the new services and start to
   extend the services by signing SLAs with other peering ISPs.

   Since the differentiated services model is biased towards long term
   allocation rather than on-demand reservation, the guarantees for any
   differentiated services come through proper provisioning.  Unless
   there is a clear traffic pattern, provisioning becomes much harder
   when more DS domains are linked together.  The level of provisioning
   depends on the economic factors in the differentiated services and
   varies from ISP to ISP.  In general, when the packets leave the ISP
   to which the customer has a SLA, the level of service may degrade.
   For example, if the traffic aggregate for a particular PHB were over
   the rate the next ISP would accept, some packets may be demoted to a
   PHB with worse treatment.  The more ISPs a packet traverses, the less
   control the originating ISP has.

   The extensibility of the differentiated services model allows many
   different schemes to be tried out and developed further.

   One possible approach is to establish an ISP-to-ISP pipe across
   multiple ISPs.  So, the originating ISP and terminating ISP know 
   exactly how traffic between them is provisioned.  This is similar to


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   the VPN services that an ISP offers for connecting different sites of
   an organization.


5.  Interoperability with Integrated Services

   In this section, we discuss three possible options for the
   interoperability between the differentiated services and Integrated
   Services [IntServ].


5.1  Parallel Operation

   Both differentiated services and Integrated Services may operate in
   parallel over the same network infrastructure.  It may be necessary
   to set limits on the amount of bandwidth available for Integrated
   Services reservations so that the bandwidth provisioning for 
   differentiated services traffic is protected.  In general,
   differentiated services provides an overall provisioning to
   aggregates of traffic while Integrated Services can be used to make
   reservation for long-lasting and high-bandwidth flows.  This is
   similar to the current telephone networks.  One does not need to make
   a prior reservation in order to make a phone call.  The likelihood of
   blocking inside the network is very small as capacity is guaranteed
   through long-term provisioning.  However, if one would like to make a
   conference call or video call, an advanced reservation may be
   necessary.


5.2  Int-serv Over Diff-serv

   Alternatively, differentiated services and Integrated Services may be
   tightly coupled by means of a hierarchical bandwidth allocation
   scheme.  Differentiated services may be used to allocate bandwidth in
   bulk quantity to individual customer networks.  Each customer network
   may use Integrated Services mechanisms to allocate the bandwidth
   among individual hosts and application flows.  This model works
   particularly well for VPNs when a corporation can purchase "virtual
   pipes" across the Internet and then run Integrated Services over the
   over-laid virtual network.  Examples of this model include [E2EQOS].


5.3  Aggregated Int-serv State

   In this approach, Integrated Services flow signaling state (e.g.,
   RSVP) is aggregated between border nodes within a cooperating network
   region.  Hop-by-hop signaling messages within this region convey the
   aggregated state of a number of Integrated Services flows.  Packets
   within an aggregated Integrated Services class are marked by a
   special DS codepoint to convey aggregated classification state (the
   service class, and possibly an in- or out-of-profile indicator).
   Examples of this model include [GBH97, CLASSY].


Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998
   

6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge the helpful comments and
   suggestions of the following individuals: Kathleen Nichols, Brian
   Carpenter, David Black, Konstantinos Dovrolis, Shivkumar Kalyana,
   Wu-chang Feng, Marty Borden, and Ronald Bonica.


7.  References

   [BB]        K. Nichols, V. Jacobson, and L. Zhang, "A Two-bit
               Differentiated Services Architecture for the Internet",
               Internet Draft <draft-nichols-diff-svc-arch-00.txt>,
               November 1997.

   [CLARK]     D. Clark and J. Wroclawski, "An Approach to Service
               Allocation in the Internet", Internet Draft
               <draft-clark-diff-svc-alloc-00.txt>, July 1997.

   [CLASSY]    S. Berson and S. Vincent, "Aggregation of Internet
               Integrated Services State", Internet Draft
               <draft-berson-classy-approach-01.ps>, November 1997.

   [COPS]      J. Boyle, R. Cohen, D. Durham, S. Herzog, R. Rajan, and
               A. Sastry, "COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol",
               <draft-ietf-rap-cops-01.txt>, March 1998.

   [DSARCH]    D. Black, S. Blake, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and
               W. Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated Services",
               Internet Draft <draft-ietf-diffserv-arch-00.txt>, May
               1998.

   [DSHEAD]    K. Nichols and S. Blake, "Definition of the
               Differentiated Services Field (DS Byte) in the IPv4 and
               IPv6 Headers", Internet Draft
               <draft-ietf-diffserv-header-00.txt>, May 1998.

   [DSPREC]    F. Baker, S. Brim, T. Li, F. Kastenholz, S. Jagannath,
               and J. Renwick, "IP Precedence in Differentiated
               Services Using the Assured Service", Internet Draft
               <draft-ietf-diffserv-precedence-00.txt>, April 1998.

   [Ellesson]  E. Ellesson and S. Blake, "A Proposal for the Format and
               Semantics of the TOS Byte and Traffic Class Byte in IPv4
               and IPv6", Internet Draft <draft-ellesson-tos-00.txt>,
               November 1997.

   [E2EQOS]    Y. Bernet, R. Yavatkar, P. Ford, F. Baker, and L. Zhang,
               "A Framework for End-to-End QoS Combining RSVP/Intserv
               and Differentiated Services", Internet Draft
               <draft-bernet-intdiff-00.txt>, March 1998.



Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   [GBH97]     R. Guerin, S. Blake, and S. Herzog, "Aggregating RSVP-
               based QoS Requests", Internet Draft
               <draft-guerin-aggreg-rsvp-00.txt>, November 1997.

   [IntServ]   R. Braden, D. Clark, and S. Shenker, "Integrated Services
               in the Internet Architecture: An Overview", Internet RFC
               1633, July 1994.

   [RMON]      S. Waldbusser, "Remote Network Monitoring Management
               Information Base Version 2 using SMIv2", Internet RFC
               2021, January 1997.

   [RSVP]      B. Braden et. al., "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)
               -- Version 1 Functional Specification", Internet RFC
               2205, September 1997.

   [RTFlow]    N. Brownlee, C. Mills, and G. Ruth, "Traffic Flow
               Measurement: Architecture", Internet Draft
               <draft-ietf-rtfm-architecture-02.txt>, Dec. 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Yoram Bernet
   Microsoft
   One Microsoft Way,
   Redmond, WA 98052
   Phone:  +1-425-936-9568
   E-mail: yoramb@microsoft.com

   James Binder
   3Com Corp.
   5400 Bayfront Plaza
   Santa Clara, CA 95052
   Phone:  +1-408-326-6051
   E-mail: james_binder@3com.com

   Steven Blake
   IBM Corporation
   800 Park Offices Drive
   Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
   Phone:  +1-919-254-2030
   E-mail: slblake@raleigh.ibm.com

   Mark A. Carlson
   Redcape Software, Inc.
   2990 Center Green Court South
   Boulder, CO 80301
   Phone:  +1-303-448-0048 x115
   E-mail: mac@redcape.com




Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT     A Framework for Differentiated Services      May 1998


   Elwyn Davies
   Nortel UK
   London Road
   Harlow, Essex CM17 9NA, UK
   Phone:  +44-1279-405498
   E-mail: elwynd@nortel.co.uk

   Borje Ohlman
   Ericsson Radio
   Dialoggatan 1  (Kungens Kurva)
   S-126 25 Stockholm
   Sweden
   Phone:  +46-8-719 3187
   E-mail: Borje.Ohlman@ericsson.com

   Dinesh C. Verma
   IBM TJ Watson Research Center
   PO Box 218 
   Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
   E-mail: dverma@watson.ibm.com

   Zheng Wang
   Bell Labs Lucent Tech
   101 Crawfords Corner Road
   Holmdel, NJ 07733
   E-mail: zhwang@bell-labs.com

   Walter Weiss
   Lucent Technologies
   300 Baker Avenue, Suite 100,
   Concord, MA  01742-2168
   E-mail: wweiss@lucent.com






















Bernet, et. al.            Expires: November 1998              [Page 26]

