

ecrit                                                            H. Arai
Internet-Draft                                              M. Kawanishi
Expires: August 18, 2005                                             Oki
                                                       February 14, 2005


     Emergency Call Requirements for IP Telephony Services In Japan
                 draft-arai-ecrit-japan-req-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 18, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This memo introduces the status of study in Japan regarding the
   communication for emergency reports using public IP telephony
   services.  First, it provides the information on the background and
   history, and then it summarizes the functional requirements from the
   relevant authorities.




Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   IP telephony services in Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2   Committee for the Advancement of Emergency Message
           Systems (CAEMS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3   A assumed network model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Emergency numbers in Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  IP Telephony Requirements for Emergency Messages . . . . . . .  6
     3.1   Getting Emergency Call to Correct Emergency Call Center  .  6
     3.2   Keeping Connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3   Presenting and Acquiring Calling Line Identification,
           and Presenting IP Telecommunication Provider
           Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4   Presenting and Acquiring Geographical Location
           Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 13






























Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


1.  Introduction

   Public IP telephony services in Japan became popular by the
   allocation of the exclusive IP phone number begun in September 2002.
   The IP telephone number is an eleven-digit telephone number includes
   "050" prefix followed by the carrier ID.  Currently more than seven
   million users subscribe the IP telephony service, and further
   subscription is expected in the next few years.

1.1  IP telephony services in Japan

   There are two types of public IP telephony services in Japan.  One is
   the '050' service mentioned above, and another is the IP telephony
   service using standard telephone number of '0AB-J'.  The ministerial
   ordinance requires service providers to achieve a certain level of
   required condition.

   The requirements to the '0AB-J' IP telephony service are summarized
   below.

   o  Provides voice quality equal to PSTN telephone

   o  Enables the use of the emergency calls

   o  Installed location of the IP telephone device is fixed and the
      devices are not portable

   On the other hand, the IP telephony services with 050 prefix are not
   necessarily bound by these conditions.

   There is a general opinion that it is preferable for the emergency
   calls to be enabled both on 050 IP telephony services or on 0AB-J IP
   telephony services as long as the users consider these services are
   alternatives to PSTN telephone.

1.2  Committee for the Advancement of Emergency Message Systems (CAEMS)

   In November 2003, the Minister of Internal Affairs and Communications
   requested the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (MIC)
   for the advice about the achievement of the emergency call with the
   IP telephony services prompt and emphatically.

   Upon this request, MIC set up the IP Telephony Working Group under
   the Committee for the Advancement of Emergency Message Systems
   (CAEMS) from March 2004 to January 2005 to discuss the requirements
   to the emergency call securing in the IP network.  The study group
   was composed of the emergency call acceptance organization (ECAO in
   this document), the people from academic background, the



Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


   telecommunications carrier, the IP telephony equipment manufacturer,
   and so forth.

   As the result of study, a draft proposal that consists of the
   authority's service requirements and the functional requirements was
   compiled and the draft is currently under public review.  The
   document in Japanese is available from MIC home page.  At the end of
   March 2005, the final report that incorporates the public comments
   will be submitted to the minister of MIC.

   The purpose of this report is for parties concerned of the
   telecommunications carrier, the emergency call acceptance
   organization, the IP telephone terminal maker, and so forth, to fix a
   detailed specification, to advance the introduction, and to use it
   widely.

   This memo provides information on the requirements for the emergency
   call acceptance on the IP network, based on the above-mentioned draft
   proposal under the public review.

1.3  A assumed network model

   The following preconditions were assumed for the CAEMS discussion.

   IP Telephony Network:

      There will be two types of network configuration


      ECAO is connected to IP network via PSTN using existing emergency
      line


      ECAO is connected directly to IP telephony network via a new IP
      line


   Types of IP telephony services:

      Fixed IP telephone


      Portable IP telephone


      IP telephone with mobile capability





Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


2.  Emergency numbers in Japan

   There are three emergency telephone numbers in Japan.  It is 110
   (police), 118 (Japan Coast Guard), and 119(fire station and
   ambulance).

   When dialing one of these numbers, the emergency call is established
   toward the emergency reception desk of each organization that covers
   the area where the reporter is present.  In PSTN, telephony carriers
   have a database with subscriber's name, address, and telephone
   number, and each emergency telephone number is converted to the
   telephone number of emergency reception desk of each ECAO.

   Each ECAO places an emergency call reception desk based on the
   district of their definition.

   Police (110): 52 head offices

      1 in each 49 prefectures, except 2 in Tokyo and 3 in Hokkaido


   Japan Coast Guard (118): 11 jurisdictions

   Fire station and ambulance (119): Slightly less than 900 districts

      Defined locally along with the district of about 3000
      municipalities
























Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


3.  IP Telephony Requirements for Emergency Messages

   This section provides a list of highly important requirements in
   support of the emergency messages within the context of IP telephony
   in Japan.

3.1  Getting Emergency Call to Correct Emergency Call Center

   As mentioned in section 2, the emergency call that will be dialed
   110, 118 and 119 must be got to the correct emergency call center,
   which takes charge of place where the call would be sent, by
   location-based call routing.  This requirement must be met IP
   telephony emergency call service, in case of not only fixed-use IP
   telephones, but also portable IP telephones for fixed-use and mobile
   IP telephones.

   In this case, call control nodes should identify emergency calls in
   order to establish a call even under network congestion.  Some
   network use alternative telephone number other than emergency number
   of 110/118/119 for routing purpose, and therefore the emergency calls
   should be identified by an identifier other than dialed number.

3.2  Keeping Connection

   This requirement is for allowing the emergency call center to secure
   the time or the chance of the conversation with the caller if
   necessary.

   IP telecommunication providers are required to provide the "keeping
   connection" functionality that keeps the call unless the emergency
   call center would terminate the call, even though the caller would
   hang up.  And the providers are also required to provide the
   "reversing call" functionality that calls the caller's terminal up by
   operating the instruction board in the call center, if the call
   center intends to resume the conversation with the caller while the
   emergency call is kept by the "keeping connection" functionality.

3.3  Presenting and Acquiring Calling Line Identification, and
    Presenting IP Telecommunication Provider Identification

   These functionalities, Calling Line Identification Presentation and
   Acquisition, and IP Telecommunication Provider Identification
   Presentation, are used for calling the caller back from the emergency
   call center that received the emergency call, if the call center
   intends to resume the conversation with the caller after the call
   ends.

   In general, IP telecommunication providers in Japan provide Calling



Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


   Line Identification Presentation and Restriction (CLIP and CLIR)
   service; the selection of whether the identification is presented is
   either by the subscription contract or by specifying the service
   number (which is 184 or 186) before the telephone number you would
   dial.  The latter has precedence over the former.  That is, if you
   specify the service number for CLIR before the telephone number you
   dial, the caller's telephone number won't be displayed on the called
   site even though the caller subscribes as CLIP.  On the other hand,
   if you specify CLIP, the caller's telephone number will be displayed
   even though the caller subscribes as CLIR.

   For the emergency call, the caller's telephone number must be
   presented to the emergency call center regardless of the subscription
   of the caller, unless the caller specifies CLIR explicitly.

   Furthermore, even if the caller specifies CLIR, the emergency call
   center must be able to acquire the caller's telephone number over the
   call or the "keeping connection" condition.  Because, for example, in
   case the caller faces a crisis that is a matter of life and death,
   even if the caller doesn't want to present his/her telephone number
   to the emergency call center, the call center has to know the
   caller's telephone number in order to settle the circumstance.  This
   operation conforms to "The Guidelines on the Protection of Personal
   Information in the Telecommunications Business" (MIC Announcement No.
   695 of 2004).

   Also it is necessary for the emergency call center to identify per
   call the IP telecommunication provider to which the caller
   subscribes.  This functionality allows the call center that receives
   the emergency call to inquire subscriber information for the IP
   telecommunication provider even if the call center couldn't acquire
   caller's information on the telephone number or the geographical
   location etc.

3.4  Presenting and Acquiring Geographical Location Information

   Geographical location information of the caller must be presented to
   the emergency call center that receives the call when the call center
   receives the call and the call center demands information from the IP
   telecommunication provider.

   To consider applying the existing geographical location information
   system, there are two configurations; one is that two connections are
   used for voice and the geographical location system individually, and
   the other provides one connection for them.

   HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) is used for transferring
   Geographical location information that is formatted by XML



Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


   (eXtensible Markup Language).

   The content of the location information must be accurate so that the
   fire department, the police department etc.  may deal with the
   problem promptly.

   The following shows the contents of the location information.


   element           tag          remarks
   ---------------   -----------  -----------------------------------
   Caller ID         repo_tele    caller's telephone number

   Area of address   add_area     area of caller's address
     Zip code        add_post     postal code number
     Address code    add_code     JIS(Japanese Industrial Standard)
                                  address code
     Address name    add_name     literal information corresponding
                                  to address code (name of prefecture,
                                  city or county, etc.)
     Address number  add_num      house number, street number etc.
     Others          add_others   House name, building number, room
                                  number, or building name and floor

   Area of           name_area    area of caller's name
   caller's name
     Name in kana    name_kana    pronunciation of caller's name
     Name in kanji   name_kanji   caller's name in kanji letters
   -------------------------------------------------------------------


     Figure 1: The location information for the fixed IP telephone



















Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


   element           tag          remarks
   ---------------   -----------  ------------------------------------
   Caller ID         repo_tele    caller's telephone number

   Area of location  loc_area     area of caller's geographical
                                  location information
     Zip code        loc_post     postal code number
     Address code    loc_code     JIS(Japanese Industrial Standard)
                                  address code
     Address name    loc_name     literal information corresponding
                                  to address code (name of prefecture,
                                  city or county, etc.)
     Address number  loc_num      house number, street number etc.
     Others          loc_others   House name, building number, room
                                  number, or building name and floor

   Area of           name_area    area of caller's name
   caller's name
     Name in kana    name_kana    pronunciation of caller's name
     Name in kanji   name_kanji   caller's name in kanji letters
   -------------------------------------------------------------------


    Figure 2: The location information for the portable IP telephone



   element           tag          remarks
   ---------------   -----------  -------------------------------------
   Caller ID         repo_tele    caller's telephone number
   Terminal type     term_type    whether caller's terminal is fixed-
                                  use or mobile-use
   Location type     loc_type     indicating either place of dispatch
                                  information or present place
                                  information (see *2)
   Area of location  loc_area     area of caller's geographical
                                  location information
     Zip code        loc_post     postal code number
     Address code    loc_code     JIS(Japanese Industrial Standard)
                                  address code
     Address name    loc_name     literal information corresponding
                                  to address code (name of prefecture,
                                  city or county, and so on)
     Address number  loc_num      house number, street number etc.
     Others          loc_others   House name, building number, room
                                  number, or building name and floor

   Area of           CircularArea circular area including measured



Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


   measured position              position
     Latitude        X            latitude of center of CircularArea
     Longitude       Y            longitude of center of CircularArea
     Radius          Radius       radius of CircularArea
     Altitude        Alt          altitude of caller's location
                                  (optional)
     Precision of Alt  alt_acc    precision of Alt (optional)

   Area of           name_area    area of caller's name
       caller's name
     Name in kana    name_kana    pronunciation of caller's name
     Name in kanji   name_kanji   caller's name in kanji letters
   -------------------------------------------------------------------


     Figure 3: The location information for the mobile IP telephone

   (*2): "Place of dispatch information" means information on the place
   where the caller makes the emergency call.  "Present place
   information" means information on the place where the caller is when
   the location information is sent.






























Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


4.  Security Considerations

   TBD
















































Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not contain IANA considerations.

6.  Informative References

   [MIC draft report]
              The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications,
              "draft report concerning Measures for Preserving Important
              Communications Such as Emergency Messages on IP Networks",
              January 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Hideki Arai
   Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd.
   4-10-6 Shibaura
   Minato-ku, Tokyo  108-8551
   Japan

   Email: arai859@oki.com


   Motoharu Kawanishi
   Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd.
   4-10-6 Shibaura
   Minato-ku, Tokyo  108-8551
   Japan

   Email: kawanishi381@oki.com




















Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Emergency req.s in Japan           February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Arai & Kawanishi         Expires August 18, 2005               [Page 13]


