



BESS                                                            Z. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                 R. Kebler
Updates: 6513, 6514 (if approved)                                 W. Lin
Intended status: Standards Track                        Juniper Networks
Expires: September 12, 2019                                     E. Rosen
                                                          March 11, 2019


               MVPN/EVPN C-Multicast Routes Enhancements
           draft-zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-cmcast-enhancements-01

Abstract

   [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] specify procedures for originating,
   propagating, and processing "C-multicast routes".  However, there are
   a number of MVPN use cases that are not properly or optimally handled
   by those procedures.  This document describes those use cases, and
   specifies the additional procedures needed to handle them.  Some of
   the additional procedures are also applicable to EVPN SMET routes [I-
   D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy].

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 12, 2019.








Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  MVPN C-Bidir Support with VPN Backbone being RPL  . . . .   4
       1.2.1.  C-multicast Routes for the MVPN-RPL Method of C-BIDIR
               support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       1.2.2.  Optional use of MVPN-RPL RD with mLDP/PIM Provider
               Tunnels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       1.2.3.  MVPN C-ASM Support without CE Routers . . . . . . . .   6
     1.3.  Inter-AS Propagation of MVPN C-Multicast Routes . . . . .   6
     1.4.  MVPN Inter-AS Upstream PE Selection . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     1.5.  EVPN Selective Multicast Ethernet Tag (SMET) Routes . . .   9
     1.6.  Provider Tunnel Segmentation with Explicit-Tracking
           C-Multicast Routes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       1.6.1.  Conventional Tunnel Segmentation  . . . . . . . . . .  11
       1.6.2.  Selective Tunnel Segmentation with Untargeted
               Explicit-Tracking C-multicast Routes  . . . . . . . .  11
   2.  Specifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     2.1.  MVPN C-Bidir Support with VPN Backbone being RPL  . . . .  12
       2.1.1.  Constructing C-Multicast Share Tree Join route  . . .  12
       2.1.2.  Setting Up the MVPN-RPL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     2.2.  Inter-AS Propagation of MVPN C-Multicast Routes . . . . .  14
       2.2.1.  Procedures in Section 11.2 of [RFC6514] . . . . . . .  14
       2.2.2.  Ordinary BGP Propagation Procedures . . . . . . . . .  15
     2.3.  Inter-AS Upstream PE Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     2.4.  Duplication Prevention on the Same Inclusive Inter-AS
           Tunnel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       2.4.1.  Using PE Distinguisher Labels . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       2.4.2.  Ingress ASBR Filtering Out Duplications . . . . . . .  16
     2.5.  Provider Tunnel Segmentation with Explicit-Tracking
           C-Multicast Routes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       2.5.1.  Egress PEs and RBRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17



Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


       2.5.2.  Transit RBRs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       2.5.3.  Ingress RBRs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       2.5.4.  Setting Up Forwarding State on RBRs . . . . . . . . .  20
       2.5.5.  Other Types of Tunnels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   4.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23

1.  Introduction

   [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] specify procedures for originating,
   propagating, and processing "C-multicast routes".  However, there are
   a number of MVPN use cases that are not properly or optimally handled
   by those procedures.  This document describes those use cases, and
   specifies the additional procedures needed to handle them.

   Some of the additional procedures are also applicable to EVPN SMET
   routes [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy]; this is discussed in
   Section 1.5.

1.1.  Terminology

   This document uses terminology from MVPN and EVPN.  It is expected
   that the audience is familiar with the concepts and procedures
   defined in [RFC6513], [RFC6514], [RFC7524], [RFC7432], [I-D.ietf-
   bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates], and [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-
   proxy].  Some terms are listed below for references.

   o  PMSI: P-Multicast Service Interface - a conceptual interface for a
      PE to send customer multicast traffic to all or some PEs in the
      same VPN.

   o  I-PMSI: Inclusive PMSI - to all PEs in the same VPN.

   o  S-PMSI: Selective PMSI - to some of the PEs in the same VPN.

   o  C-G-BIDIR: A bidirectional multicast group address (i.e., a group
      address whose IP multicast distribution tree is built by BIDIR-
      PIM) in customer address space.

   o  RBR: Regional Border Router.  A provider tunnel could be
      segmented, with one segment in each region.  A region could be an
      AS, an IGP area, or even a subarea.





Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


1.2.  MVPN C-Bidir Support with VPN Backbone being RPL

   In BIDIR-PIM [RFC5015], every group is associated with a "Rendezvous
   Point Link" (RPL).  The RPL for a given group G is at the root of the
   BIDIR-PIM distribution tree.  Links of the distribution tree that
   lead towards the RPL are considered to be "upstream" links, and links
   that lead away from the RPL are considered to be "downstream" links.
   Every node on the distribution tree has one upstream link and zero or
   more downstream links.

   Data addressed to a BIDIR-PIM group may enter the distribution tree
   at any node.  The entry node sends the data on the upstream links and
   the downstream links.  A node that receives the data from a
   downstream link sends it on its upstream link and on its other
   downstream links.  A node that receives the data from its upstream
   link sends it on its downstream links.  When a node that is attached
   to the RPL receives data from a downstream link, it forwards the data
   onto the RPL (as well as onto any other downstream links.)  When node
   attached to the RPL receives data from the RPL, it forwards the data
   downstream.

   The above is a simplified description, and ignores the fact that
   every link except the RPL has a Designated Forwarder (DF).  Only the
   DF forwards traffic onto the link.  However, the RPL has no DF; any
   node can forward traffic onto the RPL.

1.2.1.  C-multicast Routes for the MVPN-RPL Method of C-BIDIR support

   Section 11.1 of [RFC6513] describes a method of providing MVPN
   support for customers that use BIDIR-PIM.  This is known as "MVPN
   C-BIDIR support".  In this method of C-BIDIR support, the VPN
   backbone itself functions as the RPL.  Thus this method is known as
   the "MVPN-RPL" method.  The RPL is actually an I-PMSI or S-PMSI.  The
   PE routers treat the I-PMSI or S-PMSI as their upstream link, and
   treat their VRF interfaces as downstream links.

   If the MVPN-RPL method of C-BIDIR support is being used in a
   particular MVPN, all the PEs attached to that MVPN must be
   provisioned to use this method.

   In the context of a given VPN, a PE with interest in receiving a
   particular C-BIDIR group (call it C-G-BIDIR) advertises this interest
   to the other PEs by originating a C-multicast Shared Tree Join route.
   When any PE receives traffic for the C-G-BIDIR on its PE-CE
   interface, it sends the data to the MVPN-RPL if and only if it has
   received corresponding (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) C-multicast Shared Tree Join
   route.  Other PEs receive the traffic on the MVPN-RPL and forward to
   their downstream receivers.  However, the procedure for constructing



Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   the C-multicast Shared Tree Join route in this case is not fully
   specified in [RFC6513] or [RFC6514].  The proper set of procedures
   are specified in Section 2.1.1 of this document.

   Compared to other C-Multicast routes specified in [RFC6514], these
   are "untargeted" in that the RT allows all PEs in the same MVPN to
   import them, while those other C-Multicast routes use a RT that
   identifies a VRF on a particular Upstream Multicast Hop (UMH) PE.

   If a PE wants to use selective tunnel to send traffic to only a
   subset of the PEs on MVPN-RPL, i.e., those with downstream
   (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) state, per [RFC6513] [RFC6514] the PE needs to
   advertise a corresponding (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) S-PMSI A-D route, whose PTA
   specifies the tunnel to be used.  In case of RSVP-TE P2MP, Ingress
   Replication (IR), or BIER tunnel, the Leaf Information Required (LIR)
   bit in the S-PMSI route's PTA is set to solicit corresponding Leaf
   A-D routes from those PEs with downstream (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) state.
   Every PE that wants to use selective tunnel for the (C-*,C-G-BIDIR)
   will advertise its own S-PMSI A-D route, each triggering a set of
   corresponding Leaf A-D routes.

   Notice that the (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) C-Multicast routes from different PEs
   all have their own RDs so Route Reflectors (RRs) will reflect every
   one of them, and they already serve explicit tracking purpose (the
   BGP Next Hop identifies the originator of the route in non-
   segmentation case) - there is no need to use Leaf A-D routes
   triggered by the LIR bit in S-PMSI A-D routes.  In case of RSVP-TE
   P2MP tunnel, the S-PMSI A-D routes are still needed to announce the
   tunnel but the LIR bit does not need to be set.  In case of IR/BIER,
   there is no need for S-PMSI A-D routes at all.

1.2.2.  Optional use of MVPN-RPL RD with mLDP/PIM Provider Tunnels

   When mLDP/PIM tunnels are used, there is no need for explicit
   tracking as the leaves will simply send mLDP label Mapping or PIM
   Join messages.  As a result, it's unnecessary for a PE to retain each
   C-Multicast route from each PE for the same C-G-BIDIR.  If there is a
   Route Reflector (RR) in use, and it is known apriori that all the
   PEs/RRs/ASBRs involved in the propagation of the C-Multicast routes
   support BGP ADD-PATH [RFC7911], then the PEs could use a common RD to
   construct the C-Multicast routes.  That way, the routes from
   different PEs for the same C-G-BIDIR will be considered paths for the
   same route and the RRs will reflect N paths to each PE.  If N is
   significantly smaller than the number of PEs that advertises the
   routes, then the burden is significantly reduced for the PEs.

   The reason for the need for ADD-PATH is shown with this example: both
   PE1 and PE2 advertise the same (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) C-Multicast route and



Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   the RR chooses the one from PE1 as the active path.  Without ADD-
   PATH, the RR won't reflect any (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) path back to PE1,
   causing PE1 to think there is no other PE interested in receiving the
   C-G-BIDIR traffic.  With ADD-PATH, it is guaranteed that even the
   originator of the active path will receive at least one other path.
   For this reason, ADD-PATH is needed and N=2 is well enough.

1.2.3.  MVPN C-ASM Support without CE Routers

   Current MVPN specifications is based on the fact that CEs are routers
   and in case of ASM one or more of the routers in customer address
   space, which could be a CE, a PE's VRF, or another non-PE/CE router,
   serves as RP.  Traffic may be delivered on shared trees, switch to
   source specific trees, or switch back to shared trees depending the
   situation.  There are two modes of MVPN to support ASM, all involving
   (C-S,C-G) MVPN Source Active (SA) A-D routes, individual (C-S,C-G)
   control/forwarding plane state and procedures that are not needed for
   a special scenario where CEs are not routers but just hosts.

   From a logical point of view, this special scenario is when a VPN
   only involves customer networks directly connected to the PEs and no
   customer routers are used.. A practical example is EVPN inter-subnet
   multicast [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-irb-mcast], when EVPN is used to
   connect only servers and no customer routers are involved.  In this
   case, it does not make sense to introduce the RP concept into the
   deployment and involve the MVPN SA procedures.  Rather, this could be
   modeled as C-Bidir with MVPN-RPL and all the above discussed
   optimizations apply.

1.3.  Inter-AS Propagation of MVPN C-Multicast Routes

   Section 11.2 of [RFC6514] specifies the procedure used to propagate
   C-multicast routes from one AS to another.  However, there are a
   number of problems with the procedures as specified in that RFC.

   RFC6514 presumes that C-multicast routes are propagated through the
   ASBRs.  This is analogous to RFC 4364's "Inter-AS option b".
   However, in some deployment scenarios, the C-multicast routes are
   propagated through Route Reflectors, in a manner analogous to RFC
   4364's "Inter-AS option c".  Strictly speaking, RFC 6514 does not
   allow this deployment scenario.  This document updates RFC 6514 by
   allowing this deployment scenario to be used in place of the
   procedures of Section 11.2 of RFC 6514.

   In some deployment scenarios, the propagation of C-multicast routes
   is controlled by the "Route Target Constraint" procedures of
   [RFC4684].  Strictly speaking, RFC 6514 does not allow this
   deployment scenario.  This document updates RFC 6514 by allowing this



Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   deployment scenario to be used in place of the procedures of
   Section 11.2 of RFC 6514.

   Per [RFC6514], an MVPN C-Multicast route is targeted at a particular
   PE, and its inter-as propagation towards the PE follows a series of
   ASBRs (in the reverse order) on the propagation path of one of the
   following:

   o  The Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route from the targeted PE, if the
      deployment is using non-segmented tunnels.  In this scenario, the
      IP address of the targeted PE is encoded into the four-octet
      "Source AS" field (!) of the C-multicast route's NLRI.

   o  The Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route for the AS that the targeted PE is
      in, if the deployment is using segmented tunnel.  In this
      scenario, the AS number of the source PE is encoded into the
      "Source AS" field of the C-multicast route's NLRI.

   In both cases, the corresponding I-PMSI A-D route is found by looking
   for an I-PMSI A-D route whose NLRI consists of the C-multicast
   route's RD prepended to the contents of the C-multicast route's
   "Source AS" field.  If neither Inter-AS nor Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route
   is used, e.g.  (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D route is used, then the specified
   procedure will not work.

   It must be noted that the RFC 6514 Section 11.2 propagation
   procedures cannot be applied to untargeted C-multicast routes, and
   cannot be applied even to targeted C-multicast routes if the
   infrastructure is based on IPv6 rather than IPv4.

   This document updates RFC 6514 by declaring that the procedure of
   Section 11.2 of that document is only applicable in the case that (1)
   the C-multicast routes are being propagated through the ASBRs, AND
   (2) the propagation of those routes is not under the control of the
   Route Target Constraint procedures.  It also updates the procedures
   of Section 11.2 of [RFC6514] to allow it to work without relying on
   I-PMSI A-D routes, whether IPv4 or IPv6 infrastructure is used.

   This document also updates RFC 6514 by declaring that C-multicast
   routes MAY be propagated using ordinary BGP propagation procedures,
   which do not rely on the presence of I-PMSI A-D routes.  For targeted
   C-multicast routes, this will result in a less optimal propagation
   path, but it does work in all cases.  The Route Target Constraint
   procedures can always be used to obtain a more optimal path.

   The selection of the propagation procedure for C-multicast routes is
   determined by provisioning.




Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   In Section 1.2.1, the explicit tracking using C-multicast route
   relies on that the route's next hop is not changed so that the next
   hop can identify the originator.  If the c-multicast routes are
   propagated through ASBRs, the next hop will be changed.  With tunnel
   segmentation, this is not a problem (see Section 1.6) but if non-
   segmented tunnels are used, either the C-multicast route propagation
   must follow the Option C procedures and the next hop is not changed
   by the RRs, or the routes must carry an EC to identify the
   originator.  Or, the RD of a C-multicast route can be used to locate
   an I/S-PMSI route from the same PE, in which the Originator IP
   Address can be found.

1.4.  MVPN Inter-AS Upstream PE Selection

   Consider the following scenario:

   A multicast source is multi-homed to PE1 and PE2 in the same source
   AS1.  ASBR1 in AS1 connects to ASBR2 in another AS2.  In AS2, egress
   PE3 selects PE1 while egress PE4 selects PE2 as their upstream PE
   respectively, because they use the "Installed UMH Route" as the
   "Selected UMH Route" (as defined in Section 5.1.3 of [RFC6513]).

   Suppose inter-as tunnel segmentation is used.  Following
   Section 11.1.3 of [RFC6514], PE3 and PE4 will construct their
   C-multicast routes with the same NLRI key (in particular with the
   same RD from the Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route originated by ASBR1) but
   with one different Route Target - PE3's C-multicast route carries the
   RT corresponding to PE1's VRF while PE4's C-multicast route carries
   the RT corresponding to PE2's VRF.  ASBR2 will re-advertise only one
   of the two C-multicast routes to ASBR1.  Assuming it is the one with
   a RT corresponding to PE1, then only PE1 will transmit corresponding
   traffic.

   If selective tunnels are used, PE4 that chooses PE2 as the upstream
   PE will not join the selective tunnel advertised by PE1 so it will
   not receive traffic.

   With the new method for inter-as propagation of C-multicast routes
   described in the previous section, this traffic blackholing problem
   can be resolved if PE3 and PE4 construct their C-multicast routes
   with different RDs, e.g. with the RD from the chosen UMH route
   instead of the RD from the Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route.  That way, PE1
   will receive the C-multicast route from PE3 and PE2 will receive the
   C-multicast route from PE4.  Both will transmit traffic but PE3 and
   PE4 will only receive the traffic via the selective tunnel that they
   join hence no duplication or blackholing.





Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   Notice that this also removes the pre-requisite in Section 4.4 of
   [I-D.ietf-bess-mvpn-fast-failover].

   However, there are still two problems.  First, while there is no
   duplication or blackholing issue when selective tunnels are used, two
   copies of traffic are sent inter-AS, possibly through many common
   paths before reaching the egress PEs (imagine that there are a string
   of ASes between AS1 and AS2).  This is not an efficient use of inter-
   AS resources.

   Choosing upstream PE based on installed UMH route allows different
   egress PEs to choose different upstream PEs (typically the closest
   upstream PE), so it is desired for certain intra-as deployment
   scenarios but apparently it is not desired for PEs in other ASes to
   choose different upstream PEs.  This problem can actually be solved
   if PEs always do "Single Forwarder Selection" (the default method
   described in Section 5.1.3 of [RFC6513]) for sources in other ASes
   while (if provisioned so) selecting upstream PE based on installed
   UMH routes for sources in the local AS.

   The second problem is that, when inclusive inter-as tunnels are used,
   if both PE1 and PE2 send the same traffic, ASBR1 will inject
   duplicate traffic into the same inter-as tunnel, while PE3 and PE4
   has no way to distinguish the source PE of each copy.

   There are two solutions to the second problem.  The first solution is
   that ASBRs advertise PE Distinguisher (PED) labels (Section 8 of
   [RFC6514]) via a PED attribute attached to their Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D
   routes, and push a label that identifies the ingress PE when it sends
   a packet into the inclusive inter-AS tunnel, and an egress PE
   discards traffic not from its chosen upstream PE.

   The other solution is for the ingress ASBR to only accept traffic
   from one ingress PE and forward into the inclusive inter-as tunnel.
   This does not require egress PEs to discard traffic based on an
   additional PED label, but does require the ingress ASBR to
   participate upstream PE selection and do IP forwarding in a VRF for
   the source VPN, so that it can choose the copy to accept and forward.
   Because it may not have local receivers, it needs to receive
   C-multicast routes from egress PEs who will receive corresponding
   traffic from it, and import the routes into its local VRF.

1.5.  EVPN Selective Multicast Ethernet Tag (SMET) Routes

   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy] defines a new EVPN route type
   known as an "SMET route".





Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   The EVPN SMET routes are analogous to the MVPN C-muilticast routes,
   in that both type of routes are used to disseminate the information
   that a particular egress PE has interest in a particular multicast
   C-flow or set of C-flows.

   An EVPN SMET route contains, in its NLRI, the RD associated with the
   VRF from which the SMET route was originated.  In addition, it is
   disseminated to all PEs of a given EVI.  In this way, SMET routes are
   analogous to the MVPN C-multicast routes that are used for C-BIDIR
   support.

   An EVPN SMET route contains, in its NLRI, the IP address of the
   originating PE.  In this way, they are analogous to the MVPN Leaf A-D
   routes (They really combine the function of the MVPN C-multicast
   routes and the MVPN Leaf A-D routes).  Similarly, they are also
   analogous to the C-multicast route for MVPN-RPL that carries an EC
   that identifies the originating PE.

   In EVPN, as in MVPN, explicit tracking is required when selective
   tunnels are realized using IR, BIER, or RSVP-TE P2MP.  The EVPN SMET
   routes provide this explicit tracking, so in these cases EVPN does
   not need explicit Leaf A-D routes.  With IR/BIER, there is no need
   for S-PMSI route either.  However, when SMET routes are used with
   segmented IR/BIER tunnels, more procedures are needed, just like the
   C-multicast route in MVPN-RPL case (Section 1.6).  For that reason,
   given the similarity between SMET and C-Multicast routes, in this
   document we will use the same term C-Multicast route for EVPN SMET
   route as well.  The two may be used interchangeably in case of EVPN.

   If selective tunnels are set up using procedures that do not require
   explicit tracking, e.g. mLDP or PIM, the following optimization could
   be done, similar to MVPN-RPL with mLDP/PIM tunnels (Section 1.2.2):

   o  When constructing an SMET route, put 0 as the Originator Router
      Address.

   o  When constructing an SMET route in the context of a given EVI,
      have all PEs of that EVI set the RD field of the NLRI to the same
      value (This is analogous to "MVPN-RPL RD" discussed in
      Section 1.2.2).

   o  When a Route Reflector distributes the SMET routes, it uses BGP
      ADD-PATH to distribute at least two "paths" for a given NLRI.








Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


1.6.  Provider Tunnel Segmentation with Explicit-Tracking C-Multicast
      Routes

   For the above MVPN-RPL and EVPN cases where C-multicast routes are
   used for explicit tracking without requiring corresponding S-PMSI A-D
   routes in case of IR/BIER selective tunnel, it works well when there
   is no tunnel segmentation.  With tunnel segmentation [RFC6514]
   [RFC7524], [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates] additional
   procedures are needed.

1.6.1.  Conventional Tunnel Segmentation

   Multicast forwarding needs to follow a rooted tree.  With
   segmentation, the tree is divided into segments, with each segment
   rooted at either the ingress PE or a Regional Border Router (RBR).  A
   segment is contained in a region, which could be an AS, an area, or a
   sub-area.  The root of a segment only needs to track the leaves in
   its region, which are PEs or RBRs in that region.  With the
   traditional PMSI/Leaf A-D procedures, an ingress PE/RBR sends out an
   I/S-PMSI route, propagated by RBRs (segmentation points), who change
   the tunnel identifier along the way to identify the tunnels for their
   segments.  The Leaf A-D routes from PEs are not propagated by the
   RBRs.  Rather, a RBR will proxy the Leaf AD routes it receives from
   its downstream towards its upstream RBR or PE, following the I/S-PMSI
   A-D routes received in the upstream region, as specified in [RFC6514]
   [RFC7524] [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates].

1.6.2.  Selective Tunnel Segmentation with Untargeted Explicit-Tracking
        C-multicast Routes

   Without segmentation, the untargeted explicit-tracking C-Multicast
   routes are sent to every PE, and each PE adds the originator of the
   routes as leaves of the tunnel rooted at the PE.

   With segmentation, untargeted explicit-tracking C-Multicast routes
   are propagated through segmentation points towards all ingress PEs or
   ASes and are merged along the way.  This is like the traditional
   PMSI/Leaf A-D procedures but with one difference.

   With the traditional PMSI/Leaf A-D procedures, the propagation is
   towards the originator of the PMSI A-D route and a single tree is
   formed.  With untargeted C-Multicast routes, multiple trees are
   formed, each being rooted at the ingress PE (if per-region
   aggregation [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates] is not used)
   or ingress RBR (if per-region aggregation is used).  The roots of
   those trees are either the ingress PEs or the ingress RBRs,
   identified by all the per-PE or per-region I-PMSI A-D routes.




Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   To form those multiple trees without requiring S-PMSI A-D routes from
   the ingress PEs/RBRs, this document proposes that the RBRs convert a
   C-multicast route originated in its own region to Leaf A-D routes, as
   if corresponding S-PMSI A-D routes had been received from ingress
   PEs/RBRs.  The details are provided in Section 2.2.

2.  Specifications

   This section provides detailed specifications for the optional
   enhancements introduced above.

2.1.  MVPN C-Bidir Support with VPN Backbone being RPL

2.1.1.  Constructing C-Multicast Share Tree Join route

   In the context of a particular VRF, a PE with downstream state for
   the group C-G-BIDIR originates a C-multicast Shared Tree Join route,
   referred to as "MVPN-RPL C-multicast Join", when the MVPN-RPL method
   of C-BIDIR support is being used.

   The fields of the route are set as follows:

   o  RD: See Section 2.1.1.2.

   o  Source AS: set to zero.

   o  Multicast Source Length: 4 or 16.

   o  Multicast Source: set to RPA.

   o  Multicast Group Length: 4 or 16.

   o  Multicast Group: BIDIR-PIM group address.

   Note that the RD field, and the Route Targets that are attached to
   the C-multicast route are different than what is specified in
   [RFC6514].  See following two sections.

2.1.1.1.  Setting the Route Targets

   Per [RFC6514], when a PE originates a C-multicast route, it "targets"
   the route to a specific one of the other PEs attached to the same
   VPN.  The IP address of the targeted PE is encoded into a Route
   Target and attached to the C-mulitcast route.  This ensures that the
   C-multicast route is processed only by the PE to which it is
   targeted.





Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   However, C-multicast routes used by the MVPN-RPL method are not
   targeted.  Rather, they must be processed by all the other PEs
   attached to the same MVPN.  Thus we refer to these routes as
   "untargeted".  The Route Targets attached to these routes must be
   such as to cause the routes to be propagated to all the other PEs of
   the given MVPN.  By default, these will be the same Route Targets
   that are attached to the I-PMSI A-D routes of the MVPN.

2.1.1.2.  Setting the Route Distinguisher

   Per [RFC6514], the RD in a C-multicast Join Route is the RD of a VRF
   on the PE to which the route is targeted.  However, in an MVPN-RPL
   C-multicast Join, the RD is set differently.

   If PIM/mLDP provider tunnels are used, and it is known that all the
   PEs/RRs/ASBRs involved in the propagation of C-multicast routes
   support BGP ADD-PATH, the RD MAY be set to a value that is specially
   configured to be used as the RD for MVPN-RPL in a given VPN.  Call
   this the "MVPN-RPL" RD for that VPN.  In that case, all the
   C-multicast Joins that are providing C-BIDIR support (for a given
   VPN) using the MVPN-RPL method will have the same RD.  This MVPN-RPL
   RD of a given VPN MUST NOT be used for any other purpose, or by any
   other VPN.  See Section 1.2.2 for a discussion of when it may be
   advantageous to use an MVPN-RPL RD.

   For other provider tunnel types, or if the above mentioned MVPN-RPL
   RD in case of PIM/mLDP tunnel is not feasible (e.g.  BGP ADD-PATH is
   not supported), the RD in the C-multicast route is that of the VRF
   from which the route is originated.

   For Global Table Multicast (GTM) using MVPN procedures [RFC7716], RFC
   7716 specifies that MVPN routes use a special 0:0 RD.  This document
   specifies that GTM use non-0:0 RDs for C-Multicast routes for
   C-Bidir, when the backbone is used as RPL and provider tunnels are
   not set up by PIM/mLDP.

2.1.2.  Setting Up the MVPN-RPL

   By default, the I-PMSI or (C-*,C-BIDIR) S-PMSI plays the role of
   MVPN-RPL.  When (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) S-PMSI is used for a particular
   C-G-BIDIR, the following procedures are followed, depending on the
   type of provider tunnel used.

2.1.2.1.  Ingress Replication or BIER

   If Ingress Replication or BIER is used, there is no need for the
   ingress PE to advertise (C-*,C-G-BIDIR) S-PMSI A-D route.  The
   ingress PE identifies the tunnel leaves to send traffic to by the



Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   C-multicast routes it receives, because each such route has a
   different RD and serves explicit tracking purpose.  In case of IR,
   the label in the Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D
   route from a leaf is used to send traffic to the leaf.  In case of
   BIER, the label in the same route from the ingress PE is used to send
   traffic.

2.1.2.2.  RSVP-TE P2MP

   With RSVP-TE P2MP tunnel, the ingress PE advertises (C-*,C-G-BIDIR)
   S-PMSI A-D route without setting the LIR bit in the route's PTA.  It
   identifies the tunnel leaves from the C-multicast routes it receives.

2.1.2.3.  PIM/mLDP

   With PIM or mLDP P2MP provider tunnel, procedures in [RFC6514] are
   followed.

2.2.  Inter-AS Propagation of MVPN C-Multicast Routes

   This specification allows two methods of Inter-AS propagation for
   MVPN C-multicast routes.  The choice of which method is used is by
   provisioning.

2.2.1.  Procedures in Section 11.2 of [RFC6514]

   The procedures in Section 11.2 of [RFC6514] are extended with the
   following.

   The Source AS field in the NLRI of C-multicast route is set to the AS
   number of the UMH PE if and only if segmented inter-AS tunnels and
   per-AS aggregation (via Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D routes) are used.  The
   existing procedures are used as is in this case.

   Otherwise, when an egress PE constructs a C-Multicast route and the
   upstream PE is in a different AS from the local PE, it finds in its
   VRF an Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route or any S-PMSI A-D route from the
   upstream PE (the Originating Router's IP Address field of that route
   has the same value as the one carried in the VRF Route Import of the
   (unicast) route to the address carried in the Multicast Source
   field).  The RD of the found I/S-PMSI A-D route is used as the RD of
   the advertised C-multicast route.  The Source AS field in the
   C-multicast route is set to 0.  If the Next Hop of the found I/S-PMSI
   A-D route is an EBGP neighbor of the local PE, then the PE advertises
   the C- multicast route to that neighbor.  Otherwise the PE advertises
   the C-multicast route into IBGP.





Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   When an ASBR receives a C-multicast route with the Source AS field
   set to 0, it uses the RD of the C-multicast route to locate an Intra-
   AS I-PMSI A-D route or any S-PMSI A-D route, and propagate the
   C-multicast route to the bgp neighbor from which the found I/S-PMSI
   A-D route is learned.

2.2.2.  Ordinary BGP Propagation Procedures

   This document specifies that C-multicast routes MAY be propagated
   using ordinary BGP propagation procedures, which do not rely on the
   presence of any I/S-PMSI A-D routes.  With this method, the
   construction of C-Multicast A-D routes always follows the same
   procedures, whether the source is in the same or different AS.
   Specifically, the 3rd and 5th paragraphs of Section 11.1.3 of
   [RFC6514] are quoted here:

    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
    From the selected UMH route, the local PE extracts (a) the ASN of the
    upstream PE (as carried in the Source AS Extended Community of the
    route), and (b) the C-multicast Import RT of the VRF on the upstream
    PE (the value of this C-multicast Import RT is the value of the VRF
    Route Import Extended Community carried by the route).  The Source AS
    field in the C-multicast route is set to that AS.  The Route Target
    Extended Community of the C-multicast route is set to that
    C-multicast Import RT.

    ...

    ... the RD of
    the advertised MCAST-VPN NLRI is set to the RD of the VPN-IP route
    that contains the address carried in the Multicast Source field.
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   For targeted C-multicast routes, this will result in a less optimal
   propagation path, but it does work in all cases.  The Route Target
   Constraint procedures can always be used to obtain a more optimal
   path.

2.3.  Inter-AS Upstream PE Selection

   This document allows that, when selecting upstream PE for a source
   not in the local AS, the Single Forwarder Selection method, i.e., the
   default procedure in Section 5.1.3 of [RFC6513] is used, even if the
   method of using the installed UMH route as the selected UMH route is
   provisioned (to be used for sources in the local AS only).






Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


2.4.  Duplication Prevention on the Same Inclusive Inter-AS Tunnel

   The procedures in this section are only applicable when inclusive
   inter-AS tunnels advertised in Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D routes are used
   and it is known that an ingress ASBR may receive duplicate traffic
   from different ingress PEs in the same local AS.  One of the
   following two methods is provisioned consistently on all PEs and
   ingress ASBRs of a VPN.

2.4.1.  Using PE Distinguisher Labels

   With this method, an ingress ASBR that may receive duplicate traffic
   from different PEs and inject into the same inclusive inter-AS
   tunnels use a PED label to identify the upstream PE of the traffic,
   so that egress PEs can discard traffic not from their selected
   upstream PE.

   When an ASBR advertises an Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route, it includes a
   PE Distinguisher (PED) Labels attribute [RFC6514].  The attribute
   lists one label for each PE in the corresponding AS, and the labels
   are allocated from a Domain-wide Common Block (DCB,
   [I-D.ietf-bess-mvpn-evpn-aggregation-label]).  When an ingress ASBR
   forwards traffic it receives from a local ingress PE, it needs to
   push the label assigned to the ingress PE and advertised in the PED
   attribute of corresponding Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route.  Because the
   labels are assigned from the DCB, they do not need to be swapped
   along the way.  Downstream and upstream assigned labels could be used
   as well, but that requires the ASBRs swap PED labels along the way
   (in addition to tunnel label swapping) so they are not discussed
   here.

   Note that if intra-AS tunnel aggregation is used in the ingress AS,
   the ingress PE SHOULD use the same PED label and the ingress ASBR
   MUST NOT push the PED label again when forwarding traffic into the
   inclusive inter-as tunnel.

2.4.2.  Ingress ASBR Filtering Out Duplications

   With this method, an ingress ASBR performs IP forwarding for traffic
   that goes onto inclusive tunnels
   [I-D.zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-segmented-forwarding] after discarding
   traffic not from the upstream PE that it chooses.

   The ingress ASBR MUST be provisioned with a VRF for each VPN with
   local PEs, and with a C-multicast Import RT for the VRF.  The Inter-
   AS I-PMSI A-D route that it advertises for the VPN MUST carry a VRF
   Route Import Extended Community (EC) that has the value of the




Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   C-multicast Import RT for the VRF.  This is similar to that a PE
   includes a VRF Route Import EC in VPN-IP routes that it originates.

   When an egress PE constructs a C-multicast routes, if the source is
   in a different AS, the ingress ASBR that advertises the Inter-AS
   I-PMSI A-D rotue installed by this egress PE is chosen as the
   upstream PE.  The RD and AS number in the Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route
   are used to construct the C-multicast route, and a C-multicast Import
   RT (for importing the constructed C-multicast route into the ingress
   ASBR's VRF) is included, with the value of this RT being the value of
   the VRF Route Import EC carried by the Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route.

   When an ingress ASBR receives a C-multicast route and imports the
   route into one of its local VRFs (because of the RT constructed as
   above), it treats as if a PIM/IGMP join was received on the inter-AS
   inclusive tunnel.  It selects its own upstream PE and originates a
   corresponding C-multicast route.  Corresponding traffic received from
   the selected upstream PE is then routed into the inter-AS inclusive
   tunnel.

2.5.  Provider Tunnel Segmentation with Explicit-Tracking C-Multicast
      Routes

   This section applies when IR/BIER are used for MVPN/EVPN selective
   tunnels.

   If per-region aggregation [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates]
   is used, this document specifies that the per-region I-PMSI A-D route
   MUST carry a VRF Route Import EC to identify the originator of the
   per-region I-PMSI A-D route.  Note that, while it borrows "VRF Route
   Import EC" from the UMH routes, it is only used to identify the
   originator.

   If per-region aggregation is not used, this document specifies that
   either per-PE I-PMSI or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D routes MUST be
   originated by every PE.

2.5.1.  Egress PEs and RBRs

   An egress PE originates MVPN C-multicast routes for MVPN-RPL as
   specified in previous sections of this document, or EVPN SMET routes
   as specified in [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy].  Recall that
   EVPN SMET routes may also be referred to C-Multicast routes in this
   document.

   Explicit-tracking C-multicast routes must be processed by
   segmentation points, which are referred to as RBRs.  When a RBR
   receives a C-multicast route from within its own region, and the



Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   route does not carry a flag bit that indicates the route is converted
   from a downstream Leaf A-D route (see descriptions below), it
   converts the C-multicat route into one or more Leaf A-D routes, as if
   it had received corresponding S-PMSI A-D routes.  When a converted
   Leaf A-D routes reaches the ingress region, the RBR converts it back
   to C-multicast routes.

   With per-region aggregation, the RBR in an egress region finds all
   active per-region I-PMSI A-D route that the RBR has in the
   corresponding VRF.  For each of them, it makes up a (C-S,C-G) or
   (C-*,C-G) S-PMSI A-D route as following.

   o  RD: set to the RD from the per-region I-PMSI A-D route.

   o  Source/Group length/address fields: set according to the received
      C-multicast route.

   o  Originator's IP Address: set according to the VRF Route Import EC
      in the per-region I-PMSI A-D route

   o  Ethernet Tag ID in case of EVPN: set according to the received
      SMET route (which is also referred to as C-multicast route).

   o  Next Hop: set according to the per-region I-PMSI A-D route.

   Without per-region aggregation, a RBR finds all active per-PE I-PMSI
   or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D route in the VRF.  For each of them it makes
   up a (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) S-PMSI A-D route similar to the per-
   region aggregation case.  The only difference is that the
   Originator's IP Address field is set to the same as in the per-PE
   I-PMSI or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D route.

   A corresponding Leaf A-D route is then generated and propagated to
   the upstream identified by the BGP next hop in the made up S-PMSI A-D
   route, following existing PMSI/Leaf A-D route procedures.

   If the egress region uses Ingress Replication, the made up S-PMSI A-D
   route is not propagated anywhere.  If the egress region uses PIM or
   RSVP-TE/mLDP P2MP tunnel, the S-PMSI A-D route is advertised into the
   egress region to announce the tunnel to be used.  If the egress
   region uses BIER or aggregated RSVP-TE/mLDP P2MP tunnel, the S-PMSI
   A-D route is also advertised into the egress region and carry an
   upstream allocated label.  The label may be at the per S-PMSI A-D
   route level or at per VPN/BD level.  In the former case, label
   switching at the RBR can be used.  In the latter case, IP lookup in
   the corresponding VRF or BD is needed.





Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


2.5.2.  Transit RBRs

   When an upstream RBR receives a (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) Leaf A-D
   route, It locates the active per-PE/region I-PMSI or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI
   A-D route whose RD matches the received Leaf A-D route.  If no such
   route exists, the received Leaf A-D route is ignored until such a
   route appears later.  It also tries to locate a corresponding active
   (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) S-PMSI A-D route, which could be a real one
   received from an upstream PE/RBR, or could be a made up one triggered
   by a Leaf A-D route from a different downstream.  If such route
   exists, existing PMSI/Leaf A-D route procedures are followed.

   If no such corresponding active (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) S-PMSI A-D
   route exists, and the located active I-PMSI or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D
   route has a next hop different from the Originator IP Address in the
   per-PE I-PMSI A-D route or (C-*,C-*) I-PMSI A-D route, or different
   from the address in the VRF Route Import EC in the per-region I-PMSI
   A-D route, the ingress region corresponding to the I-PMSI or
   (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI A-D route has not been reached.  The RBR then makes
   up a (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) S-PMSI A-D route.  as specified earlier,
   and proxies Leaf A-D routes further up.  Similarly, the S-PMSI A-D
   route may be advertised into the transit region.

2.5.3.  Ingress RBRs

   If the BGP next hop in the located active I-PMSI or (C-*,C-*) S-PMSI
   A-D route matches the Originator IP Address in the per-PE I/S-PMSI
   A-D route or the IP address in the per-region I-PMSI A-D route's VRF
   Route Import EC, it means the ingress region has been reached.  If
   the corresponding (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) S-PMSI A-D route is a made
   up one and not actually advertised by an ingress PE/RBR, and the RBR
   does not have corresponding local (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) state, it
   reconverts the Leaf A-D route back to C-multicast route, with a CV
   ("Converted") flag bit indicating that the route is not from local
   state learned on PE-CE interface but from state learned further
   downstream.  The flag bit prevents other RBRs in this region to
   trigger Leaf A-D routes from this converted C-multicast route.

   The converted C-multicast route is constructed as following:

   o  RD: set to the RD of the RBR for the related IP/MAC VRF.

   o  Source/Group length/address fields: set according to the received
      Leaf A-D route.

   o  Ethernet Tag ID in case of EVPN: set according to the received
      Leaf A-D route.




Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   o  Next Hop: set to the RBR's local IP Address.

   The RT of the converted C-multicast route is set to the RT used for
   VRF but the route is only propagated to PEs/RBRs in the local region.

   For EVPN SMET routes, the flag bit is part of the existing Flags
   field in the NLRI:

                         0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
                       +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
                       |reserved|CV|IE|v3|v2|v1|
                       +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

   The IE/v3/v2/v1 are existing bits and the CV bit is the new bit to
   indicate that this is converted from state learned from downstream.

   For MVPN C-Multicast route, the CV bit is part of a new MVPN Flag EC,
   to be specified in a future revision.

2.5.4.  Setting Up Forwarding State on RBRs

   As a RBR follows the PMSI/Leaf A-D route procedures (even though the
   S-PMSI A-D route may be made up and not real), it sets up forwarding
   state accordingly [RFC7988] [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn].  If IR is used in
   the upstream region, a downstream allocated label is advertised in
   the PTA of the Leaf A-D route sent upstream.  If BIER is used in a
   region, the root RBR for the segment in that region MUST advertise an
   S-PMSI A-D route, whether the route is actually received from
   upstream or made up based on received C-multicast route or Leaf A-D
   route, with the PTA's label field set to a label upstream-assigned by
   the root RBR of the segment.  This allows label switching by the RBR
   instead of relying on (C-S,C-G) lookup based forwarding in the VRF.

2.5.5.  Other Types of Tunnels

   The inter-region segmented tunnel can consists of different types of
   tunnels, like PIM/mLDP/RSVP-TE P2MP tunnels that require advertised
   S-PMSI A-D routes.  This is just like BIER case mentioned in the
   above section.  The only difference is that in BIER case it is the
   upstream allocated label that needs to be advertised by the S-PMSI
   A-D routes and in PIM/mLDP/RSVP-TE P2MP case it is the tunnel
   identity and optionally the upstream allocated label that need to be
   advertised by the S-PMSI A-D routes.








Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


3.  Security Considerations

   This document does not seem to introduce new security risks, though
   this may be revised after further review and scrutiny.

4.  Acknowledgements

   The authors thank Vinay Nallamothu and Kevin Wang for their comments
   and suggestions.  The authors also thank Vinod N.  Kumar and
   Sambasiva Rao for their suggestion of using the selected UMH route's
   RD for C-multicast A-D even when the source is not in the same AS
   (Section Section 2.2.2).

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates]
              Zhang, Z., Lin, W., Rabadan, J., Patel, K., and A.
              Sajassi, "Updates on EVPN BUM Procedures", draft-ietf-
              bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates-05 (work in progress),
              December 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy]
              Sajassi, A., Thoria, S., Patel, K., Yeung, D., Drake, J.,
              and W. Lin, "IGMP and MLD Proxy for EVPN", draft-ietf-
              bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy-02 (work in progress), June 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-bess-mvpn-evpn-aggregation-label]
              Zhang, Z., Rosen, E., Lin, W., Li, Z., and I. Wijnands,
              "MVPN/EVPN Tunnel Aggregation with Common Labels", draft-
              ietf-bess-mvpn-evpn-aggregation-label-02 (work in
              progress), December 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn]
              Rosen, E., Sivakumar, M., Aldrin, S., Dolganow, A., and T.
              Przygienda, "Multicast VPN Using BIER", draft-ietf-bier-
              mvpn-11 (work in progress), March 2018.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.








Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   [RFC4684]  Marques, P., Bonica, R., Fang, L., Martini, L., Raszuk,
              R., Patel, K., and J. Guichard, "Constrained Route
              Distribution for Border Gateway Protocol/MultiProtocol
              Label Switching (BGP/MPLS) Internet Protocol (IP) Virtual
              Private Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4684, DOI 10.17487/RFC4684,
              November 2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4684>.

   [RFC5015]  Handley, M., Kouvelas, I., Speakman, T., and L. Vicisano,
              "Bidirectional Protocol Independent Multicast (BIDIR-
              PIM)", RFC 5015, DOI 10.17487/RFC5015, October 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5015>.

   [RFC6513]  Rosen, E., Ed. and R. Aggarwal, Ed., "Multicast in MPLS/
              BGP IP VPNs", RFC 6513, DOI 10.17487/RFC6513, February
              2012, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6513>.

   [RFC6514]  Aggarwal, R., Rosen, E., Morin, T., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP
              Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
              VPNs", RFC 6514, DOI 10.17487/RFC6514, February 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6514>.

   [RFC7524]  Rekhter, Y., Rosen, E., Aggarwal, R., Morin, T.,
              Grosclaude, I., Leymann, N., and S. Saad, "Inter-Area
              Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) Segmented Label Switched Paths
              (LSPs)", RFC 7524, DOI 10.17487/RFC7524, May 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7524>.

   [RFC7716]  Zhang, J., Giuliano, L., Rosen, E., Ed., Subramanian, K.,
              and D. Pacella, "Global Table Multicast with BGP Multicast
              VPN (BGP-MVPN) Procedures", RFC 7716,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7716, December 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7716>.

   [RFC7911]  Walton, D., Retana, A., Chen, E., and J. Scudder,
              "Advertisement of Multiple Paths in BGP", RFC 7911,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7911, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7911>.

   [RFC7988]  Rosen, E., Ed., Subramanian, K., and Z. Zhang, "Ingress
              Replication Tunnels in Multicast VPN", RFC 7988,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7988, October 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7988>.

5.2.  Informative References







Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          C-Multicast Enhancements              March 2019


   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-irb-mcast]
              Lin, W., Zhang, Z., Drake, J., Rosen, E., Rabadan, J., and
              A. Sajassi, "EVPN Optimized Inter-Subnet Multicast (OISM)
              Forwarding", draft-ietf-bess-evpn-irb-mcast-02 (work in
              progress), January 2019.

   [I-D.ietf-bess-mvpn-fast-failover]
              Morin, T., Kebler, R., and G. Mirsky, "Multicast VPN fast
              upstream failover", draft-ietf-bess-mvpn-fast-failover-05
              (work in progress), February 2019.

   [I-D.zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-segmented-forwarding]
              Zhang, Z. and J. Xie, "MVPN/EVPN Segmentated Forwarding
              Options", draft-zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-segmented-
              forwarding-00 (work in progress), December 2018.

Authors' Addresses

   Zhaohui Zhang
   Juniper Networks

   EMail: zzhang@juniper.net


   Robert Kebler
   Juniper Networks

   EMail: rkebler@juniper.net


   Wen Lin
   Juniper Networks

   EMail: wlin@juniper.net


   Eric Rosen

   EMail: erosen52@gmail.com












Zhang, et al.          Expires September 12, 2019              [Page 23]
