

CCAMP WG                                               Osama Aboul-Magd 
Internet Draft                                          Nortel Networks 
Document: draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-              Feb. , 2003 
00.txt 
Category: Informational                                                 
 
 
                    A Transport Network View to LMP 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to 
   produce derivative works is not granted.  
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered in accordance 
   with Section 10 of RFC2026, and the author does not provide the IETF 
   with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-Draft  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
1. Abstract 
    
   The Link Management Protocol (LMP) has bee defined at the IETF to 
   facilitate the management of transport network for the sake of 
   supporting IP traffic over transport network. The LMP development 
   has been progressing in the context of GMPLS related work. 
    
   The LMP was developed with a packet centric view in mind. Since it 
   is intended for the control of transport network it is essential to 
   bridge the gap between the two views. It is the objective of this 
   draft to project LMP in a transport network context and to relate it 
   to the discovery work that has been going on at the ITU.  
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     1 
              Draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-00.txt     Feb, 2003
                                                                       
 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
    
3. Transport Network Architecture 
    
   Traditionally the development of transport network standards, e.g. 
   SONET, SDH, OTN, etc. have been progressing at T1X1 and at the ITU-T 
   SG 15. To facilitate the development of those standards the ITU have 
   developed network architecture in recommendation G.805. The G.805 
   architecture is closely followed by the SG 15 in developing its 
   transport network recommendations. 
    
   G.805 defines layered network architecture which defines a client-
   server architecture. The architecture is recursive so that it can be 
   applied at different network layers with one layer acts as the 
   server while the layer above it defines the client. 
    
    The basic components of the G.805 architecture are ôsubnetworksö 
   and ôlinksö. A subnetwork is defined as a set of ports which are 
   available for the purpose of transferring ôcharacteristic 
   informationö. A link consists of a subset of ports at the edge of 
   one subnetwork (or ôaccess groupö) and is associated with a 
   corresponding subset of ports at the edge of another subset or 
   access group. 
    
   Two types of connections are defined. Link connection (LC) is a 
   fixed and inflexible while a subnetwork connection (SNC) is flexible 
   and is setup and released using management or control plane. A 
   network connection is then a concatenation of subnetwork and link 
   connections. 
    
   G.805 defines a set of reference points for the purpose of 
   identification in the management and the control plane. A link or a 
   subnetwork connection is delimited by connection points (CP). A 
   network connection is delimited by a termination connection point 
   (TCP). A link connection in the client layer is represented by a 
   pair of adaptation functions and a trail in the server layer 
   network. A trail represents the transfer of monitored adapted 
   characteristics information of the client layer network between 
   access points (AP). A trail is delimited by two access points, one 
   at each end of the trail.  
    
   For management plane purpose the G.805 reference points are 
   represented by a set of management objects described in ITU 
   recommendation M.3100. Connection termination points (CTP) and trail 
   termination points (TTP) are the management plane objects for CP and 
   TCP (or AP??) respectively.  
    
   In the same way as in M.3100, the transport resources in G.805 are 
   identified for the purpose of control plane by entities suitable for 
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     2 
              Draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-00.txt     Feb, 2003
                                                                       
 
 
   connection control. G.8080 introduces the reference architecture for 
   the control plane of the automatic switched optical networks (ASON). 
   G.8080 introduces a set of reference points relevant to the control 
   plane and their relationship to the corresponding points in the 
   transport plane. A Subnetwork point (SNP) is an abstraction that 
   represents an actual or potential underlying CP or an actual and 
   potential TCP. A set of SNPs that are grouped together for the 
   purpose of routing is called SNP pool (SNPP). Similar to LC and SNC, 
   the SNP-SNP relationship may be static and inflexible (this is 
   referred to as SNP link connection) or it can be dynamic and 
   flexible (this is referred to as SNP subnetwork connection). 
    
    
4. G.8080 Discovery Framework 
    
   The fundamental characteristics of G.8080 discovery framework is the 
   separation between the control and the transport plane name spaces. 
   The separation between the two name spaces has the advantage that 
   the discovery of each plane can be performed independent from that 
   of the other place. It facilitates the commissioning of the 
   transport plane independent from the control plane. The separation 
   of the name spaces allows control plane names to be completely 
   independent of the method used to distribute transport names 
    
   G.8080 Amendment 1 defines the discovery agent (DA) as the entity 
   responsible for the discovery in the transport plane. The DS 
   operates in the transport name space only and provides the 
   separation between that space and the control plane names. A local 
   DA is is only aware of the CPs and TCPs that are assigned to him. 
   The DA holds the CP-CP link connection in the transport plane to 
   enable SNP-SNP link connections to be bound to them later.  
    
   Control plane discovery takes place entirely within the control 
   plane name space (SNPs). Link Resource Manager (LRM) hold the SNP-
   SNP binding information necessary for the control plane name of the 
   link connection, while termination adaptation performer (TAP) holds 
   the relation between the control plane name (SNP) and the transport 
   plane name (CP) of the resource.  
 
5. Overview of G.7714.1 
    
   G.7714.1 describes the methods, procedures, and transport plane 
   mechanisms for discovering layer adjacency for ASON. It includes 
   discovery of the relationship of the link connection end points and 
   verifying their connectivity. It applies to Single Layer in the 
   context of the transport name space. The result of the discovery 
   process is a Link Connection name, which includes a pair of 
   Transport end points + Discovery Agent names. G7714.1 allows both 
   in-service discovery using server layer trail overhead, and out-of-
   service discovery at the client layer.  
    
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     3 
              Draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-00.txt     Feb, 2003
                                                                       
 
 
   Information relevant to discovery are the DA ID and the TCP ID. The 
   DA ID is allowed to be either a DA address or a DA name. The DA name 
   can then be resolved to a DA address. The TCP ID contains the 
   identifier for the TCP being discovered. This has only local 
   significance within the scope of the DA. 
    
   Discovery information is exchanged in the Discovery and Discovery 
   Response message. The discovery response message is sent in response 
   to the Discovery message. It contains both the received and the sent 
   DA ID and ICP ID. Mis-wiring can then be detected if the TCP-ID 
   corresponding to the remote end point of the link connection is not 
   the same in both messages.  
    
   Once a bi-directional link has been discovered it should be checked 
   against management provided policy to determine if correct TCP-link 
   connection end points have been correctly connected. 
    
    
    
6. LMP and G.8080 Discovery  
    
   The Link Management Protocol (LMP) has bee defined at the IETF to 
   facilitate the management of transport network for discovery and 
   control transport network elements. The LMP development has been 
   progressing in the context of GMPLS related work. 
    
   LMP was developed with a IP framework in mind. However many transport 
   elements do not support IP natively and as a result the concepts of 
   LMP need to be adapted to the transport world. Since LMP functions 
   are intended for the control of transport network it is essential to 
   relate the concepts and functions between the IP and transport views. 
   It is the objective of this draft to project LMP in a transport 
   network context and to relate it to the discovery work that has been 
   going on at the ITU. 
    
   LMP consists of four procedures. Those procedures are the control 
   channel maintenance, link property correlation, link connection 
   verification, and fault management. One fundamental difference 
   between LMP and G.8080 discovery frame work is the absence of the 
   explicit separation between transport and control plane names. 
    
   The part of LMP that is relevant to G.7714.1 is the link connection 
   verification part. In both cases in-band discovery message is used. 
   LMP uses an in-band Test message for this purpose that is used to 
   transmit the local Interface ID to the remote end of the link. 
   TestStatus message is used that copies the received Interface ID and 
   transmits the local Interface ID to the other end of the link. While 
   Interface ID in LMP can be IPv4, IPv6, or unnumbered, the TCP ID in 
   G.7714.1 is a transport layer ID that may or may not use any of 
   those format. 
    
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     4 
              Draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-00.txt     Feb, 2003
                                                                       
 
 
   LMP procedures that are relevant to G.8080 control plane discovery 
   are control channel maintenance and link property correlation. This 
   feature is used to synchronize the TE Link properties and verify the 
   TE link configuration. Link Property Correlation provides full 
   discovery of all intra and inter layer relationships along a 
   potential connection, requiring that a single connection management 
   application manages multiples layers. One of the problems of this 
   approach is that All connection management applications must 
   understand the engineering constraints of the technology used to 
   implement each layer (e.g. at least four different implementations 
   are supported at the Photonic layer). ItÆs not clear either how the 
   topology information can be shared with other applications or how 
   the network can be partitioned.  
    
   Control plane discovery is described in G.8080 although no 
   recommendation has been started yet. The Control Discovery process 
   described in G.8080 involves the interactions between the DA, TAP 
   and LRM as follows: SNPs are pre-assigned to SNPPs (which are 
   equivalent to LMP TE-Links). When the association CTP-SNP is 
   received from the TAP, and the CTP-CTP relationship have been found 
   as per G.7714.1, the SNP-SNP relation is discovered as well as their 
   associated SNPP-SNPP relation-ship. This relation is then verified 
   by communicating the end-point LRMs. Specific information that need 
   to be exchanged or particular procedures have not been addressed 
   yet. There is indeed the room to use LMP messages and procedures for 
   this purpose. 
    
    
    
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
    
    
 
    
    
10.  Acknowledgments 
    
   The author would like to thank Astrid Luzano and Don Fedyk for their 
   valuable comments. 
    
    
11.  Author's Addresses 
    
   Osama Aboul-Magd 
   Nortel Networks 
   P.O. Box 3511, Station C 
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     5 
              Draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-00.txt     Feb, 2003
                                                                       
 
 
   Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
   K1Y-4H7 
   Tel: 613-763-5827 
   E.mail: osama@nortelnetworks.com 
    
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     6 
              Draft-aboulmagd-ccamp-transport-lmp-00.txt     Feb, 2003
                                                                       
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
  
Aboul-Magd            Informational- Sept. 2003                     7 