Internet Draft                                        Sriganesh Kini   
Expires : April 2001                                  Muralidharan Kodialam
<draft-kini-ospf-lsp-restoration-00.txt>              T.V.Lakshman          
                                                      - Bell Labs        
                                                                              
                                                      Curtis Villamizar
                                                      - Avici Systems
                                                                              
                   Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
          protocol extensions for Label Switched Path restoration        
                                                                              
                 draft-kini-ospf-lsp-restoration-00.txt                     
                                                                              
Status of this memo                                                           
                                                                              
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with      
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.                                
                                                                           
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering       
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that        
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-          
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months   
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any   
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference   
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."             
  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at                  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt                              

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at        
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.                                        

Abstract

   Traffic engineering using MPLS involves the setting up of label
   switched paths (LSP) possibly with explicit routing and with
   bandwidth guarantees (for label switched paths). The reliability of
   these LSPs can be increased by providing a backup LSP onto which
   traffic can be switched upon failure of an element in the path of the
   active LSP. Backup LSPs can be routed in a way that bandwidth can be
   shared between backup links of more than one active path while still
   guaranteeing recoverability for a set of failures. This sharing greatly
   increases the network efficiency, thereby increasing the number of LSPs
   that can be carried while maintaining guarantees. Algorithms which can
   route such recoverable LSPs while using only aggregate network usage 
   information are being developed. To route the active LSP and the
   (possibly shared) backup LSP, the topology information of the network
   is needed and  this can be provided by a link state routing protocol
   like OSPF. This document describes the encoding of the additional
   information within the link state advertisement (LSA) of OSPF to enable
   routing of shared backup paths.


                                                                              
S. Kini, et al            Expires April, 2001                       [Page 1] 
                                                                            
Internet Draft   draft-kini-ospf-lsp-restoration-00.txt        November 2000  
                                                                              
1. Introduction                                                               
                                                                              
   The concept of sharing links along backup paths is explained in [4].
   OSPF (as described in [2]) is a link state protocol that can provide
   topology information about the network. Extensions to OSPF
   to enable traffic engineering are described in [1]. This document
   proposes further TE extensions to OSPF. These extensions provide
   aggregate information useful to calculate shared backup paths.

2. Extensions to the Type 10 LSA
                                                                              
   The opaque LSA [5] Type 10 (with area flooding scope) is used to convey
   traffic engineering capabilities [1]. The semantic content of the
   extensions proposed here are essentially identical to the corresponding
   extensions to IS-IS [3].

   The extensions described here add more information about a link to
   the Type 10 LSA. New sub-TLVs are defined for the link TLV (section
   2.4.2 of [1]). All sub-TLVs defined in this document are optional.

   Sub-TLV Type  Length (octets) Name                                
   x1            4*8             link bandwidth allocated for active paths
                                  with backup  
   x2            4*8             link bandwidth allocated for active paths     
                                  without backup
   x3            4*8             link bandwidth allocated for backup paths

   Note : Only logical numbers (x1, .. x3) are used to describe the
   sub-TLV. Actual values can be assigned when this document is made
   a working group document.

2.1 Sub-TLV x1 : Link bandwidth allocated for active paths with backup

   This sub-TLV contains the bandwidth that is reserved on this link
   for active paths that have backup paths.

   The link bandwidths allocated for active paths is encoded in 32 bits
   in IEEE floating point format. The units are bytes (not bits!) per
   second.

2.2 Sub-TLV x2 : Link bandwidth allocated for active paths without backup

   This sub-TLV contains the bandwidth that is reserved on this link
   for active paths that do not have a backup.

   The link bandwidths allocated for active paths without a backup is
   encoded in 32 bits in IEEE floating point format. The units are bytes
   (not bits!) per second.

2.3 Sub-TLV x3 : Link bandwidth allocated for backup paths

   This sub-TLV contains the bandwidth that is allocated to backup paths.

                                                                              
S. Kini, et al            Expires April, 2001                       [Page 2] 
                                                                            
Internet Draft   draft-kini-ospf-lsp-restoration-00.txt        November 2000  


   The link bandwidths allocated for backup paths is encoded in 32 bits
   in IEEE floating point format. The units are bytes (not bits!) per
   second.

3. Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security issues for OSPF.

4. IANA Considerations

   The responsible Internet authority (presently called IANA) should assign
   values to x1, x2 and x3.

5. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Vishal Sharma and Roch Guerin for their
   comments on this work.

6. References                                                                 
                                                                              
   [1] Katz, D., Yeung, M., "Traffic engineering extensions to OSPF",
       Internet Draft <draft-katz-yeung-ospf-traffic-01.txt>,
      November 1999.

   [2] Moy, J,, "OSPF Version 2" RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [3] Kini, S., et al, "Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) 
       protocol extensions for Label Switched Path restoration" Work in
       progress, Internet Draft <draft-kini-isis-lsp-restoration-00.txt>,
      November 2000.

   [4] Kini. S., et al, "Shared backup Label Switched Path restoration",
       Work in progress, Internet Draft <draft-kini-restoration-shared-
       backup-00.txt>. November 2000.

   [5] Coltun. R., "The OSPF Opaque LSA Option", RFC2370. July 1998.

7. Author's Addresses              
                                 
   Sriganesh Kini
   Lucent Technologies, Bell Labs
   High Speed Networks Research Department
   Room 4C-526, 101 Crawfords Corner Road
   Holmdel, NJ 07733-3030
   Phone : 732 949 6418
   Email : kini@dnrc.bell-labs.com

   Muralidharan Kodialam
   Lucent Technologies, Bell Labs
   High Speed Networks Research Department
   Room 4D-525, 101 Crawfords Corner Road
   Holmdel, NJ 07733-3030
                                                                              
S. Kini, et al            Expires April, 2001                       [Page 3] 
                                                                            
Internet Draft   draft-kini-ospf-lsp-restoration-00.txt        November 2000  

   Phone : 732 949 6296
   Email : muralik@dnrc.bell-labs.com

   T.V.Lakshman
   Lucent Technologies, Bell Labs
   High Speed Networks Research Department
   Room 4D-531, 101 Crawfords Corner Road

   Holmdel, NJ 07733-3030
   Phone : 732 949 4778
   Email : lakshman@dnrc.bell-labs.com

   Curtis Villamizar
   Avici Systems
   Email : curtis@avici.com                                         




Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."







                                                                              
S. Kini, et al            Expires April, 2001                       [Page 4] 