  Internet Draft                                              Penn Pfautz 
  Document: <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-00.txt>                        AT&T 
  Category: Informational                                        James Yu 
                                                            NeuStar, Inc. 
                                                             October 2000 
   
   
                                      
                                      
                ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A. 
   
                        <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm-00.txt> 
   
   
   
   
  Status of this Memo 
   
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
   
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.  
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress."  
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
       
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
     To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check 
     the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts 
     Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net 
     (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East 
     Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast). 
      


















    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-adm-process.00>        Expires March 2001      1 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
  Abstract 
      
  This document considers administrative processes for ENUM in the 
  U.S.A. and offers two "strawman" proposals in the spirit of moving 
  forward the work that must be done to implement a useful ENUM 
  capability. The U.S.A. has implemented number portability; therefore, 
  it is the telephony user that controls the assigned telephone number 
  so long as it maintains the telephony service.  While the proposed 
  processes are tailored for the U.S.A. they may be appropriate for use 
  by other countries that implement number portability so that the 
  donor telephony service provider (e.g., the telephony service 
  provider that is assigned a block of telephony numbers before any 
  number porting event happens from that number block) is not relied on 
  for maintaining the delegation information for a telephone number 
  (e.g., the Tier 1 function in the ENUM process). 
   
  The ENUM administrative process is a critical piece in making the 
  ENUM process operational.  The administrative process involves 
  several entities.  A telephony user's identity and his/her ownership 
  of a telephone number must be validated before ENUM service can be 
  granted.  Therefore, the telephony user's telephony service provider 
  plays an important and sometimes necessary role in making the ENUM 
  administrative process successful. 
   
  This document discusses two reference models.  The telephony service 
  provider is the Tier 2 Entity or Service Registrar in Reference Model 
  II but is not necessarily the Tier 2 Entity in Reference Model I.  
  The information flows associated with these two reference models are 
  described to show the interactions among the involved entities and 
  the functions to be performed by each involved entity.  The industry 
  and regulators will decide which reference model is to be used and 
  the future revisions of this document will reflect that decision 
  along with any enhancement to the information flows. 
   
      
  1. Introduction 
      
     This document discusses the ENUM [2,3,4] administrative process in 
     the U.S.A.  The U.S.A. has implemented number portability [5,6]; 
     therefore, it is the telephony user that controls the assigned 
     telephone number so long as it maintains the telephony service.  
     The proposed process is tailored for the U.S.A. so that the donor 
     telephony service provider (i.e., the telephony service provider 
     that is assigned a block of telephony numbers before any number 
     porting event happens from that number block) is not relied on for 
     maintaining the delegation information for a TN (i.e., the Tier 1 
     function in the ENUM process).  Much of what is proposed would be 
     applicable to other areas and for telephone numbers that are 
     shared by regional or international community such as the +881 and 
     +878 numbers. 
      
      
     Provisioning of ENUM is complex because it combines elements of 
     the domain name registration process (after all it is a domain 
     name that is being registered) and the preferred carrier selection 
     process (Preferred Inter-exchange Carrier or PIC in the U.S.A.) 
     because particular providers are being selected to provide 
     services to the holder of the domain name identified by the 
     telephone number. It is essential to develop an administrative 
     process that is operationally efficient, provides adequate 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  2 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     authentication of requests and at the same time is not burdensome 
     for the end user of the telephone number. 
      
     Two reference models for ENUM administration are considered: one 
     in which the end user can select which Tier 2 Entity (T2E) to use 
     for its assigned TN (Reference Model I) and another in which the 
     EU's Telephony Service Provider (TSP) is the T2E (Reference Model 
     II). 
   
     Both models assume that a "Tier 1 Entity (T1E)" has been chartered 
     by national (or, multi-national in the case of the North American 
     Numbering Plan (NANP)[7]) authorities to provide the Domain Name 
     System (DNS) service for the <country code>.e164.arpa domain 
     (1.e164.arpa for NANP) and that this entity provisions zones of 
     authority for each telephone number (TN) that point to the correct 
     service registrar for the telephone number. The service 
     registrar's DNS in turn holds the Naming Authority Pointer 
     (NAPTR)[8] records for the TN. 
      
      
  2. Terminology and Abbreviations 
      
     ASP    Application Service Provider, a service provider that 
            provides applications such as e-mail, or voice messaging to 
            an EU that is assigned with a TN. 
      
     DNS    Domain Name System 
      
     ENUM   Telephone Number URI mapping 
      
     EU     End User, a person or entity that is assigned a telephone 
            number.  The EU plays the role similar to the "registrant." 
      
     HLR    Home Location Register 
      
     ICANN  Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
      
     ID     Identity or Identification 
      
     ISP    Internet Service Provider 
      
     LERG   Local Exchange Routing Guide  
      
     NANP   North American Numbering Plan 
      
     NAPTR  Naming Authority Pointer 
      
     NPAC   Number Portability Administration Center 
      
     PIC    Preferred Inter-exchange Carrier 
      
     RR     Resource Record 
      
     SIP    Session Initiation Protocol 
      
     SMS    Service Management System 
      
     SMS-MC Short Message Service Message Center 
      
     T1E    Tier 1 Entity, the entity that has a pointer to the Tier 2 
            Entity for each served TN.  The T1E plays a role similar to 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  3 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
            the "registry." [do we need a citation about registry -
            registrar?] 
      
     T2E    Tier 2 Entity, the entity that has all the NAPTR RRs 
            associated with each served TN.  The T2E plays the role 
            similar to the "registrar." 
      
     T3E    Tier 3 Entity, the entity that provides the service-
            specific directory services for retrieving additional 
            information for services related to a TN. 
      
     TN     Telephone number, an E.164 number in the national or 
            international numbering plan. 
      
     TSP    Telephony Service Provider, the telephony service provider 
            that provides telephony and related services to a TN. 
      
     VLR    Visitor Location Register 
      
     URI    Uniform Resource Identifier 
      
     URL    Uniform Resource Locator 
      
      
  3. Reference Models 
      
     This section discusses two reference models that show the entities 
     and the interfaces among them that are involved in the ENUM 
     administrative process.  The assumptions are first described below 
     before the discussion of the reference models. 
   
   
  3.1. Assumptions 
      
     Some assumptions are made so as to describe the proposed ENUM 
     administrative process in a controlled manner.  Those assumptions 
     are made based on the objectives to have an efficient and 
     effective and a user-friendly administrative process.  They are 
     shown below.  The assumptions apply to both Reference Models I and 
     II unless specifically indicated. 
      
     - One Tier 1 Entity (T1E) handles 1.enum.arpa. and points each 
       served Telephone Number (TN) to a T2E. 
      
     - All NAPTR records for a given TN must be stored in a single Tier 
       2 entity's name server. 
      
     - Not every TN has a record or records at the T1E. 
      
     - The EU can use the ENUM service as a personal number service and 
       can subscribe to many application services (e.g., e-mail and 
       voice mail) from various ASPs including his/her TSP. 
      
     - The TSP of an EU may use the ENUM service for network-related 
       services.  Some of those network-related services use TNs that 
       are not assigned to the EUs. For example, the ENUM process can 
       be used to identify the wireless network element such as the 
       Home Location Register (HLR) or Visitor Location Register (VLR) 
       by using TNs not assigned to the EUs[9].  Other network-related 
       services may use TNs that are assigned to the EUs.  For example, 
       ENUM process can be used to identify the wireless Short Message 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  4 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
       Service Message Center (SMS-MC) when a short message is 
       addressed to a wireless subscriber's TN. 
      
     - The TSP may offer application services to the EUs.  For those 
       application services, the TSP is no different from the ASPs that 
       can offer the same applications services to the EUs.  The TSP 
       will be treated as the ASPs for those EUs' application services. 
      
     - The EU decides which Tier 2 Entity (T2E) to use for its assigned 
       TN (Reference Model I) or the EU's Telephony Service Provider 
       (TSP) is the T2E (Reference Model II). 
      
     - The mention of the entity such as T1E or T2E in this document 
       sometimes means the entity that offers a specific functionality 
       (e.g., T1E) and other times refers to the domain name servers 
       (e.g., can be two or more) operated by that particular entity.    
      
     - The EU has authority over provisioning of the Naming Authority 
       Pointer (NAPTR) Resource Records (RRs) at the T2E for his/her 
       application services, but in most instances may not provide the 
       NAPTR RRs to the T2E directly, but rather authorize the T2E and 
       various ASPs to provision the records.  The TSP has authority 
       over provisioning of the NAPTR RRs at the T2E for the network-
       related services in Reference Model I.  The T2E must control the 
       access right to the NAPTRs so that the TSP and ASPs can only 
       provision/access/change their own NAPTR RRs.   
      
     - The NAPTR RRs for the EU's application services and the TSP's 
       network-related services can be easily differentiated (e.g., via 
       the "service" field of the NAPTR RR). 
      
     - For a TN that is not assigned to any EU, the TSP that controls 
       that TN can be viewed as the EU for that TN. 
      
     - In Reference Model I, if the TSP uses ENUM for network-related 
       services, the TSP may designate a T2E, called "TSP's default 
       T2E," to hold these network-related NAPTR RRs if the EU has not 
       opted to make use of ENUM services.  When an EU does decide to 
       make use of ENUM services and chooses a T2E different than the 
       TSP's default T2E, the EU's chosen T2E will become the new T2E 
       and will retrieve the TSP's NAPTR RRs from the TSP's default 
       T2E.  When the EU stops using the ENUM service and the T2E 
       informs the T1E to remove the pointer to it for that TN, the T1E 
       will point to the TSP's default T2E for that TN. 
      
     - The T1E knows the TSP for each TN and knows when a number 
       porting takes place through information from the Number 
       Portability Administration Center (NPAC)[10]. 
      
     - In reference model 1, the EU can change the T2E without 
       informing the current serving T2E (the old T2E).  The new T2E 
       may inform the old T2E and will inform the T1E about the T2E 
       change for the TN.  The T1E will confirm the change with the old 
       T2E and inform the new T2E about the confirmation.  After 
       retrieving the NAPTR RRs for the TN from the old T2E, the new 
       T2E informs the T1E to make the T2E change in effect.  This 
       process is similar to the change of the TSP through the NPAC and 
       the change of registrar through the registry.   
      
     - The TSP may need to confirm the TN assignment to an EU when 
       requested by the T1E and/or T2E.  The need for this action from 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  5 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
       the TSP depends on whether the T1E or T2E can get the 
       information from other sources. 
      
     - The EU loses his/her right to the assigned TN and ENUM services 
       when he/she disconnects the telephony service.   
      
     - The TSP informs the T1E when the EU disconnects the telephony 
       service in a timely manner. 
      
     - An EU can be assigned one TN or a set of TNs.  The 
       administrative process will be designed to handle individual TN 
       or set of TNs for an EU.  In the discussion of information 
       flows, only single TN is addressed. 
      
     Two reference models are discussed next.  Reference Model I 
     assumes that the T2E is not necessarily the TSP. Reference Model 
     II assumes that the TSP must be the T2E.  The former gives the EU 
     more control of who the service registrar (T2E) is.  The latter is 
     a subset of the former, and it simplifies the process because the 
     TSP's necessary role (e.g., verifying the ownership of a TN) in 
     certain situations and because fewer entities are involved in the 
     process. 
      
   
  3.1. Reference Model I (TSP =/= T2E) 
      
     Figure 1 shows Reference Model I where all the entities involved
     can be logically different.  The EU decides which T2E to be 
     his/her service registrar.  The T2E can be physically operated by 
     the EU itself, its TSP, its Internet Service Provider (ISP), or a 
     third-party entity designated by the EU. The T2E may need to be a 
     certified entity (e.g., by a trusted certificate authority or by 
     Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)) to 
     play the T2E role. 
      
      
                    +-----+      H      +-----+ 
              +-----| T1E |      +------| T2E | 
              |     +-----+      |      +-----+ 
              |        |         | 
              |       A+ +-------+ 
              |        | | 
              |     +-----+      B      +----+ 
              |     | T2E |------+------| EU | 
              |     +-----+   +---------+----+ 
              |        | |    |           | 
             C+       F+ |    |  G        +E 
              |        | +----|--+-----+  | 
              |        |      |        |  | 
              |     +-----+   +D       +-----+ 
              +-----| TSP |---+        | ASP | 
                    +-----+            +-----+ 
   
   
                 Figure 1. Reference Model I 
   
      
     Interface A is used by the new T2E to indicate the T2E change to 
     the T1E or by the T2E to provision its RRs (e.g., change the DNS 
     RRs) at the T1E for a TN, and by the T1E to inform the old T2E 
     when the EU changes to a new T2E, and the new T2E about the old 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  6 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     T2E, and to acknowledge the new T2E request for a T2E change for a 
     TN.  
      
     Interface B is used by the EU to request ENUM service from a T2E, 
     provision/access/change information in his/her NAPTR RRs at the 
     T2E, and authorize his/her ASPs for the access right to their 
     respective NAPTR RRs at the T2E for a specific TN that is assigned 
     to the EU. 
      
     Interface C is used by the TSP to inform the T1E about termination 
     of the telephony service and its default T2E for the network-
     related services for a TN and by the T1E to inform the TSP about 
     the change of the T2E. It may be used by the T1E to verify the 
     ownership of a TN and whether a TN is a working TN assigned to an 
     EU, or by the TSP. 
      
     Interface D is used (since TSP acts as the ASP for EU's 
     application services, that part is covered by interface E) by the 
     EU to request a TN assignment for the telephony service, to 
     terminate the telephony service, to subscribe, change or terminate 
     application services from the TSP.  
      
     Interface E is used by the ASP to provide its NAPTR RRs or the 
     application service related information (e.g., e-mail or SIP 
     address) to the EU or to request the EU to authorize it to 
     provision/access/change its NAPTR RRs at the T2E, and by the EU to 
     subscribe, change or terminate application services from the ASP 
     or discuss matters related to the EU's account. 
      
     Interface F is used by the TSP to provision/access/change the 
     NAPTR RRs associated with the network-related services for a TN at 
     the T2E.  It may be used by the T2E to verify the ownership of a 
     TN and by the TSP to inform the T2E about the telephony service 
     disconnection for a TN. 
      
     Interface G may be used by the ASP to provision/access/change the 
     NAPTR RRs associated with the application services for a TN at the 
     T2E if the EU gives it the authorization to do so. This includes 
     the termination of a specific application service for a TN.   
      
     Interface H is used between the old T2E and the new T2E to resolve 
     disputes about the T2E change.  
      
     Interfaces A, B and C are to be defined and supported.  The other 
     interfaces are subject to the entities that are involved.  For 
     example, a T2E can provide a web based graphic user interface for 
     the EU and possibly the TSP or ASP to interact with it. 
   
      
  3.2. Reference Model II (TSP = T2E) 
      
     Figure 2 shows Reference Model II that is a special case of 
     Reference Model I where TSP and T2E are one entity.   It can be 
     clearly seen that Interfaces A and C in Reference Model I are 
     combined into Interface A', Interfaces B and D in Reference Model 
     I are combined into Interface B', Interface E in Reference Model I 
     becomes Interface C', Interface G in Reference Model I becomes 
     Interface D', Interface F in Reference Model I becomes an internal 
     interface within TSP/T2E, and Interface H in Reference Model 
     becomes Interface E'.  
      
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  7 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
      
                    +-----+ 
                    | T1E | 
                    +-----+ 
                       | 
                       +A' 
                       | 
                  +---------+      B'     +----+ 
                  | TSP/T2E |------+------| EU | 
                  +---------+             +----+ 
                       |                    | 
                       +E'                  +C' 
                       |                    | 
                       |                    | 
                  +---------+       D'    +-----+ 
                  | TSP/T2E |-------+-----| ASP | 
                  +---------+             +-----+ 
   
   
                    Figure 2. Reference Model II 
      
      
     Under this model the T2E for a TN must be the TSP that currently 
     provides the telephony service to the TN. The EU's current serving 
     TSP certainly is not required to offer T2E functionality and, if 
     it does not, the TN cannot have ENUM-based services. The EU can, 
     of course, port his/her TN to another TSP if his/her current 
     serving TSP does not provide T2E services or does so in a manner 
     or for a price the EU judges unsatisfactory. The TSP may charge 
     the EU for being a T2E. 
       
     Because the TSP already has a service relationship with the EU, it 
     should be easier for the TSP to verify both the EU's identity and 
     the ownership of the TN to authenticate the provisioning request. 
     The TSP is also presumed to have a trusted relationship to the T1E 
     that can verify the TSP's control of the TN through the Local 
     Exchange Routing Guide (LERG)[11] and NPAC. 
      
     Although the T2E must be the current TSP for a TN, the EU can 
     authorize any ASP to provide an ENUM-based application service for 
     the TN. The ASP obtains authorization to provide a specific 
     service for the EU's TN and submits this authorization to the 
     TSP/T2E. The ASP can then work directly with the TSP/T2E to 
     provision the NAPTR records at the TSP/T2E. 
      
      
  4. Information Flows 
      
     This section describes the information flows for several scenarios 
     to show how the entities in the reference model interact during 
     the ENUM administration process.  Section 4.1 covers those 
     scenarios based on Reference Model I, and Section 4.2 covers those 
     scenarios based on Reference Model II.  Those cases based on 
     Reference Model I begin with Case Ix, and those based on Reference 
     Model II begin with Case IIx. 
      
     Only the successful scenarios are discussed for the proposed 
     administrative process.   After the reference model and basic 
     concept of operation are agreed, the failure scenarios then can be 
     identified and discussed.  
      
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  8 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     The processes of verifying the EU's identity and EU's ownership of 
     the TN by the T2E, verifying the TSP's or ASP's identity and 
     rights of provisioning/accessing/ changing the NAPTR RRs at the 
     T2E by the T2E, or verifying the T2E's identity by the T1E, are 
     not detailed or not shown in this section to simplify the 
     explanation.  The authentication aspect is discussed in Section 5. 
      
      
  4.1. Reference Model I (TSP =/= T2E) 
      
  Case IA. Initial ENUM service request by the End User 
      
     This case happens when the EU approaches a T2E for ENUM service.  
     The EU may initiate the service request due to his/her need for 
     ENUM service, or at the request of his/her TSP or ASP for some 
     application services. 
      
     1.  The EU requests a T2E to host the NAPTR RRs for his/her TN. 
     2.  The T2E verifies the EU's identity and the ownership of the 
          TN, accepts the service request and collects information from 
          the EU. 
     3.  There are several ways of provisioning the NAPTR RRs 
          associated with the EU's application services at the T2E. 
     3a. The EU provides all the necessary information to the T2E 
          based on the information (e.g., voice-mail address and e-mail 
          address) received from its TSP and ASPs.  The EU can provide 
          the exact NAPTR RRs or some application address information 
          that is converted by the T2E to the NAPTR RRs.  This case, 
          where the ASP must go through the EU to make changes to the 
          NAPTR RRs at the T2E for the EU's TN, may be burdensome and 
          error prone for many EUs. 
     3b. The EU gives the authorization to the T2E for his/her ASPs to 
          provision/access/change the RRs at the T2E.  The ASP then 
          provisions the NAPTR RRs at the T2E for a TN.  The TSP is 
          authorized to provision the NAPTR RRs associated with 
          network-related services.  The T2E will verify and allow the 
          TSP or ASP to provision only those NAPTR RRs it is 
          authorized.  The EU may pass the information that is unique 
          to the TSP or ASP so that the T2E can authenticate the TSP or 
          ASP when it interacts with the T2E, or the T2E can provide 
          some information (e.g., user ID and password) to be passed to 
          the TSP or ASP by the EU. 
     3c. The EU provides all the necessary information to the T2E 
          based on the information received from its ASPs and gives the 
          authorization to the T2E for his/her ASPs and TSP to 
          provision/access/change the RRs at the T2E. 
     3d. The EU may give the authorization to the T2E for some of 
          his/her ASPs to provision NAPTR records for the applications 
          services they provide.  In that case, information at the T2E 
          for those services without the EU's authorization must go 
          through the EU to make changes. 
     4.  Since the T2E has not already provisioned this TN at the T1E, 
          it requests that the T1E provision the TN with proper DNS RRs 
          pointing to the T2E. 
     5a. If the EU's TSP has provided the default T2E information to 
          the T1E (e.g., for using the ENUM services for the TSP's 
          network-related services), the T1E informs the TSP about the 
          new EU-selected T2E, confirms the provisioning request with 
          the EU-selected T2E and informs the EU-selected T2E about the 
          TSP's default T2E.  The EU-selected T2E then retrieves the 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  9 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
          NAPTR RRs that are associated with the TN from the TSP's 
          default T2E. 
     5b. If the T1E does not have information about the TSP's default 
          T2E (e.g., the TSP has no use of the ENUM services for its 
          network-related services), it sends an acknowledgement to the 
          new EU selected T2E. 
     6.  The T1E creates the proper DNS RRs for the TN to point to the 
          new EU selected T2E. 
      
     The TSP may have a need to use the ENUM service for some 
     application services for TNs not assigned to the EUs.  In that 
     case, the TSP acts as the EU in terms of selecting the T2E for 
     that TN and giving the authorization to itself to 
     provision/access/change the NAPTR RRs at the T2E.  The TSP can be 
     the T2E in this case or can use a third party as the T2E.  No ASP 
     will be involved in this case for those TNs. 
      
  Case IB. Initial ENUM service request by the Telephony Service 
  Provider for the network-related services 
      
     This case happens when the TSP wants to use the ENUM services for 
     network-related services for a TN. 
      
     1.  The TSP contacts the T1E requesting ENUM for network-related 
          services for a TN. 
     2.  The T1E accepts and stores the default T2E provided by the 
          TSP. 
     3.  There are two possibilities depending on whether the EU has 
          been using the ENUM services or not. 
     3a. If the T1E has no pointer to an EU-selected T2E for that TN, 
          it adds proper DNS RRs to point to the TSP's default T2E for 
          that TN. 
     3b. If the T1E has a pointer to an EU-selected T2E for that TN, 
          it informs the TSP about the EU-selected T2E.  The TSP then 
          interacts with the EU-selected T2E to provision those NAPTR 
          RRs associated with the TSP's network-related services.  Or 
          the T1E can inform the EU-selected T2E about the TSP's 
          default T2E so that the EU-selected T2E can retrieve the 
          NAPTR RRs from the TSP's default T2E.  
      
     The TSP can interact with the T1E later to change the default T2E 
     information.  It is expected that the TSP will store the NAPTR RRs 
     associated with its network-related services for a TN on a T2E so 
     that the same T2E can host the NAPTR RRs for the EU's application 
     services for the same TN when the EU selects the TSP for the T2E 
     service.  Having the NAPTR RRs associated with the network-related 
     services for a TN stored on a default T2E even when there is an 
     EU-selected T2E allows the T1E to quickly point to the TSP's 
     default T2E when the EU stops using the ENUM service. 
      
  Case IC. End User changes Tier 2 Entity 
      
     This case happens when the EU decides to use another T2E for the 
     ENUM service.  There may or may not be any changes in the TSP or 
     any of the ASPs.  To simplify the scenario, it is assumed that no 
     NAPTR RR is changed due to this move.  If there are changes, the 
     new T2E needs to work with the EU and EU's ASPs to create the 
     correct NAPTR RRs. 
      


    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  10 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     1.  The EU requests a T2E (the new T2E) to host the NAPTR RRs for 
          his/her TN and indicates that all the NAPTR RRs stored at the 
          old T2E (the old T2E) are still valid. 
     2.  The T2E verifies the EU's identity and the ownership of the 
          TN, accepts the service request and collects information from 
          the EU.  The new T2E may notify the old T2E of the EU's 
          request. 
     3.  The new T2E requests that the T1E provision the TN with 
          proper DNS RRs pointing to it. 
     4.  The T1E informs the old T2E about the T2E change for that TN. 
     5.  The old T2E confirms the T2E change. 
     6.  The T1E acknowledges the change with the new T2E and informs 
          the new T2E about the old T2E. 
     7.  The new T2E retrieves the NAPTR RRs (related to EU's 
          application services and TSP's network-related services) from 
          the old T2E. 
     8.  The new T2E informs the T1E to make the T2E change in effect. 
     9.  The T1E creates the proper DNS RRs for the TN to point to the 
          new T2E.  
      
     It is possible that the old T2E can dispute the T2E change for a 
     TN.  The T1E will not change the pointer to the new T2E unless the 
     dispute is resolved or if the T2E fails to respond to the T1E 
     within a specified time period.  
   
  Case ID. End User disconnects telephony service on a telephone number 
         
     This case happens when the EU decides to disconnect his/her 
     telephony service (e.g., move to a new city) or his/her TSP 
     disconnects his/her telephony service due to reasons such as non-
     payment.   
      
     1.  The EU's telephony service is disconnected. 
     2.  The TSP informs the T1E about the telephony service 
          disconnection for a TN.  The T1E relays that information to 
          the EU-selected T2E if applicable. 
     3a. If the EU's TSP has provided the default T2E information to 
          the T1E, the T1E changes the DNS RRs for that TN to point to 
          the TSP's default T2E and informs the TSP about the T2E 
          switch for that TN.  
     3b. If the T1E does not have information about the TSP's default 
          T2E, it removes the DNS RRs for that TN. 
      
  Case IE. Tier 2 Entity changes information at Tier 1 Entity 
          
     This case happens when the T2E needs to change the information 
     such as the DNS RRs or contact person information at the T1E.  The 
     T2E interacts with the T1E to make the necessary changes. 
      
  Case IF. End User changes Telephony Service Provider 
          
     This case happens when the EU changes from one TSP to another.  
     The processes vary depending on whether the old serving TSP or new 
     serving TSP uses the ENUM services for network-related services or 
     whether the EU uses the ENUM services.  The T1E will be informed 
     of such a TSP change via the NPAC and must synchronize the TSP 
     change with the NPAC process.  The exact time to remove the old 
     serving TSP's NAPTR RRs or to add the new serving TSP's NAPTR RRs 
     at the T2E or to point to the new serving TSP's default T2E are 
     not specifically addressed to simplify the description.  The 
     change of the TSP does not impact the pointer to the current 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  11 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     serving T2E for a TN at the T1E if the old TSP is not the T2E for 
     that IN.  This scenario assumes that is the case. 
   
     1.  If the new serving TSP has the use of the ENUM services for 
          the network-related services, it follows the process 
          described in Case IB to inform the T1E about its default T2E 
          information and to provision its NAPTR RRs at the T2E.  The 
          T2E will swap the NAPTR RRs from the new TSP when it is 
          informed by the T1E to make that switch. 
     2a. If the EU has no use of ENUM services, the T1E creates the 
          DNS RRs for the TN pointing to the new serving TSP's default 
          T2E.  If the old serving TSP has provided the default T2E 
          information, that information at the T1E would be replaced by 
          the new serving TSP's default T2E.  The process ends here. 
     2b. If the EU has selected a T2E, the T1E informs the EU- 
          selected T2E about the TSP change so that the T2E can allow 
          the new TSP to provision its NAPTR RRs.  The T2E will swap 
          the NAPTR RRs from the new TSP when it is informed by the T1E 
          to make that switch. The process ends here. 
     3.  If the new serving TSP has no use of the ENUM services for 
          the network-related services for the TN, the old serving TSP 
          has the use of the ENUM services, and the EU has selected a 
          T2E, the T1E, synchronized with the NPAC process, instructs 
          the EU-selected T2E to remove all the NAPTR RRs associated 
          with the network-related services and removes the stored 
          default T2E information provided by the old serving TSP for 
          the TN. 
     4.  If the new serving TSP has no use of the ENUM services for 
          the network-related services, the old serving TSP has the use 
          of the ENUM services, and the EU has no use of the ENUM 
          services, the T1E, synchronized with the NPAC process, 
          removes the stored default T2E information provided by the 
          old serving TSP for the TN. 
     5.  If both the old and new serving TSPs have no use of the ENUM 
          services for the network-related services for the TN and the 
          EU has selected a T2E, the T1E takes no action.  
   
  Cases IG to IK. Changing information at Tier 2 Entity 
      
     In many cases the information at the T2E such as the NAPTR RRs or 
     the TSP or ASP that has the authorization to provision/access/ 
     change the information for specific service or services needs to 
     be changed.  Each distinct occasion is separately described below 
     although some or all of them may be completed in one session. 
      
     Since the T2E may store the NAPTR RRs associated with EU's 
     applications services and/or TSP's network-related services for a 
     TN and the TSP can act as an ASP for some application services 
     provided to that TN, the T2E must control the access right to a 
     particular NAPTR RR that is stored at the T2E.  The EU should be 
     authorized to provision/access/change all the NAPTR RRs associated 
     with the application services for a TN assigned to him/her.  The 
     TSP or ASP, if authorized by the EU, should be able to provision/ 
     access/change all the NAPTR RRs associated with the application 
     services it offers to the EU's TN.  The ASPs may not be allowed to 
     change the "order" and "preference" fields of the NAPTR RRs. 
      
     The EU may need to change personal information (e.g., address) 
     that does not impact the NAPTR RRs or the authorization of the TSP 
     or ASPs at the T2E.   If authorized by the EU, the TSP or ASPs 
     also may need to change the private information (e.g., contact 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  12 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     person's phone number) at the T2E.  Those cases are obvious and 
     are not included here.  But the protocols should be designed to 
     allow those cases to proceed properly. 
      
  Case IG. End User changes Application Service Provider 
          
     This case happens when the EU decides to change his/her ASP for an 
     application service.  If the EU authorizes the TSP or ASP to 
     interact with the T2E, that authorization needs to be transferred 
     to the new ASP for the associated application service. 
      
     1a. If the EU performs the provisioning/modification for that 
          particular service or set of services, he/she first gets the 
          information from the new ASP and interacts with the T2E to 
          provide the changes to the NAPTR RRs related to that 
          particular service or set of services for his/her TN. 
     1b. If the EU authorizes the ASP for provisioning/ 
          accessing/changing the information for his/her TN, he/she 
          informs the T2E about the change of authorization from the 
          old ASP to the new ASP for a specific service or set of 
          services for his/her TN. 
     1c. If the EU has the information from his/her new ASP, he/she 
          can make the necessary changes to the NAPTR RRs related to 
          the specific service or set of services during the same 
          session with the T2E. 
     2.  The T2E makes the necessary changes to the information 
          related to the TN. 
     3.  The TSP or ASP, if authorized by the EU, can interact with 
          the T2E to provision/access/change the information related to 
          application service or services for the TN. 
   
  Case IH.  End User terminates an application service 
      
     This case happens when the EU terminates an application service 
     (i.e., not a telephony service) that is provided by an ASP. 
      
     1.  The EU informs the ASP to terminate an application service. 
     2.  There are several possible ways that the T2E can be informed 
          about such a service termination. 
     2a. If the EU does not authorize the ASP to interact with the T2E 
          for his/her TN, the EU must interact with the T2E to remove 
          the NAPTR RRs associated with that particular application 
          service. 
     2b. If the EU does authorize the ASP to interact with the T2E for 
          his/her TN or set of TNs for the terminated application 
          service, either the EU or ASP can interact with the T2E to 
          remove the NAPTR RRs associated with that particular 
          application service.  If the ASP interacts with the T2E after 
          the EU has interacted with the T2E, its authorization for 
          that service for the TN would have been revoked.  If the EU 
          interacts with the T2E after the ASP has interacted with the 
          T2E, he/she will find that the NAPTR RR(s) associated with 
          the application service for his/her TN has/have been removed. 
      
  Case II.  End User adds or removes authorization 
      
     This case happens when the EU wants to add or remove the 
     authorization of an ASP for a particular application service or 
     set of services.  This case can be triggered at the request from 
     the ASP to the EU or simply an EU decision to do so.  After the 
     interaction, the EU may inform or confirm with the ASP about the 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  13 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     addition or removal of the authorization for a specific service or 
     set of services. 
      
      
  Case IJ. End User/Telephony Service Provider/Application Service 
  Provider changes information at Tier 2 Entity 
      
     This case happens when the information at the T2E needs to be 
     changed.  The EU can change any NAPTR RR that is related to the 
     application services.  There are many possible ways.  The ASP can 
     only change the NAPTR RRs associated with the application services 
     that it is authorized to access.  The TSP may interact with the 
     T2E to change those NAPTR RRs associated with the network-related 
     services. 
      
  Case IK. End User adds a new application service 
      
     This case happens when the EU subscribes to a new application 
     service from an ASP that currently offers some application 
     services to the EU or from a new ASP.  The EU can receive the 
     information from the ASP that provides the new application service 
     and interact with the T2E to add the new NAPTR RRs associated with 
     the new application, or it can give the authorization to the T2E 
     for the new ASP to provision/access/change the data at the T2E. 
   
  Case IL. Requesting Tier 2 Entity information for a telephone number 
      
     Any entity can obtain this information by launching an ENUM query 
     to determine the entity that provides the T2E service for a TN. 
     The T2E information would be limited to the information in the DNS 
     RRs for a TN at the T1E.  For example, there will not be any 
     contact information.  The information may help the TSP or an ASP 
     to determine who to contact to submit EU authorization for an 
     application or network-related service. 
      
      
  4.2. Reference Model II (TSP = T2E) 
      
  Case IIA. Initial provisioning 
      
     Initial provisioning occurs when either the EU elects to take an 
     ENUM-based service or, in this reference model, when the TSP 
     decides to provision a record in the T1E. (A TSP might elect to 
     have records provisioned for the all the numbers that it serves or 
     has assignment control of.) 
      
     If the EU elects to take a service the following steps are 
     required: 
      
     1.  The ASP obtains appropriate authorization from the EU for a 
          specific service or services for a TN or set of TNs. 
     2.  The ASP provides or arranges for the EU to provide the above 
          authorization to the TSP. 
     3.  The TSP verifies the authorization, at least as it would for 
          a preferred carrier (PIC in the USA) change. 
     4.  If the TN is not already provisioned in the T1E DNS, the TSP 
          requests that the T1E provision the TN with a record pointing 
          to the TSP as T2E. The TSP and T1E interact through a 
          protocol to be defined. 
     5.  The ASP provides the TSP with the information to be 
          provisioned in the T2E name server. The TSP verifies that 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  14 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
          what is to be provisioned corresponds only to the services 
          authorized. 
      
     In the case of where the TSP elects to provision a record for the 
     number on its own initiative only step (4) applies. If the TSP 
     wishes to provision NAPTR RRs for specific service capabilities, 
     it may, like other ASPs be required to obtain authorization from 
     the EU. TSP needs not obtain the authorization from the EU for 
     provisioning the NAPTR RRs for network-related services. 
      
  Case IIB. End User changes Tier 2 Entity 
      
     Under this model, the EU can only change T2E by changing TSPs, 
     i.e., by porting the TN. 
      
     1.  When porting a number the new TSP must determine if the EU 
          wishes to retain existing ENUM services and obtain 
          authorization for any changes other than for services deemed 
          to be TSP-specific and not requiring EU authorization. 
     2.  The new TSP must provision the appropriate entries in its DNS 
          and notify any 3rd party ASPs of the pending port. 
     3.  The EU ports the number to the new TSP by normal procedures. 
     4.  The T1E detects the port via its feed from the NPAC and 
          changes its entry for the TN to point to the new TSP. 
   
  Case IIC. End User disconnects service on a telephone number 
      
     1.  EU notifies TSP to disconnect. 
     2.  At time of disconnect TSP removes entry in its T2E DNS. 
          (Since TSP retains delegation for the number, changes in T1E 
          are not strictly necessary especially when the TSP uses ENUM 
          for network-related services.) 
   
  Case IIDa. Add/modify/delete of NAPTR records 
      
     The EU may authorize additions, changes, or deletions to services 
     that lead to changes in NAPTR records. The process will depend on 
     the specific changes. If changes are to the specifics of records 
     for a service that the EU has already authorized an ASP to 
     provide, the ASP may interact directly with the TSP/T2E without 
     further authorization.  
      
  Case IIDb. End User terminates an application service 
      
     1.  The EU notifies the TSP or ASP they wish to terminate a 
          service. 
     2.  If the EU notifies the ASP, the ASP requests the TSP delete 
          the corresponding NAPTR record. Alternatively, if the EU 
          notifies the TSP directly, the TSP shall remove the 
          corresponding record and notify the ASP. 
   
  Case IIDc. End User changes Application Service Provider 
      
     1.  The new ASP obtains appropriate authorization from the EU for 
          a specific service or services for a TN. 
     2.  The new ASP provides or arranges for the EU to provide the 
          above authorization to the TSP. 
     3.  The TSP verifies the authorization, at least as it would for 
          a preferred carrier (PIC in the USA) change. 


    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  15 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     4.  The ASP provides the TSP with the new information to be 
          provisioned at the T2E. The TSP verifies that what is to be 
          provisioned corresponds only to the services authorized. 
      
  Case IIDd. End User adds a new application service 
        
     1.  The ASP obtains appropriate authorization from the EU for a 
          specific service or services for a TN or set of TNs. 
     2.  The ASP provides or arranges for the EU to provide the above 
          authorization to the TSP. 
     3.  The TSP verifies the authorization, at least as it would for 
          a preferred carrier (PIC in the USA) change. 
     4.  The ASP provides the TSP with the information to be 
          provisioned in the T2E name server. The TSP verifies that 
          what is to be provisioned corresponds only to the services 
          authorized. 
      
  Case IIDe. Tier 2 Entity changes information at Tier 1 Entity 
        
     The proper T2E is known by the T1E based on information about 
     number assignment as discussed above. The T2E interacts with the 
     T1E to make the necessary changes. 
      
      
  Case IIE. Application Service Provider requests Tier 2 Entity 
  information for a telephone number 
      
     The ASP can obtain this information by an ENUM query to determine 
     the entity to which to submit EU authorization for a service.  The 
     T2E information would be limited to the information in the DNS RRs 
     for a TN at the T1E.  For example, there may not be any contact 
     information.  
      
   
  5. Security Consideration 
   
      
  5.1. Authentication 
   
     Since the correctness of the NAPTR RRs stored at the T2E and the 
     DNS RRs stored at the T1E for a TN may impact whether an EU can 
     receive incoming calls or messages when the ENUM process is 
     invoked, it is essential to ensure that provisioning requests are 
     adequately authenticated. 
       
     The T2E needs to authenticate the EU when an EU approaches it to 
     be the T2E for his/her TN.  The T2E is responsible for validating 
     the EU's identity and his/her ownership of the TN.  The EU could 
     be asked to provide a recent phone bill and other information 
     (e.g., pictured ID), or the EU's serving TSP may need to be 
     involved. 
      
     The T1E needs to authenticate the TSP and T2E before accepting 
     information from them.  If the EU gives the authorization for the 
     ASP to provision/access/change the data for a TN at the T2E, the 
     T2E must authenticate the TSP or ASP and ensure that it can only 
     touch the information related to its application or network-
     related service or services. 
   
     The T2E may need to be a trusted/certified entity to play the T2E 
     role.  If an EU wants to play the T2E role for his/her own TN, 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  16 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     there must exist a way to certify that this particular EU or 
     entity does control/own that TN. 
      
      
  5.2. Secure Communication 
      
     Communication over Interfaces A, B and C in the Reference Model I 
     and over Interface A' and possibly Interface E' in the Reference 
     Model II must be secure to prevent eavesdropping of the exchanged 
     data and to ensure the data integrity. 
      
      
  6. Discussions/Issues 
      
     The two strawman models and associated information flows raise a 
     number of issues. It is hoped that further ENUM working group 
     discussion will help resolve these. 
   
     The following discussions and issues are specific to Reference 
     Model I: 
      
     - How can we make it easy so that the EU can be the T2E for its 
        TN or set of TNs?  The requirement to be a certified service 
        registrar may not apply in this case unless this EN or entity 
        wants to provide the T2E functionality for other EUs' TNs.   
     - If the EU changes the TSP, the time that the T2E replaces with 
        the NAPTR RRs associated with the new TSP's network-related 
        services must be synchronized with the NPAC (e.g., when 
        receiving notification from the NAPC about the change of TSP). 
   
     The following discussions and issues are specific to Reference 
     Model II: 
      
     - What if there is only one TSP in a market and that TSP does not 
        want to support the T2E functionality?  The EUs in that market 
        will not be able to get the ENUM services. 
     - If the EU changes the TSP, the time that the T1E points to the 
        new TSP/T2E must be synchronized with the NPAC. 
   
     The following discussions and issues apply to both Reference Model 
     I and II: 
      
     - Many EUs will not be sophisticated enough to create the NAPTR 
        RRs themselves.  The T2E may need to convert the application 
        address information received from the EU to the proper NAPTR 
        RRs, or the ASP may need to be authorized to provision/access/ 
        change the information for a TN.  For the former case, can the 
        T2E do it for all kinds of the NAPTR RRs?  For the latter case, 
        the T2E must authenticate the ASP and ensure that it can only 
        access those NAPTR RRs it is authorized to access. 
     - If the EU changes the ASP for an application service and the 
        T2E is not informed about the change (e.g., the EU forgets to 
        inform the T2E), there may be a need for the ASP to interact 
        with the T2E so that its NAPTR RRs for a specific service for a 
        TN can be removed. 
     - Is there a need to define the interfaces between the EU or the 
        ASP/TSP and the T2E for provisioning/accessing/changing the 
        NAPTR RRs and between the two T2Es or should those interfaces 
        be left to those entities to decide? 
     - Will and can the TSP inform the T1E about telephony service 
        disconnection for a TN in a timely manner? 
    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  17 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     - The Tier 1 entity is likely to be regulated.  Should the T2E be 
        regulated also?  Must an entity register as the ENUM service 
        registrar to perform the T2E functionality?  Who regulates them 
        or handles the registration from them?  What are the 
        qualifications? Is ICANN Domain Name Registrar certification 
        necessary? Is it sufficient? 
     - What should constitute sufficient authentication in terms of 
        validating among the EU, T2E, TSP, ASP and T1E? 
     - In each reference model, what, if any, services does the TSP 
        have the right to provision without explicit EU consent?  There 
        must be a clear definition and distinction on what belong to 
        the EUs' application services and what belong to the TSPs' 
        network-related services.  If an EU can receive a particular 
        service multiple service providers, that service may be 
        considered as the EUs' application service.  If an EU can only 
        receive a service from the TSP or a service is offered only by 
        the TSP, that service may be considered as the network-related 
        service. 
     - The NAPTR RRs associated with the TSP's network-related 
        services must be distinct from those associated with the EU's 
        application services.  Some fields (e.g., the service field) in 
        the NAPTR RR must clearly indicate whether it is an application 
        service or network-related service.  
     - It is likely that an EU may want to have multiple NAPTR RRs for 
        the same application service (e.g., e-mail) from many ASPs.  
        The T2E must ensure that a particular ASP can only provision/ 
        access/change a particular NAPTR RR for a specific application 
        service.  If the ASP is authorized to provision/access/change 
        the information at the T2E, how can the EU control the orders 
        and preferences of multiple NAPTR RRs related to the same 
        application service that are offered by several ASPs?  The T2E 
        may need to ensure that the ASPs cannot modify the order and 
        preference fields of their NAPTR RRs.   
      
      
  7. Conclusion 
   
     This document discusses two reference models that can be used for 
     the ENUM administrative process in the U.S.A.  There are pros and 
     cons with each of the two reference models.  Both reference models 
     assume that there will be only one entity that provides the T1E 
     functionality.  The authors believe that this not only make the 
     allocation of the delegation authority for a TN much quicker and 
     hold only one entity to be accountable for providing that 
     particular service.   
      
     The industry needs to discuss the two reference models and the 
     issues surrounding them and move toward adopting a reference model 
     (one of those proposed or perhaps some other model) for defining 
     the protocols and procedures.  The information in this document 
     will be enhanced to reflect the discussions, comments, suggestions 
     and agreements generated through the discussion list and based on 
     further investigations by the authors. 
   
      
      
  REFERENCES 
      
     [1]  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3, 
          BCP9," RFC 2026, October 1996. 

    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  18 

   ENUM Administrative Process in the U.S.A.               October 2000 
   
   
     [2]  A. Brown, "Telephone Number Mapping", draft-enum-rqmts-01-
          txt, June 2000. 
     [3]  P. Fltstrm, "E.164 number and DNS," RFC 2916, September 
          2000. 
     [4]  A. Brown & G. Vaudreuil, "ENUM Service Specific Provisioning: 
          Principles of Operation," draft-ietf-enum-operation-00.txt, 
          July 13, 2000. 
     [5]  M. Foster, T. McGarry & J. Yu, "Number Portability in the 
          GSTN: An Overview," draft-ietf-enum-e164-gstn-np-00.txt, July 
          2000. 
     [6]  A. Gallant, " The Number Portability Supplement to ITU-T 
          Recommendation E.164,"draft-ietf-enum-e164s2-np-00.txt, July 
          7, 2000. 
     [7]  North American Numbering Plan Administration (NANPA), 
          <http://www.nanpa.com> 
     [8]  M. Mealing & R. Daniel, "The Naming Authority Pointer (NAPTR) 
          DNS Resource Record," RFC 2915, September 2000. 
     [9]  J. Loughney & J. Yu, " Roaming Support with DNS," draft-
          loughney-enum-roaming-00.txt, July 14, 2000. 
     [10] Number Portability Administration Center (NPAC), 
          <http://www.npac.com>  
     [11] Local Exchange Routing Guide (LERG), <http://www.trainfo.com> 
      
   
  Authors' Addresses 
   
     Penn Pfautz 
     AT&T 
     Room E4-3A01 
     200 South Laurel Avenue 
     Middletown, NJ 07748 
     U.S.A. 
     Phone: +1-732-420-4962 
     Email: ppfautz@att.com 
      
     James Yu 
     NeuStar, Inc. 
     1120 Vermont Avenue, NW, Suite 550 
     Washington, D.C., 20005 
     U.S.A. 
     Phone: +1-202-533-2814 
     Email: james.yu@neustar.com 
   
   
   
  Full Copyright Statement 
   

     "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished 
     to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
     explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
     copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
     restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice 
     and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative 
     works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
     way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the 
     Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed 
     for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the 
     procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards 
     process must be followed, or as required to translate it into. 


    
  <draft-pfautz-yu-enum-adm.00>  Informational - Expires March 2001  19 

