

IMPP                                                         C. Jennings
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: August 14, 2004                               February 14, 2004


                       vCard Extensions for IMPP
                      draft-jennings-impp-vcard-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This draft describes an extension to vCard to support Instant
   Messaging (IM) and Presence Protocol (PP) applications. IM and PP are
   becoming increasingly common ways of communicating, and users want to
   save this contact information in their address books. This draft
   allows a URI that is associated with IM or PP to be specified inside
   of a vCard.

   This work is being discussed on the imc-vcard@imc.org mailing list.

1. Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this



Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 vCard-IMPP                  February 2004


   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].

2. Overview

   As more and more people use various instant messaging (IM) and
   presence protocol (PP) applications, it becomes important for them to
   be able to share this contact address information along with the rest
   of their contact information. RFC 2425 [1] and RFC 2426 [2] define a
   standard format for this information which is referred to as vCard.
   This document defines a new type in a vCard for representing instant
   IM and PP URIs. It is very similar to existing types for representing
   email address and telephone contact information.

   The type entry to hold this new contact information is an IMPP type.
   The IMPP entry has a single URI that indicates the address of a
   service that provides IM, PP, or both. Also defined are some
   parameters that give hints as to when certain URIs would be
   appropriate. A given vCard can have multiple IMPP entries but each
   entry can contain only one URI. Each IMPP entry can contain multiple
   parameters. Any combination of parameters is valid, though a
   parameter should occur at most once in a given IMPP entry.

   The type of URI indicates what protocols might be useable for
   accessing it, but this document does not define any of the types. For
   example a URI type of "sip"[6] might indicate to use SIP/SIMPLE,
   "xmpp"[7] indicates to use jabber, "irc"[5]  indicates to use IRC,
   "ymsgr" indicates to use yahoo, "msn" might indicate to use
   messenger, "aim" indicates to use AOL, and "im"[9] or "pres"[8]
   indicates to use a CPIM or CPP gateway.

   The normative definition of this new vCard type is given in Section
   3, and an informational ABNF is provided in Section 4.

3. IMPP Type Definition

   To: ietf-mime-directory@imc.org

   Subject: Registration of text/directory MIME type IMPP

   Type name: IMPP

   Type purpose: To specify the URI for instant messaging and presence
   protocol communication with the object the vCard represents.

   Type encoding: 8bit

   Type value: A single URI. The type of the URI indicates the protocol
   that can be used for this contact.



Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 vCard-IMPP                  February 2004


   Type special notes: The type can include the type parameter "TYPE" to
   specify an intended use for the URI. The TYPE parameter values can
   include:

   An indication of the type of communication for which this URI is
   appropriate. This can be a value of PERSONAL or BUSINESS.

   An indication of the location of a device associated with this URI.
   Values can be HOME, WORK, or MOBILE.

   An indication of some of the core capabilities of this instant
   messaging system. Values can be PRES, VIDEO, VOICE, TEXT, SMS,
   NUMERIC, and BEEP. PRES indicates the system supports some presence
   protocol. VIDEO, VOICE, and TEXT indicate the system supports voice,
   video, and text messaging respectively. SMS indicates short text
   messages are supported. Short is not defined here, but something like
   160 octets may be a reasonable assumption. NUMERIC indicates that
   only numeric text messages are allowed. BEEP indicates that the only
   information the system can deliver is that a message was sent to the
   target user.

   The value STORE indicates that the system can store messages for
   future delivery to the intended user.

   The value PREF indicates this is a preferred address and has the same
   semantics as the PREF value in a TEL type.

4. Formal Grammar

   The following ABNF grammar[4] extends the grammar found in RFC 2425
   [1] and RFC 2426 [2].


   ;For name="IMPP"
    param      = impp-param ; Only impp parameters are allowed

    value      = uri

    impp-param = "TYPE" "=" impp-type *("," impp-type)

    impp-type  = "PERSONAL" / "BUSINESS" / ; purpose of communications
                 "HOME" / "WORK" / "MOBILE" / ; useful?
                 "VIDEO" / "VOICE" / "TEXT" /  ; core capabilities
                 "SMS" / "NUMERIC"  /  "BEEP"  / "PRES" ;  needed???
                 "STORE" / ;  like MSG
                 "PREF" /
                 iana-token / x-name;
                 ; Values are case insensitive



Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 vCard-IMPP                  February 2004


5. Example


   BEGIN:vCard
   VERSION:3.0
   FN:John Doe
   IMPP;TYPE=personal,text,store,pref:im:john@example.com
   END:vCard


6. Open Issues

   Are PERSONAL and BUSINESS a conflict in meaning with HOME and WORK?
   In the TEL type HOME and WORK indicated a location, but they have
   slowly come to be indicators that personal or business communication
   is requested. Would a person with both a personal mobile phone and a
   work mobile phone have HOME,MOBILE and WORK,MOBILE?

   Is there any need for SMS, NUMERIC, BEEP? This is not a system for
   negotiating capabilities and these seem like too fine detail. On the
   other hand the existing vCard supports pagers and such, and these
   definitions would help users avoid sending large messages to GSM cell
   phones.

   Is STORE needed? It mirrors the functionality of MSG in the TEL type
   and is a feature supported by many IM systems.

7. IANA Considerations

   Section 3 forms the IANA registration.

8. Security Considerations

   This does not introduce additional security issues beyond current
   vCard specification. It is worth noting that many people consider
   their presence information more sensitive than some other address
   information. Any system that stores or transfers vCards needs to
   carefully consider the privacy issues around this information.

Normative References

   [1]  Howes, T., Smith, M. and F. Dawson, "A MIME -- --Content-Type
        for Directory Information", RFC 2425, September 1998.

   [2]  Dawson, F. and T. Howes, "vCard MIME Directory Profile", RFC
        2426, September 1998.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement



Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 vCard-IMPP                  February 2004


        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Informational References

   [4]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [5]  Butcher, S., "Uniform Resource Locator Schemes for Internet
        Relay Chat Servers", draft-butcher-irc-url-01 (work in
        progress), October 2003.

   [6]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [7]  Saint-Andre, P., "XMPP URI Format", draft-saintandre-xmpp-uri-00
        (work in progress), September 2003.

   [8]  Peterson, J., "Common Profile for Presence (CPP)",
        draft-ietf-impp-pres-03 (work in progress), May 2003.

   [9]  Peterson, J., "Common Profile for Instant Messaging (CPIM)",
        draft-ietf-impp-im-03 (work in progress), May 2003.


Author's Address

   Cullen Jennings
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   MS: SJC-21/2
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 902-3341
   EMail: fluffy@cisco.com















Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 vCard-IMPP                  February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 vCard-IMPP                  February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Jennings                Expires August 14, 2004                 [Page 7]

