


Network Working Group                                       B. Carpenter
Internet-Draft                                         Univ. of Auckland
Intended status: Informational                              July 2, 2008
Expires: January 3, 2009


                          RFC 2026 in practice
                  draft-carpenter-rfc2026-practice-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 3, 2009.

Abstract

   This document discusses how RFC 2026, the current description of the
   IETF standards process, operates in practice.  Its main purpose is to
   document, for information only, how actual practice interprets the
   formal rules.











Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Detailed Commentary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   6.  Change log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 23








































Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


1.  Introduction

   BCP 9 [RFC2026] has been the basis for the IETF standards process for
   many years.  This document is a review of how some aspects of the
   process work in practice.  The focus is mainly on how the community,
   and the IESG in particular, interprets the formal rules in actual
   practice.  It is intended as a purely descriptive document and in no
   way claims to change the formal rules.

   Newcomers to the IETF should first read the Tao of the IETF
   [RFC4677].  For a living guide to all IETF process documents, see
   <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/content/procdocs.html>.  While this
   document mainly focuses on RFC 2026, many other documents form part
   of the IETF rules.

   Extracts from RFC 2026 are presented verbatim in quotation marks,
   preceded and followed by the following markers:
   "---------Begin Extract---------
   -----------End Extract---------"

   Original pagination and administrative material have been ignored,
   but the original section headings have been included where
   convenient.


2.  Detailed Commentary

   "---------Begin Extract---------

1.1  Internet Standards
   ...
   The Internet Standards Process described in this document is
   concerned with all protocols, procedures, and conventions that are
   used in or by the Internet, whether or not they are part of the
   TCP/IP protocol suite.  In the case of protocols developed and/or
   standardized by non-Internet organizations, however, the Internet
   Standards Process normally applies to the application of the protocol
   or procedure in the Internet context, not to the specification of the
   protocol itself.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   In practice, things are not as easily delimited as the above
   paragraph suggests.  Some IETF standards are quite interwoven with
   standards from other organizations.  Hence, liaison relationships
   have become complex and important, dealing with mutually
   interdependent standards.




Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   "---------Begin Extract---------

 1.2  The Internet Standards Process
    ...
    o  These procedures are explicitly aimed at recognizing and adopting
       generally-accepted practices.  Thus, a candidate specification
       must be implemented and tested for correct operation and
       interoperability by multiple independent parties and utilized in
       increasingly demanding environments, before it can be adopted as
       an Internet Standard.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   It is a fact that relatively few standards advance beyond the
   Proposed Standard stage, and hence the mechanisms for documenting
   interoperability are often not used.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

2.1  Requests for Comments (RFCs)

   ...

   The RFC series of documents on networking began in 1969 as part of
   the original ARPA wide-area networking (ARPANET) project (see
   Appendix A for glossary of acronyms).  RFCs cover a wide range of
   topics in addition to Internet Standards, from early discussion of
   new research concepts to status memos about the Internet.  RFC
   publication is the direct responsibility of the RFC Editor, under the
   general direction of the IAB.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   There is a general description in [RFC4844].  Today, the RFC Editor's
   work for the IETF is also under the administrative management of the
   IASA [RFC4071].

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      The rules for formatting and submitting an RFC are defined in [5].

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Note that [I-D.rfc-editor-rfc2223bis] is applied today.

   "---------Begin Extract---------





Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


      The status of Internet protocol and service specifications is
      summarized periodically in an RFC entitled "Internet Official
      Protocol Standards" [1].  This RFC shows the level of maturity and
      other helpful information for each Internet protocol or service
      specification (see section 3).

   -----------End Extract---------"

   This was written before a hyperlinked index was available on line.
   In recent years, this RFC has been updated very rarely.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      Some RFCs document Internet Standards.  These RFCs form the 'STD'
      subseries of the RFC series [4].  When a specification has been
      adopted as an Internet Standard, it is given the additional label
      "STDxxx", but it keeps its RFC number and its place in the RFC
      series. (see section 4.1.3)

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Note that sometimes users do not readily know where to look for the
   latest standard, since a DS may obsolete an STD, and a PS may
   obsolete either.  This is documented in the official RFC index and at
   <http://www.rfc-editor.org/categories/rfc-standard.html>, but is
   obscured at <http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfcxx00.html>, where obsoleted
   standards are not identified.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   Some RFCs standardize the results of community deliberations about
   statements of principle or conclusions about what is the best way to
   perform some operations or IETF process function.  These RFCs form
   the specification has been adopted as a BCP, it is given the
   additional label "BCPxxx", but it keeps its RFC number and its place
   in the RFC series. (see section 5)

   Not all specifications of protocols or services for the Internet
   should or will become Internet Standards or BCPs.  Such non-standards
   track specifications are not subject to the rules for Internet
   standardization.  Non-standards track specifications may be published
   directly as "Experimental" or "Informational" RFCs at the discretion
   of the RFC Editor in consultation with the IESG (see section 4.2).

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Factually, the RFC Editor does not have such discretion for IETF
   documents - it's the IESG approval that defines the status of an IETF



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   RFC.  IETF Experimental or Informational RFCs (see
   <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/STATEMENTS/ad-sponsoring.html>) are
   distinct from independent submissions to the RFC Editor (see
   [RFC4846]), which are processed under [RFC3932].

   "---------Begin Extract---------

  2.2  Internet-Drafts

     During the development of a specification, draft versions of the
     document are made available for informal review and comment by
     placing them in the IETF's "Internet-Drafts" directory, which is
     replicated on a number of Internet hosts.  This makes an evolving
     working document readily available to a wide audience, facilitating
     the process of review and revision.

     An Internet-Draft that is published as an RFC, or that has remained
     unchanged in the Internet-Drafts directory for more than six months
     without being recommended by the IESG for publication as an RFC, is
     ...

   -----------End Extract---------"

   This is inaccurate.  Expiry is inhibited when a draft enters IESG
   consideration, not when it is approved.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      ...
      simply removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   In practice today,
   1.  Drafts are also removed from the directory after publication as
       an RFC.
   2.  All drafts are retained in the IETF archive for legal reasons,
       such as for demonstrating claims of prior art.
   3.  Expired drafts are unofficially visible in many places.
   4.  Authors may request expired drafts to be removed from such
       visibility (in some countries, this is a legal right).

   It's also worth noting that the published RFC will not be textually
   identical to the final version of the draft.  Not only will the
   boilerplate be finalized; the RFC Editor will also make editorial
   corrections, and any minor technical changes following IESG review
   will be applied.




Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   "---------Begin Extract---------

 3.1  Technical Specification (TS)

    A Technical Specification is any description of a protocol, service,
    procedure, convention, or format.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   This has not been interpreted to limit a TS to defining a wire
   protocol - it doesn't exclude APIs, for example (an API is a
   convention), even though the IETF tends to avoid standardizing APIs.
   It includes data definitions such as MIBs (a MIB is clearly a
   format).  It doesn't exclude a standard that only defines an IANA
   registry (a registry is also a format).  Yet all of these things have
   led to debate in the IETF - for example we have seen debate about
   whether a document that only defines a registry can become a Proposed
   Standard.  It is clear that a TS must be both implementable and
   testable - but even this is subject to interpretation by the IESG.
   Also see later comments on interoperability testing.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

3.2  Applicability Statement (AS)

   An Applicability Statement specifies how, and under what
   circumstances, one or more TSs may be applied to support a particular
   Internet capability.  An AS may specify uses for TSs that are not
   Internet Standards, as discussed in Section 7.

   An AS identifies the relevant TSs and the specific way in which they
   are to be combined, and may also specify particular values or ranges
   of TS parameters or subfunctions of a TS protocol that must be
   implemented.  An AS also specifies the circumstances in which the use
   of a particular TS is required, recommended, or elective (see section
   3.3).

   An AS may describe particular methods of using a TS in a restricted
   "domain of applicability", such as Internet routers, terminal
   servers, Internet systems that interface to Ethernets, or datagram-
   based database servers.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The community rarely creates this sort of separate AS.  The IETF has
   been reluctant to put ASes on the standards track: they cannot be
   implemented and tested.  (See comments below on section 4.1.2.)
   Today, an AS is typically included as a separate section in the



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   Technical Specification.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      The broadest type of AS is a comprehensive conformance specification,

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The IETF community has shown reluctance to be involved in conformance
   specifications.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      commonly called a "requirements document", for a particular class of
      Internet systems, such as Internet routers or Internet hosts.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Today, we use the word "requirements" much more broadly, often as a
   front-end document when a WG is starting out.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   An AS may not have a higher maturity level in the standards track
   than any standards-track TS on which the AS relies (see section 4.1).
   For example, a TS at Draft Standard level may be referenced by an AS
   at the Proposed Standard or Draft Standard level, but not by an AS at
   the Standard level.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   There is nothing specific to ASes in this rule; it is applied
   globally wherever normative references occur.  See comment below on
   4.2.4.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   3.3  Requirement Levels

   -----------End Extract---------"

   This section provides the basis on which the IETF's normative
   keywords [RFC2119] are built.

   "---------Begin Extract---------






Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


...
   The "Official Protocol Standards" RFC (STD1) lists a general
   requirement level for each TS, using the nomenclature defined in this
   section. This RFC is updated periodically.  In many cases, more
   detailed descriptions of the requirement levels of particular
   protocols and of individual features of the protocols will be found
   in appropriate ASs.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   As noted, STD1 is rarely updated today.  How this is really done in
   the RFC archive is an operational matter.  The concept and format of
   STD1 long predated the availability of on-line hyperlinked
   information.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   4.  THE INTERNET STANDARDS TRACK
   ...
   4.1.1  Proposed Standard
   ...
      The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
      prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
      materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
      behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
      Internet.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Note that for many years the Routing Area essentially applied the
   Draft Standard rules at Proposed Standard level [RFC1264], but
   recently dropped this [RFC4794].

   "---------Begin Extract---------

  ...
     Implementors should treat Proposed Standards as immature
     specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to gain
     experience and to validate, test, and clarify the specification.
     However, since the content of Proposed Standards may be changed if
     problems are found or better solutions are identified, deploying
     implementations of such standards into a disruption-sensitive
     environment is not recommended.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   It is well known that to a large extent this warning has been
   ignored, and that the Internet "runs on Proposed Standards."  Also,



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   as the MIB doctors have observed, some types of spec may benefit from
   being recycled at this level rather than being "promoted."  In
   reality today:
   1.  Proposed Standard (PS) is the preliminary level.
   2.  Implementors should be aware that a PS may be revised or even
       withdrawn.
   3.  It is nevertheless common to use PS implementations
       operationally.
   4.  Many documents spend their entire active life as PS.
   5.  Certain types of specification are likely to be recycled at PS as
       they evolve rather than being promoted.  (Sometimes this is
       simply a result of complexity, but other times it's due to
       intrinsic difficulties in interoperability testing and normative
       dependencies.)

   "---------Begin Extract---------

4.1.2  Draft Standard

   A specification from which at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations from different code bases have been developed, and
   for which sufficient successful operational experience has been
   obtained, may be elevated to the "Draft Standard" level.  For the
   purposes of this section, "interoperable" means to be functionally
   equivalent or interchangeable components of the system or process in
   which they are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology
   is required for implementation, the separate implementations must
   also have resulted from separate exercise of the licensing process.
   Elevation to Draft Standard is a major advance in status, indicating
   a strong belief that the specification is mature and will be useful.

   The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations applies to all of the options and features of the
   specification.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   At least four significant questions arise repeatedly in interpreting
   this, which a WG or author may need to discuss with their AD while
   preparing a document for DS status.
   1.  What is a "feature"?  This can be interpreted in many ways.  For
       a TLV field is every separate type code a feature?  Is every
       normative keyword [RFC2119] a feature?
   2.  Is it acceptable if features A and B are shown to be
       interoperable between implementations X and Y, and features C and
       D are shown to be interoperable between implentations P and Q?
       In that case we have shown interoperability of features A, B, C
       and D but have not shown that any implementation successfully



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


       interoperates with all of them.

       At least for the strong security requirement of BCP 61 [RFC3365],
       the Security Area, with the support of the IESG, has often
       insisted that specifications include at least one mandatory-to-
       implement strong security mechanism to guarantee universal
       interoperability.
   3.  Is it acceptable if both implementations X and Y show
       interoperability with implementation Q, but the implementor of Q
       is not party to the tests and does not make any statements about
       features supported?  In other words Q has merely served as an
       active mirror in the tests.
   4.  How should we handle the issue of "single-ended" technical
       specifications such as data formats, where there is no new
       protocol whose interoperation we can verify?  A practical
       solution for MIBs has been documented [RFC2438].

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   In cases in which one or more options or features
   have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable
   implementations, the specification may advance to the Draft Standard
   level only if those options or features are removed.

   The Working Group chair is responsible for documenting the specific
   implementations which qualify the specification for Draft or Internet
   Standard status along with documentation about testing of the
   interoperation of these implementations.  The documentation must
   include information about the support of each of the individual
   options and features.  This documentation should be submitted to the
   Area Director with the protocol action request. (see Section 6)

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The database of reports collected over the years is at
   <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/implementation.html>.  The quality is
   highly variable and some are very sparse and uninformative.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   4.1.3  Internet Standard
   ...
      A specification that reaches the status of Standard is assigned a
      number in the STD series while retaining its RFC number.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   There is sometimes also an acronym or mnemonic associated with an STD



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   designation, e.g.  "SMTP" or "SNMP".  However, there is no consistent
   mechanism for assigning acronyms, and the STD numbers are not
   associated with PS and DS documents that obsolete or update an STD
   document.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

4.2.1  Experimental

   The "Experimental" designation typically denotes a specification that
   is part of some research or development effort.  Such a specification
   is published for the general information of the Internet technical
   community and as an archival record of the work, subject only to
   editorial considerations and to verification that there has been
   adequate coordination with the standards process (see below).  An
   Experimental specification may be the output of an organized Internet
   research effort (e.g., a Research Group of the IRTF), an IETF Working
   Group, or it may be an individual contribution.

4.2.2  Informational

   An "Informational" specification is published for the general
   information of the Internet community, and does not represent an
   Internet community consensus or recommendation.  The Informational
   designation is intended to provide for the timely publication of a
   very broad range of responsible informational documents from many
   sources, subject only to editorial considerations and to verification
   that there has been adequate coordination with the standards process
   (see section 4.2.3).

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The IESG has documented guidelines for classifying documents as
   Informational vs Experimental at
   <http://www.ietf.org/u/ietfchair/info-exp.html>.

   In practice, some Informationals and Experimentals that are published
   via IESG Approval are very close to being a TS and are evaluated
   almost as carefully as a TS.  They may also be precursors of BCPs in
   areas where more operational experience is needed.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      Specifications that have been prepared outside of the Internet
      community and are not incorporated into the Internet Standards
      Process by any of the provisions of section 10 may be published as
      Informational RFCs, with the permission of the owner and the
      concurrence of the RFC Editor.



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   -----------End Extract---------"

   This paragraph conflates "outside of the IETF process" and "outside
   of the Internet community."  Some specifications originate elsewhere
   (for example, cryptographic algorithms).  These are routinely
   published as IESG-approved Informational RFCs, commonly sponsored by
   an Area Director rather than being processed by a WG.  See
   <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/STATEMENTS/ad-sponsoring.html>.  IAB and
   IRTF documents are normally published as Informational or
   Experimental too, without IESG approval [RFC4844].  Other
   specifications, such as proprietary specifications or work that did
   not find IETF sponsorship, are published as Informational or
   Experimental RFCs after independent submission to the RFC Editor and
   brief IESG review [RFC3932].  See [RFC4846] for a current
   description.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   4.2.3  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs

      Unless they are the result of IETF Working Group action, documents
      intended to be published with Experimental or Informational status
      should be submitted directly to the RFC Editor.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   That's often not what happens.  Many of them come via an AD through
   the IESG because they are (for example) related to a recently closed
   WG etc.  These are processed and approved entirely within the IETF
   <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/STATEMENTS/ad-sponsoring.html>.  But as
   noted, the independent submissions track is separate from the IETF
   process.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

    The RFC Editor will
    publish any such documents as Internet-Drafts which have not already
    been so published.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   That is inaccurate, i.e. they ask the authors to do so, except
   possibly shortly prior to April 1st each year.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

      In order to differentiate these Internet-Drafts
      they will be labeled or grouped in the I-D directory so they are



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


      easily recognizable.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Not done in practice.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

    The RFC Editor will wait two weeks after this
    publication for comments before proceeding further.  The RFC Editor
    is expected to exercise his or her judgment concerning the editorial
    suitability of a document for publication with Experimental or
    Informational status, and may refuse to publish a document which, in
    the expert opinion of the RFC Editor, is unrelated to Internet
    activity or falls below the technical and/or editorial standard for
    RFCs.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The RFC Editor is assisted in this by an editorial board
   <http://www.rfc-editor.org/edboard.html>.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   To ensure that the non-standards track Experimental and Informational
   designations are not misused to circumvent the Internet Standards
   Process, the IESG and the RFC Editor have agreed that the RFC Editor
   will refer to the IESG any document submitted for Experimental or
   Informational publication which, in the opinion of the RFC Editor,
   may be related to work being done, or expected to be done, within the
   IETF community.  The IESG shall review such a referred document
   within a reasonable period of time, and recommend either that it be
   published as originally submitted or referred to the IETF as a
   contribution to the Internet Standards Process.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The current practice for this is defined in [RFC3932]; also see
   [RFC4846].

   "---------Begin Extract---------










Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


4.2.4  Historic

   A specification that has been superseded by a more recent
   specification or is for any other reason considered to be obsolete is
   assigned to the "Historic" level.  (Purists have suggested that the
   word should be "Historical"; however, at this point the use of
   "Historic" is historical.)

   Note: Standards track specifications normally must not depend on
   other standards track specifications which are at a lower maturity
   level or on non standards track specifications other than referenced
   specifications from other standards bodies.  (See Section 7.)

   -----------End Extract---------"

   The first paragraph has not been implemented consistently.  In most
   cases a standards track RFC that has been obsoleted by a more recent
   version is not listed in the RFC Index as Historic.

   The second paragraph is applied generally.  Furthermore, a clear
   distinction is now required between Normative and Informative
   references.  Also, the requirement for Normative references to be
   published (i.e. not work in progress) is applied to all
   specifications, not just the standards track.

   Also note the procedures of [RFC3967] and [RFC4897] for allowing
   normative reference to less mature documents.

   "---------Begin Extract---------






















Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


5.  BEST CURRENT PRACTICE (BCP) RFCs

   The BCP subseries of the RFC series is designed to be a way to
   standardize practices and the results of community deliberations.  A
   BCP document is subject to the same basic set of procedures as
   standards track documents and thus is a vehicle by which the IETF
   community can define and ratify the community's best current thinking
   on a statement of principle or on what is believed to be the best way
   to perform some operations or IETF process function.

   Historically Internet standards have generally been concerned with
   the technical specifications for hardware and software required for
   computer communication across interconnected networks.  However,
   since the Internet itself is composed of networks operated by a great
   variety of organizations, with diverse goals and rules, good user
   service requires that the operators and administrators of the
   Internet follow some common guidelines for policies and operations.
   While these guidelines are generally different in scope and style
   from protocol standards, their establishment needs a similar process
   for consensus building.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   It is sometimes unclear whether a given document should be standards
   track, BCP or informational (and in the end, it may not really
   matter).  For example, how should the IESG classify a document which
   recommends against a particular operational practice that has been
   found to be damaging?  It might amend a technical specification (by
   removing a feature); it might limit the applicability of a protocol
   (and therefore be an applicability statement); it might be a BCP
   defining a "worst current practice"; or it might fit none of the
   above.  WGs or authors need to discuss this matter with their AD.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   While it is recognized that entities such as the IAB and IESG are
   composed of individuals who may participate, as individuals, in the
   technical work of the IETF, it is also recognized that the entities
   themselves have an existence as leaders in the community.  As leaders
   in the Internet technical community, these entities should have an
   outlet to propose ideas to stimulate work in a particular area, to
   raise the community's sensitivity to a certain issue, to make a
   statement of architectural principle, or to communicate their
   thoughts on other matters.  The BCP subseries creates a smoothly
   structured way for these management entities to insert proposals into
   the consensus-building machinery of the IETF while gauging the
   community's view of that issue.




Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   -----------End Extract---------"

   Although it's not unknown for a BCP to have its origin in the IESG or
   IAB, IETF consensus is still needed, as judged by the IESG.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

6.1.1  Initiation of Action

   A specification that is intended to enter or advance in the Internet
   standards track shall first be posted as an Internet-Draft (see
   section 2.2) unless it has not changed since publication as an RFC.
   It shall remain as an Internet-Draft for a period of time, not less
   than two weeks, that permits useful community review, after which a
   recommendation for action may be initiated.

   A standards action is initiated by a recommendation by the IETF
   Working group responsible for a specification to its Area Director,
   copied to the IETF Secretariat or, in the case of a specification not
   associated with a Working Group, a recommendation by an individual to
   the IESG.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   In practice, individual submissions are recommended to and shepherded
   by an AD, who brings them to the IESG just like a WG document.  See
   <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/STATEMENTS/ad-sponsoring.html>.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   6.1.3  Publication

      If a standards action is approved, notification is sent to the RFC
      Editor and copied to the IETF with instructions to publish the
      specification as an RFC.  The specification shall at that point be
      removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   "At that point" refers to the moment of publication of the RFC.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

     An official summary of standards actions completed and pending shall
     appear in each issue of the Internet Society's newsletter.  This
     shall constitute the "publication of record" for Internet standards
     actions.




Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   -----------End Extract---------"

   This is no longer done on paper.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

     The RFC Editor shall publish periodically an "Internet Official
     Protocol Standards" RFC [1], summarizing the status of all Internet
     protocol and service specifications.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   As noted above, this has become infrequent.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

6.2  Advancing in the Standards Track
...
   Change of status shall result in republication of the specification
   as an RFC, except in the rare case that there have been no changes at
   all in the specification since the last publication.  Generally,
   desired changes will be "batched" for incorporation at the next level
   in the standards track.  However, deferral of changes to the next
   standards action on the specification will not always be possible or
   desirable; for example, an important typographical error, or a
   technical error that does not represent a change in overall function
   of the specification, may need to be corrected immediately.  In such
   cases, the IESG or RFC Editor may be asked to republish the RFC (with
   a new number) with corrections, and this will not reset the minimum
   time-at-level clock.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   Note that the RFC Editor maintains errata for published RFCs.

   "---------Begin Extract---------















Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   When a standards-track specification has not reached the Internet
   Standard level but has remained at the same maturity level for
   twenty-four (24) months, and every twelve (12) months thereafter
   until the status is changed, the IESG shall review the viability of
   the standardization effort responsible for that specification and the
   usefulness of the technology. Following each such review, the IESG
   shall approve termination or continuation of the development effort,
   at the same time the IESG shall decide to maintain the specification
   at the same maturity level or to move it to Historic status.  This
   decision shall be communicated to the IETF by electronic mail to the
   IETF Announce mailing list to allow the Internet community an
   opportunity to comment. This provision is not intended to threaten a
   legitimate and active Working Group effort, but rather to provide an
   administrative mechanism for terminating a moribund effort.

   -----------End Extract---------"

   In practice, the IESG relies on working groups, or on initiatives by
   members of the community, to propose promotion (or demotion) of
   documents.  A practical example of demotion is [RFC4450].

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   6.5  Conflict Resolution and Appeals

   -----------End Extract---------"

   It's possible to read this as applying only to IESG actions described
   in this section 6.  The IESG and IAB have preferred to read it as
   applying to any IESG decision whatever.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

8.  NOTICES AND RECORD KEEPING
...
   As a practical matter, the formal record of all Internet Standards
   Process activities is maintained by the IETF Secretariat, and is the
   responsibility of the IETF Secretariat except that each IETF Working
   Group is expected to maintain their own email list archive and must
   make a best effort to ensure that all traffic is captured and
   included in the archives.  Also, the Working Group chair is
   responsible for providing the IETF Secretariat with complete and
   accurate minutes of all Working Group meetings.  Internet-Drafts that
   have been removed (for any reason) from the Internet-Drafts
   directories shall be archived by the IETF Secretariat for the sole
   purpose of preserving an historical record of Internet standards
   activity and thus are not retrievable except in special
   circumstances.



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   -----------End Extract---------"

   See comments on section 2.2.

   "---------Begin Extract---------

   10.  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

   -----------End Extract---------"

   This section is superseded by [RFC3978] and [RFC3979].


3.  Security Considerations

   This document has no security implications for the Internet.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no action by the IANA.


5.  Acknowledgements

   Useful comments on earlier versions of this document were made by
   Eric Gray, Luc Pardon, Pekka Savola, Magnus Westerlund, Jeff
   Hutzelman, Mike Heard, Alfred Hoenes, Spencer Dawkins, Jari Arkko,
   Sam Hartman and others.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


6.  Change log

   draft-carpenter-rfc2026-practice-00: Back as a draft again when IONs
   abolished

   ion-2026-practice: Updated for IETF and IESG comments, 2007-10-08

   ion-2026-practice: IONized version limited to factual description,
   2007-06-27

   draft-carpenter-rfc2026-critique-03: Clarifications and editorial
   updates, 2007-04-20

   draft-carpenter-rfc2026-critique-02: Changed title, changed tone from
   critique to commentary, removed purely editorial comments, included



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   further substantive comments, 2006-08-10

   draft-carpenter-rfc2026-critique-01: reduced personal statement,
   included feedback comments, 2006-04-11

   draft-carpenter-rfc2026-critique-00: original version, 2006-02-24


7.  Informative References

   [I-D.rfc-editor-rfc2223bis]
              Reynolds, J. and R. Braden, "Instructions to Request for
              Comments (RFC) Authors", draft-rfc-editor-rfc2223bis-08
              (work in progress), July 2004.

   [RFC1264]  Hinden, R., "Internet Engineering Task Force Internet
              Routing Protocol Standardization Criteria", RFC 1264,
              October 1991.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2438]  O'Dell, M., Alvestrand, H., Wijnen, B., and S. Bradner,
              "Advancement of MIB specifications on the IETF Standards
              Track", BCP 27, RFC 2438, October 1998.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3365]  Schiller, J., "Strong Security Requirements for Internet
              Engineering Task Force Standard Protocols", BCP 61,
              RFC 3365, August 2002.

   [RFC3932]  Alvestrand, H., "The IESG and RFC Editor Documents:
              Procedures", BCP 92, RFC 3932, October 2004.

   [RFC3967]  Bush, R. and T. Narten, "Clarifying when Standards Track
              Documents may Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower
              Level", BCP 97, RFC 3967, December 2004.

   [RFC3978]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78,
              RFC 3978, March 2005.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.



Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


   [RFC4071]  Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, April 2005.

   [RFC4450]  Lear, E. and H. Alvestrand, "Getting Rid of the Cruft:
              Report from an Experiment in Identifying and Reclassifying
              Obsolete Standards Documents", RFC 4450, March 2006.

   [RFC4677]  Hoffman, P. and S. Harris, "The Tao of IETF - A Novice's
              Guide to the Internet Engineering Task Force", RFC 4677,
              September 2006.

   [RFC4794]  Fenner, B., "RFC 1264 Is Obsolete", RFC 4794,
              December 2006.

   [RFC4844]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC
              Series and RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.

   [RFC4846]  Klensin, J. and D. Thaler, "Independent Submissions to the
              RFC Editor", RFC 4846, July 2007.

   [RFC4897]  Klensin, J. and S. Hartman, "Handling Normative References
              to Standards-Track Documents", BCP 97, RFC 4897,
              June 2007.


Author's Address

   Brian Carpenter
   Department of Computer Science
   University of Auckland
   PB 92019
   Auckland,   1142
   New Zealand

   Email: brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com















Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              RFC 2026 practice                  July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Carpenter                Expires January 3, 2009               [Page 23]


