


Network Working Group                                  J. Arkko (Editor)
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                          October 16, 2006
Expires: April 19, 2007


           Guidance on Area Director Sponsoring of Documents
                  draft-iesg-sponsoring-guidelines-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   There are a number of different methods by which an RFC can be
   published in addition to the regular submissions from a working
   group.  This note discusses the publication of RFCs by finding a
   sponsoring Area Director to take it through IETF and Internet
   Engineering Steering Group (IESG) review.  This note covers both the
   the processing in the IESG as well as guidance on when such
   sponsoring is appropriate.




Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Processing Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Choosing Documents to Sponsor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Summary of Changes to Existing Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  PROTO Write-Up  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15

































Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


1.  Introduction

   There are a number of different methods by which an RFC is published
   [RFC3932, I-D.iab-rfc-editor]:

   o  Output from the Working Groups (WGs) to Standards Track, Best
      Current Practice (BCP), Experimental, or Informational.

   o  Area Director (AD) Sponsored documents to Standards Track,
      Experimental, or Informational.

   o  RFC Editor documents to Experimental or Informational.

   o  Documents for which special rules exist.

   Only some of these methods involve review in the IETF.  This note is
   concerned with the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG)
   processing by the AD Sponsored method.  This note also provides
   guidance for choosing between sponsored and RFC Editor submissions.

   This note describes procedures and working methods.  It does not
   change any underlying rules such as those in RFC 2026 [RFC2026] or
   the operation of the RFC Editor as defined in [I-D.iab-rfc-editor].


2.  Requirements language

   In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "OPTIONAL",
   "RECOMMENDED", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT", are to be interpreted as
   described in [RFC2119].


3.  Submission

   Individual submissions can enter the process either by sending a
   request to the RFC Editor or through an agreement with an AD.

   RFC Editor document submission

      The authors contact the RFC Editor and request the publication as
      an RFC.  The requested result in this case is an RFC Editor
      document.

      However, some submissions either have to be from the IETF or would
      benefit from being from the IETF.  For instance, the document may
      request an IANA allocation from a space that has a Standards
      Action IANA rule (see RFC 2434 [RFC2434]).  Such actions can not
      come from RFC Editor submissions.  For a discussion of when a



Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


      document can not be processed as an RFC Editor submission, see RFC
      3932 [RFC3932].

      One possibility for such documents is to process them as AD
      Sponsored submissions.  Other alternatives include finding or
      creating a suitable WG to process the document or abandoning the
      document altogether.  The authors are responsible for the decision
      to proceed with a particular approach among the set of allowed
      options.  The authors are also responsible for the effort of
      proposing a Birds-of-a-Feather (BoF) session, convincing the IESG
      or one of the ADs that the document needs to be sponsored, etc.

   Agreement with an AD

      AD Sponsored submissions can also be initiated by the AD who is
      willing to sponsor a document.  Such submissions are usually the
      result of the AD tracking the work earlier, or discussions between
      the authors and the AD.

   Document submissions to the RFC Editor are automatically entered to
   the IESG processing for the RFC 3932 check.

   AD sponsored document submissions require the sponsoring AD to enter
   the draft in the tracker and set the parameters appropriately (e.g.,
   state set to "AD Review", status set to "Proposed Standard", and the
   area set correctly).

   Once the AD has agreed to sponsor a document, the authors need to
   provide a write-up similar to PROTO team write-ups from WGs.  A
   suggested write-up form can be found from Appendix B.

   Previously, it was also possible to send a request to the secretariat
   for a document to be sponsored.  This is no longer possible.
   Messages sent to iesg@ietf.org are NOT considered to be a submission
   at all.  Messages sent to iesg-secretary@ietf.org prompt the
   secretariat to send the following response:















Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


      "We cannot process your request. You have two choices - direct
       submission to the RFC Editor, or finding an IETF Area Director
       to sponsor your draft as an individual submission to the
       IETF. Also, please consider the normal IETF publication path
       through an existing working group, or consider proposing a BoF
       at a future IETF meeting.

       Please see RFC 3932 for guidance on which documents may be
       suitable for direct submission to the RFC Editor. If you
       choose this option, please send your publication request to
       <rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org>

       If you wish to seek Area Director sponsorship for an
       individual submission, the best solution is to contact the
       most relevant Area Director directly, with an explanation of
       why the draft is appropriate for IETF publication. The Area
       Director is also the best source of advice about whether an
       existing WG, or a BoF, may be applicable. The Area Directors
       and WGs are listed at:

         http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/wg-dir.html

       If for some reason you cannot identify the most relevant Area
       Director, please talk to the General Area Director first.

       The IETF Secretariat"


4.  Processing Rules

   AD Sponsored documents to Standards Track require review in the IETF,
   IETF Last Call, and IESG approval.  AD Sponsored documents to
   Experimental/Informational require some form of review in the IETF
   and IESG approval.  Even the latter type of documents often go
   through an IETF Last Call as a means to solicit the IETF review.

   As RFC 2026 states, when a proposed standards action comes from
   outside Working Groups, the IETF Last Call period is at least four
   weeks.  If the IESG believes that the community interest would be
   served by allowing more time for comment, it may decide on a longer
   Last-Call period or to explicitly lengthen a current Last-Call
   period.

   The exact nature of the review within the IETF is not specified, but
   it is expected that documents be posted for review in the relevant WG
   mailing lists.  Often no relevant mailing list exists, in which case
   area-specific or IETF main discussion list can be used.  Individual
   reviewers, review teams, and review boards for specific topics can



Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


   also be used.  If no sufficient review has been obtained, the AD
   should solicit it explicitly.

   Note that discussing topics outside the charter of a WG can cause
   loss of focus in a WG, if a WG list is chosen for discussion.  This
   should be considered when seeking review and when deciding to adopt
   documents for sponsoring.

   Sponsored submissions are treated in the same manner with other
   submissions in the actual IESG evaluation process.  Existing discuss,
   appeal, recusing, etc. rules apply also to sponsored submissions.


5.  Choosing Documents to Sponsor

   This section provides some guidelines for the use of the AD
   Sponsoring method.  Such guidelines are useful when authors contact
   the AD and suggest that their document be sponsored.  The rules are
   also useful in controlling the load on the IESG, and to ensure
   fairness.  AD Sponsored documents are the only way to publish
   Standards Track documents outside WGs.  IETF documents may also have
   a higher priority at the RFC Editor processing queue than RFC Editor
   submissions.

   When considering the choice between a sponsored document and an RFC
   Editor submission, the RFC 3932 rules play a role [RFC3932].  If the
   document generates a 3, 4 or 5 response based on RFC 3932 it is not
   appropriate for an RFC Editor submission.  Sometimes such documents
   are suitable candidates for being sponsored, however.  It would be
   useful to add, say, IANA rules or IPv6 considerations to an old
   specification that did not have them and for which no WG can be
   found.  Such additions to standards track RFCs need to be on the
   standards track themselves, preventing the use of RFC Editor
   submissions.

   But a negative response from the RFC 3932 check may also indicate
   that the document is inappropriate or harmful.  If the document is
   not changed, it should neither be sponsored by the ADs or published
   via the RFC Editor.

   In general, the decision to sponsor a document involves AD
   discretion.  It is necessary for the AD to be willing to spend effort
   on the document.  The following considerations should be applied:

   Document Track

      Documents that need to be on the Standards Track can only be
      published via WGs or the AD Sponsored method.



Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


      Documents that fall under this class should either be handled by
      the IETF in some manner or be dropped.  This ultimate decision
      depends on, among other things, on the value of the document's
      contribution.

      The AD should also consider whether the normal IETF WG/BoF process
      should be employed instead.  Some situations where this is
      impractical have been noted in Section 5.

   IANA Rules

      Documents that request "IETF Consensus" or "Standards Action" IANA
      allocations also need to use be WG submissions or AD Sponsored
      documents.

   Benefit from IETF Review

      Does the document need IETF-wide review, or is Independent
      Specification Review (ISR) sufficient?  For instance, the AD can
      decide that while a particular document could be submitted via the
      RFC Editor, the added review at the IETF and IESG would be useful
      and would benefit the community.

      As an example, the AD may expect that a particular protocol will
      be widely deployed, and that providing additional IETF review
      makes the protocol more likely to be useful for the community and
      less likely to cause problems.

   Availability of Reviewer Resources

      Are there persons that can help with the review of the document
      during, for instance, the IETF Last Call?  Is there a risk that
      such persons become distracted from their chartered work at the
      IETF because of the extra reviews being requested?

   Fairness

      ADs should be fair in choosing the documents that they decide to
      sponsor.  For instance, they should not sponsor documents only
      from their own company or their friends; the content of the
      document and its relevance to the Internet community should be the
      guiding factor.

      Where an AD is one of the authors of a document, he or she can not
      be the sponsoring AD.






Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


   Relevance

      The above process issues need to be considered together with the
      relevance the document has for the Internet community.  Does it
      solve an important problem?  Does it describe an issue that
      affects a significant number of users in the Internet?  Does it
      create an interface or convention where widespread
      interoperability would be necessary?

      For instance, a document that describes a serious vulnerability or
      an architectural issue in protocols in the AD's area is a good
      candidate for being sponsored.  Clarifications and small updates
      of protocols in the AD's area are also good candidates when no
      suitable working working group exists, and the scale of the change
      does not warrant the creation of one.

      A document specifying a particular vendor's proprietary protocol
      is typically not suitable for being sponsored.  A document
      specifying an alternate approach to an existing Standards Track
      solution is typically not a likely candidate either.

   Quality

      As with relevance, the quality of the document and the expected
      outcome of the IETF review process affect the decision.  In
      general, the AD should only sponsor documents that have he or she
      believes in; the decision to sponsor should only be taken after at
      least as detailed review as the AD performs for regular WG
      submissions.

      As with BoFs, it is possible that the IETF community is divided or
      unable to agree on a proposal, even if the proposal itself is of
      high quality and relevant.  The AD should consider the likelihood
      of achieving consensus in IETF review.

   ADs can always decline to sponsor a given document.

   It may take a while to find the right AD.  Sometimes the contacted AD
   may suggest that the document fits better in another AD's area of
   expertise.  Or the author may realize that a more suitable AD exists.
   Legitimate search for the right AD should not be confused with
   authors going through several ADs trying to find one that will
   sponsor their document.  For BOF requests, this practice has been
   termed "AD shopping."

   To identify cases of AD shopping, it is recommended that ADs send a
   brief note to the IESG when they have turned down a sponsoring
   request, accompanied by an indication if this was due to unsuitable



Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


   topic for the AD or some other reason.  This allows the other ADs to
   recognize that they are being asked for the same document again.
   This should not necessarily cause the second AD to automatically turn
   down the request.  However, it is recommended that he query the ADs
   that have turned down sponsorship in the past and incorporate this
   information into his decision.


6.  Discussion

   AD Sponsored submissions represent a significant workload to the
   IESG.  Reasons for this popularity include the interest of the ADs to
   progress work in their fields, the difference in time-to-RFC-
   publication IETF documents enjoy over RFC Editor submissions, the
   ability to avoid the IESG notes that RFC Editor submissions get, and
   the wider review IETF documents get.

   However, improvements in the efficiency of the RFC Editor processing
   are likely to increase the popularity of the RFC Editor submissions,
   which represent a smaller load for the IESG.  Similarly, ongoing work
   [I-D.klensin-rfc-independent] may change the tone of the IESG notes.

   In any case, the IESG can handle some amount of sponsored documents.
   The system is self-regulating in the sense that if the IESG becomes
   too busy, the ADs are less likely to adopt sponsored documents; there
   is no requirement for them to sponsor any submissions.

   The interesting question is why there was no WG to deal with the
   issue in the proposal, if it is so important and useful.  One reason
   for this can be that our BoF process tends works better for large
   efforts than small.  The process also favors focused efforts which
   may make it hard to report issues that cross multiple WGs or areas.
   Running a BoF and creating a WG takes time and requires a significant
   number of persons to be involved in the effort.  Some of the
   situations where this can be problematic include:

   o  Corrections and small updates of existing RFCs when the WG that
      created the original RFCs no longer exists.

   o  Draft Standard revisions of Proposed Standard RFCs when the WG no
      longer exists.

   o  IANA considerations updates for old protocol specifications to
      bring them up to today's requirements.  Many old protocol
      specifications had no IANA considerations, for instance.

   o  Architectural issues that cross multiple WGs or areas.




Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


   o  Registration of values and formats in frameworks, such as media
      type registrations.

   Some areas employ area-specific WGs that can be used to process some
   of these.  For instance, TSVWG in the Transport area produces
   documents as a real WG, resulting in less need for AD sponsoring.
   Other areas such as Internet and Security have area-specific
   discussion forums that do not act like WGs.  The Routing area employs
   both models with their RTGAREA group for discussion and RTGWG for WG-
   like operation for "catchall" documents.


7.  Summary of Changes to Existing Procedures

   The "talk to the appropriate AD" and "submit via RFC Editor"
   approaches are promoted over submitting documents via the
   secretariat.  This allows the ADs to discuss the appropriate
   submission method with the authors, and does not require the
   secretariat to think about policy issues such as whether a document
   is worthwhile for being sponsored.

   Submissions sent to iesg@ietf.org are not considered.

   New text is adopted for the secretariat's response to submissions.

   It should also be noted that Section 4.2.3 of RFC 2026 states "Unless
   they are the result of IETF Working Group action, documents intended
   to be published with Experimental or Informational status should be
   submitted directly to the RFC Editor."  This has not been operational
   practise for some time, however.  A number of Informational and
   Experimental documents have been submitted as AD Sponsored documents.
   The rationale behind this is the wider review that can be achieved,
   but this is one area where current procedures have deviated from RFC
   2026.


8.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations beyond those normally involved
   in the IETF processing of proposals for new RFCs.


9.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.


10.  References



Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.

   [RFC3932]  Alvestrand, H., "The IESG and RFC Editor Documents:
              Procedures", BCP 92, RFC 3932, October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding]
              Levkowetz, H., "Document Shepherding From Working Group
              Last Call to IESG Approval",
              draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding-07 (work in
              progress), June 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3967]  Bush, R. and T. Narten, "Clarifying when Standards Track
              Documents may Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower
              Level", BCP 97, RFC 3967, December 2004.

   [I-D.iab-rfc-editor]
              Daigle, L., "The RFC Series and RFC Editor",
              draft-iab-rfc-editor-01 (work in progress), July 2006.

   [I-D.klensin-rfc-independent]
              Klensin, J., "Independent Submissions to the RFC Editor",
              draft-klensin-rfc-independent-02 (work in progress),
              May 2006.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This note has been prepared as a result of discussions in the IESG.
   The members of the IESG at the time this was written were:

      Bill Fenner

      Brian Carpenter

      Cullen Jennings




Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


      Dan Romascanu

      David Kessens

      Jari Arkko

      Jon Peterson

      Lars Eggert

      Lisa Dusseault

      Magnus Westerlund

      Mark Townsley

      Ross Callon

      Russ Housley

      Sam Hartman

      Ted Hardie

   In addition, the editor would like to thank Leslie Daigle for input.


Appendix B.  PROTO Write-Up

   The following write-up should accompany any request for sponsoring.
   The write-up is a modified version of the WG chair proto write-up in
   [I-D.ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding].

   (1.a)  Has the document had adequate review both from key community
      members and technical experts?  Does the submitting author have
      any concerns about the depth or breadth of the reviews that have
      been performed?

   (1.b)  Does the submitting author have concerns that the document
      needs more review from a particular or broader perspective, e.g.,
      security, operational complexity, someone familiar with AAA,
      internationalization or XML?

   (1.c)  Has anyone threatened an appeal or otherwise indicated extreme
      discontent?  If so, please summarise the areas of conflict in
      separate email messages to the Responsible Area Director.  (It
      should be in a separate email because this questionnaire will be
      entered into the ID Tracker.)



Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


   (1.d)  Has the submitting author verified that the document satisfies
      all ID nits?  (See http://www.ietf.org/ID-Checklist.html and
      http://tools.ietf.org/tools/idnits/).  Boilerplate checks are not
      enough; this check needs to be thorough.

   (1.e)  Has the document split its references into normative and
      informative?  Are there normative references to documents that are
      not ready for advancement or are otherwise in an unclear state?
      If such normative references exist, what is the strategy for their
      completion?  Are there normative references that are downward
      references, as described in [RFC3967]?  If so, list these downward
      references to support the Area Director in the Last Call procedure
      for them [RFC3967].

   (1.f)  The IESG approval announcement includes a Document
      Announcement Write-Up.  Please provide such a Document
      Announcement Write-Up.  Recent examples can be found in the
      "Action" announcements for approved documents.  The approval
      announcement contains the following sections:

      Technical Summary

         Relevant content can frequently be found in the abstract and/or
         introduction of the document.  If not, this may be an
         indication that there are deficiencies in the abstract or
         introduction.

      Working Group Summary

         Indicate the community and/or individuals that this submission
         comes from.  Was this proposal discussed in any public forum,
         and was there anything in that discussion that is worth noting?
         For example, was there controversy about particular points?

      Document Quality

         Are there existing implementations of the protocol?  Have a
         significant number of vendors indicated their plan to implement
         the specification?  Are there any reviewers that merit special
         mention as having done a thorough review, e.g., one that
         resulted in important changes or a conclusion that the document
         had no substantive issues?

   The write-up is entered into the ID Tracker in the "Comment" field.







Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com











































Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          AD Sponsoring Guidelines            October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Arkko (Editor)           Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 15]

