



IPv6 maintenance Working Group (6man)                            F. Gont
Internet-Draft                                    SI6 Networks / UTN-FRH
Updates: 6106 (if approved)                                   P. Simerda
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: August 30, 2015                                          W. Liu
                                                     Huawei Technologies
                                                       February 26, 2015


        Current issues with DNS Configuration Options for SLAAC
               draft-gont-6man-slaac-dns-config-issues-01

Abstract

   RFC 6106 specifies two Neighbor Discovery options that can be
   included in Router Advertisement messages to convey information about
   DNS recursive servers and DNS Search Lists.  Small lifetime values
   for the aforementioned options have been found to cause
   interoperability problems in those network scenarios in which these
   options are used to convey DNS-related information.  This document
   analyzes the aforementioned problem, and formally updates RFC 6106
   such that these issues are mitigated.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Gont, et al.             Expires August 30, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       SLAAC DNS Configuration Issues        February 2015


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Changing the Semantics of the 'Lifetime' field of RDNSS and
       DNSSL options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Changing the Default Values of the 'Lifetime' field of RDNSS
       and DNSSL options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Use of Router Solicitations for active Probing  . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Sanitize the received RDNSS/DNSSL 'Lifetime' Values . . . . .   5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   RFC 6106 [RFC6106] specifies two Neighbor Discovery (ND) [RFC4861]
   options that can be included in Router Advertisement messages to
   convey information about DNS recursive servers and DNS Search Lists.
   Namely, the Recursive DNS Server (RDNSS) Option specifies the IPv6
   addresses of recursive DNS servers, while the DNS Search List (DNSSL)
   Option specifies a "search list" to be used when trying to resolve a
   name by means of the DNS.

   Each of this options include a "Lifetime" field which specifies the
   maximum time, in seconds, during which the information included in
   the option can be used by the receiving system.  The aforementioned
   "Lifetime" value is set as a function of the Neighbor Discovery
   parameter 'MaxRtrAdvInterval', which specifies the maximum time
   allowed between sending unsolicited multicast Router Advertisements
   from an interface.  The recommended bounds (MaxRtrAdvInterval <=
   Lifetime <= 2*MaxRtrAdvInterval) have been found to be too short for
   scenarios in which some Router Advertisement messages may be lost.
   In such scenarios, hosts may fail to receive unsolicited Router
   Advertisements and therefore fail to refresh the expiration time of
   the DNS-related information previously learned through the RDNSS and
   DNSSL options), thus eventually discarding the aforementioned DNS-
   related information prematurely.

   Some implementations consider the lack of DNS-related information as
   a hard failure, thus causing configuration restart.  This situation



Gont, et al.             Expires August 30, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       SLAAC DNS Configuration Issues        February 2015


   is exacerbated in those implementations in which IPv6 connectivity
   and IPv4 connectivity are bound together, and hence failure in the
   configuration of one of them causes the whole link to be restarted.

   This document formally updates RFC 6106 such that this issue is
   mitigated.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  Changing the Semantics of the 'Lifetime' field of RDNSS and DNSSL
    options

   The semantics of the 'Lifetime' field of the RDNSS and DNSSL options
   is updated as follows:

   o  The 'Lifetime' field indicates the amount of time during which the
      aforementioned DNS-related information is expected to be stable.
      A node is NOT required to discard the DNS-related information once
      the Lifetime expires.

   o  If the information received in a RDNSS or DNSSL option is already
      present in the corresponding local data structures, the
      corresponding 'Expiration' time should be updated according to the
      value in the 'Lifetime' field of the received option.  A
      'Lifetime' of '0' causes the corresponding information to be
      discarded, as already specified in [RFC6106].

   o  If a host has already gathered a sufficient number of RDNSS
      addresses (or DNS search domain names), and additional data is
      received while the existing entries have not yet expired, the
      received RDNSS addresses (or DNS search domain names) SHOULD be
      ignored.

   o  If a host receives new RDNSS addresses (or DNS search domain
      names), and some of the existing entries have expired, the newly-
      learned information SHOULD be used to replace the expired entries.

   o  A host SHOULD flush configured DNS-related information when it has
      any reason to believe that its network connectivity has changed in
      some relevant way (e.g., there has been a "link change event").
      When that happens, the host MAY send a Router Solicitation message
      to re-learn the corresponding DNS-related information.

   o  The most-recently-updated information SHOULD have higher priority
      over the other DNS-related information already present on the
      local host.



Gont, et al.             Expires August 30, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       SLAAC DNS Configuration Issues        February 2015


   We note that the original motivation for enforcing a short expiration
   timeout value was to allow mobile nodes to prefer local RDNSSes to
   remote RDNSSes.  However, the above rules already allow for a timely
   update of the corresponding DNS-related information.

3.  Changing the Default Values of the 'Lifetime' field of RDNSS and
    DNSSL options

   The default RDNSS/DNSSL "Lifetime" value in current the current
   router solutions vary between MaxRtrAdvInterval and
   2*MaxRtrAdvInterval.  This means that common packet loss rates can
   lead to the problem described in this document.

   One possible approach to mitigate this issue would be to avoid
   'Lifetime' values that are on the same order as MaxRtrAdvInterval.
   This solution would require, of course, changes in router software.

   When specifying a better default value, the following aspects should
   be considered:

   o  IPv6 will be used on many links (including IEEE 802.11) that
      experience packet loss.  Therefore losing a few packets in a short
      period of time should not invalidate DNS configuration
      information.

   o  Unsolicited Router Advertisements sent on Ethernet networks result
      in packets that employ multicast Ethernet Destination Addresses.
      A number of network elements (including those that perform
      bridging between wireless networks and wired networks) have
      problems with multicasted Ethernet frames, thus typically leading
      to packet loss of some of those frames.  Therefore, SLAAC
      implementations should be able to cope with devices that can lose
      several multicast packets in a row.

   [RFC6106] is hereby updated as follows:

      The default value of AdvRDNSSLifetime and AdvDNSSLLifetime MUST be
      at least 10*MaxRtrAdvInterval so that the probability of hosts
      receiving unsolicited Router Advertisements is increased.

4.  Use of Router Solicitations for active Probing

   According to RFC 6106, hosts MAY send Router Solicitations to avoid
   expiry of RDNSS and DNSSL lifetimes.  This technique could be
   employed as a "last resort" when expiration of the RDNSS and DNSSL
   information is imminent.





Gont, et al.             Expires August 30, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       SLAAC DNS Configuration Issues        February 2015


5.  Sanitize the received RDNSS/DNSSL 'Lifetime' Values

   A host that receives a RDNSS or DNSSL option that has a non-zero
   Lifetime smaller than 10*MaxRtrAdvInterval should employ
   10*MaxRtrAdvInterval as the Lifetime value of the corresponding RDNSS
   or DNSSL option.

6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any additional security
   considerations to those documented in the "Security Considerations"
   section of [RFC6106].

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Erik Nordmark and Mark Smith for
   their valuable input on the topic covered by this document.

8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC6106]  Jeong, J., Park, S., Beloeil, L., and S. Madanapalli,
              "IPv6 Router Advertisement Options for DNS Configuration",
              RFC 6106, November 2010.

Authors' Addresses

   Fernando Gont
   SI6 Networks / UTN-FRH
   Evaristo Carriego 2644
   Haedo, Provincia de Buenos Aires  1706
   Argentina

   Phone: +54 11 4650 8472
   Email: fgont@si6networks.com
   URI:   http://www.si6networks.com






Gont, et al.             Expires August 30, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       SLAAC DNS Configuration Issues        February 2015


   Pavel Simerda

   Phone: +420 775 996 256
   Email: pavlix@pavlix.net


   Will Liu
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian, Longgang District
   Shenzhen  518129
   P.R. China

   Email: liushucheng@huawei.com






































Gont, et al.             Expires August 30, 2015                [Page 6]
