
     
     Solutions Mailing List                            Spencer Dawkins
     INTERNET DRAFT                                          MCSR Labs
     8 October 2003                                 Charles E. Perkins
                                                 Nokia Research Center
                                                          Dave Crocker
                                           Brandenburg InternetWorking
     
     
     
     
                                
                    Two Stage Standardization
                                
               draft-dawkins-pstmt-twostage-01.txt



     STATUS OF THIS MEMO
     
     This document is a submission to the Solutions Mailing List,
     which is not an official mailing list of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force, but is the best place weÆve found to
     discuss process change proposals.  Comments should be
     submitted to the solutions@alvestrand.no mailing list.
     
     Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
     
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full
     conformance with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
     groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
     documents as Internet-Drafts.
     
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
     six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
     other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use
     Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other
     than as "work in progress."
     
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
     
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
     accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
     
     
     
     ABSTRACT
     
     RFC 2026 specifies a three-stage Standards Track. As
     currently practiced, IETF standards track documents
     typically attain only the first stage. This proposal
     discusses the problems caused by the disparity between
     documented procedures and actual practice, and proposes a
     two-step standard track.
     
     This proposal also defines an optional, pre-standards label
     for use within working groups. The proposal is intended to
     streamline the IETF standardization process, and to provide
     clear benefits for each stage.



1.   INTRODUCTION
     
     RFC 2026 specifies a three-stage standards process. In
     theory, Proposed Standard is an entry to the standards
     track. In practice relatively few specifications ever
     advance even to the second stage, Draft Standard.
     Furthermore, the periodic IESG review of "immature"
     standards that is called for in section 6.2 of RFC 2026
     seldom happens.  Consequently the Internet runs on Proposed
     Standards, some of which are more than 25 years old,
     covering critical aspects of routing, congestion control,
     and security.
     
     This results in vulnerability at both ends of the spectrum:
          
     *    Admission to "Proposed Standard" carries a heavier
         burden than originally envisioned, because
         responsible reviewers realize this is probably their
         last chance to identify problems with the
         specification, and try to ôthink of everything that
         could go wrongö. This thought exercise causes
         standards track work to be less timely.  The
         protracted development cycle often causes productive
         engineers to lose interest and/or their opportunity
         to remain involved.
          
     *    In spite of this, advancing to "Proposed Standard"
          still does not require implementation or deployment
          experience, so that the IETF's "rough consensus and
          running code" guiding principle isnÆt given a chance
          to be effective.
     
     


1.1. The Problems
     
     Current IETF standards management has a number of harmful
     properties:
          
     *    Our documented process isn't what we use in
          practice.  This disparity creates many opportunities
          for miscommunication, which in turn can produce
          mistrust.
          
     *    Basing the review for Proposed Standard on a thought
          exercise instead of implementation and deployment
          experience encourages ôlate surprisesö in the
          process. The desire for perfection drives reviewers
          to agonize over warnings and clarity. Whether a
          specification will be returned to a working group
          for rework is unpredictable, and the time required
          for approval is highly variable.
          
     *    Consumers of IETF specifications have learned to
          disregard our formal process.  RFC 2026 recommends
          in clear language that Draft Standard, not Proposed
          Standard, is the proper maturity level for
          widespread deployment.  Any vendor that waits for
          this status is left far behind in the marketplace û
          in most cases, ôinfinitely far behindö
          
     *    Newcomers to the IETF have no written document to
          explain the ad hoc adjustments we've made to
          accommodate current practice.  For example, the
          Transport Area routinely cycles proposed changes to
          TCP congestion control through Experimental status
          before approval as a Proposed Standard - a
          reasonable practice, but one not described in RFC
          2026.
          
     *    We are almost assured that the IETF inventory of
          standards contains specifications which do not
          reflect the corresponding protocols in use on the
          Internet today, because the protocols require
          modifications based on implementation or deployment
          experience, or simply because ôstandardö protocols
          may not used at all.
     
     
     
     
     
     Because of the delays, implementers often cannot wait for
     even the first formal standards track specification approval
     of Proposed Standard before they begin to implement. This
     leads to a variety of problems.
          
     *    The version of the specification that is used may be
          immature, and may change markedly between revisions.
          
     *    Different implementers may choose different
          revisions of the specification as a basis for
          development.
          
     *    When a Proposed Standard needs to be revised, it can
          take years for the revision to be published even for
          very minor repairs.  Then it is quite difficult for
          vendors and other standards organizations (i.e., the
          IETFÆs ôcustomersö) to know what the real protocol
          specification is, and they may be forced to specify
          known bugs as part of systems to be built, even when
          the bugs are well known to the ôcustomerö.
          
     *    The "running code" component of the IETF culture
          clearly means that it is good to base a standard on
          implementation history.  The implementation results
          need to be discussed and documented in order for
          this history to have its greatest value.


1.2. A Hybrid Solution
     
     This current proposal merges the previous one by two of the
     current authors [DAWK], with one suggested by Scott Bradner
     [BRAD]. The resulting recipe for labeling IETF standards
     track documents includes some additional seasoning.
     
     Bradner essentially proposes a new label that primarily
     serves to move the IETF process one to the 'left' of the
     current labels. A concern with this proposal is that it will
     only buy us some time, without actually fixing any
     underlying problems or changing anyone's motivations to do
     better. It permits quicker issuance of early-stage
     specifications, but with significantly less review.
     
     The synthesized variant, proposed here, also adds a new
     label, but it also makes some changes to Proposed and it
     removes Draft. Mostly, it seeks to capture existing
     practise, with some features intended to encourage revision
     and progress along the track.



2.   PROPOSAL -- TWO-STAGES AND A LABEL
     
     A two-stage standards process is suggested, and a new
     working group action is defined.  The working group action
     is not needed in all cases before a specification is
     standardized, but it can be quite useful to facilitate the
     progress of working group documents.
     
     Draft Standard status is dropped.


2.1. Working Group Snapshot (WGS)
     
     The Working Group Snapshot (WGS) label can be affixed to an
     Internet-Draft, for working group synchronization.  It is
     pointedly not an IETF standards label. Rather it is an
     optional part of the working group development process,
     permitting the working group to synchronize on a particular
     version of a draft.
     
     A WGS is an Internet-Draft that
          
          a)   Achieves ôrough consensusö based on a Working
               Group Last Call
          
          b)   May receive IESG comment
     
     A working group can issue a WGS at any time, and does so by
     notifying the IESG of their intention to issue a WGS as the
     *next* revision of an Internet-Draft.
     
     The IESG has up to 1 month to supply additional text that is
     added to an "IESG Comments" section of the document. It may
     not delay or veto issuance of a WGS. Therefore, IESG
     involvement is not for "approval" but rather to permit
     formal, outside comments to be affixed to the draft.
     
     The document is subject to all normal I-D rules.
     
     When a WGS specification needs more time, active effort on
     it will usually result in changes to the specification being
     needed, with a resulting new version of the document, and
     (possibly) another working group decision to assign it WGS
     status.
     
     COMMENT:  This label augments the current situation with I-
               Ds. It imposes minimal delay, permits vendors to
               be better coordinated, and permits IESG review and
               comment. The label makes clear that the
               specification is a WG product, not an IETF
               product, and it does not imply long-term stability
               to the specification. The use of a non-archival
               version (I-D) and the resulting 9-month time limit
               on that version should encourage folks to revise
               and progress the specification.
     
     COMMENT:  It is worth considering extending the I-D time-
               limit to 9 months. This will be more convenient
               for WGS documents and will have no substantive
               effect on other I-Ds.


2.2.  Proposed Standard (PS)
     
     The IETF process would retain current Proposed Standard
     rules, with the following modifications:
          
          a)   All specifications must have least one implementation 
               that has been tested under the circumstances that 
               represent its intended use.

          b)   A fixed, 36-month time limit exists for all Proposed
               Standards. By the end of that time the specification 
               must be re-processed for PS status, or it must be 
               processed for the next standards level, or it will be 
               moved to Historic.

          c)   PS specifications receive an STD number, or are added 
               to an existing STD


2.3. Internet Standard (IS)
     
     This is essentially the same as current full Standard. The
     specification must have attained a significant degree of
     community acceptance.
     
     In other words, it must have demonstrated that it is
     deployed and useful in the real world.



3.   FORMAL EDITING CHANGES
     
     This proposal would be put into effect by making the
     following formal changes to official IETF process and
     procedures specifications. Specifically:
          
     *    Add text to the end of section 7.2 of [GUIDE],
          according to text provided later in this section
          
     *    Delete section 4.1.3 of [STD]
          
     *    Rewrite sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 of [STD], according
          to text provided later this section
          
     *    Rewrite the last paragraph of section 6.2 of [STD].
          
     *    Remove references to Draft Standard from [STD]
          
     *    Perform other edits required for consistency


3.1. [RFC2418- 7.2] Internet-Drafts (I-D)
     
     A working group may wish to synchronize its activities
     according to particular versions of its Internet-Drafts.
     The label "Working Group Snapshot" (WGS) may be affixed to
     an Internet-Draft, for this purpose. The label does not
     indicate that the Internet Draft is ready for widespread
     deployment.
     
     A WGS is an Internet-Draft that
          
          a)   Achieves ôrough consensusö based on a Working
               Group Last Call
          
          b)   May receive IESG comment
          
     
     A working group can issue a WGS at any time, and does so by
     notifying the IESG of their intention to issue a WGS as the
     *next* revision of an Internet-Draft.
     
     The IESG has up to 1 month to supply additional text that is
     added to an "IESG Comments" section of the document. It may
     not delay or veto issuance of a WGS. Therefore, the IESG
     review is not an "approval" step but rather it is a step
     permitting formal, outside comments to be affixed to the
     draft.
     
     The document is subject to all normal I-D rules, except that
     the time before deletion is extended to be 9 months.


3.2.  [RFC2026-4.1.1] Proposed Standard
     
     The entry-level maturity for the IETF standards track is
     "Proposed Standard".  A specific action by the IESG is
     required to move a specification onto the standards track at
     the "Proposed Standard" level.
     
     A Proposed Standard is generally stable, has resolved known
     design choices, is believed to be well understood, has
     received significant community review, and appears to enjoy
     enough community interest to be considered valuable.
     However, further experience may well result in a change of
     the specification before it advances, or even perhaps a
     retraction.
     
     Implementation experience is required for the designation of
     a specification as a Proposed Standard.  The specification
     must have least one implementation that has been tested
     under the circumstances that represent its intended use.
     This experience will usually represent a strong argument in
     favor of designation as a Proposed Standard.
     
     A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions
     with respect to the requirements placed upon it.  However,
     the IESG may waive this requirement in order to allow a
     specification to advance to the Proposed Standard state when
     it is considered useful and necessary (and timely) even with
     known technical omissions.
     
     A specification that reaches the status of Proposed Standard
     is assigned a number in the STD series.


3.3. [RFC2026-4.1.2] Internet Standard
     
     A specification may be elevated to the Internet Standard
     level, when the specification has been significantly
     deployed and used over the Internet.
     
     An Internet Standard is characterized by a high degree of
     technical maturity and by a generally held belief that the
     specified protocol or service provides significant benefit
     to the Internet community.
     
     A specification that reaches the status of Internet Standard
     retains its STD number, but is given a new RFC number.
     
     The Working Group chair is responsible for documenting the
     community adoption and use of the specification.
          
          An Internet Standard must be well understood and known
          to be quite stable, both in its semantics and as a
          basis for developing an implementation.
     
     An Internet Standard is normally considered a final
     specification, and changes are likely to be made only to
     solve specific problems encountered.  In most circumstances,
     it is reasonable for vendors to deploy implementations of
     Internet Standards into a disruption sensitive environment.


3.4. [RFC2026-6.2] Advancing in the Standards Track
     
     From the time it is assigned Proposed Standard status, a
     specification has thirty-six (36) months to achieve the
     status of Internet Standard. If it fails to achieve IS
     status, it will automatically be moved to the status of
     Historic. This reclassification to Historic status shall be
     communicated to the IETF by electronic mail to the IETF
     Announce mailing list. Alternatively, a specification may be
     renewed as Proposed Standard, if it again satisfies the
     usual requirements for that status.



4.   DISCUSSION
     
     This proposal seeks to capture, specify and refine current
     practise in the IETF, by making its formal labeling actions
     more streamlined.  It defines a new label for use within
     working groups, makes implementation history required for
     all Proposed Standards, eliminates Draft Standard and calls
     for Internet Standard status to be based strictly upon
     community adoption and use.
     
     Because candidate specifications for Proposed Standard
     already frequently reflect implementation experience, making
     that experience be required for all specifications is deemed
     a minimal change.  The reason for making this minimal change
     is to ensure that all IETF standards track documents reflect
     running code.
     
     One reason that specifications do not advance to Draft
     Standard is the considerable effort required to provide
     technical documentation of sufficient interoperability
     testing.  Because the community has demonstrated such a
     reluctance to seek this status, it is removed.  It is
     expected that elimination of this step, as well as the
     proposed adjustments to the criteria for Internet Standard,
     will make this label appealing to seek and to require only
     modest effort.
     
     The suggested scheme has labels that represent:
          
          WGS:      Working group project management milestone
          PS:       IETF-wide technical approval
          IS:       Internet community production deployment and
                    use
     
     Simplistically this means that WGS is the goal for working
     group internal coordination, PS is the goal for community
     technical evaluation, and IS is the goal for operations
     community adoption.


4.1. WGS
     
     This proposal extends the de facto status of "working group
     document" and the de facto occurrence of implementations
     based on Internet-Draft specifications, by permitting
     working groups to declare that a specification has achieved
     a developmental milestone. In particular, this will permit
     working group participants, and the rest of industry, to
     coordinate their development and testing efforts.
     
     However working group documents need to be kept formally
     fluid (unstable) in case major changes are needed. This is
     accomplished by giving the specification no formal IETF-wide
     status and by not publishing it as an RFC. If folks want to
     record the specification for posterity, even if itÆs not
     acceptable as a Proposed Standard, then they can issue it as
     an Informational RFC.
     
     Working groups are provided a formal and public means of
     circulating their work for technical evaluation, before it
     is complete.  The process to achieve this is streamlined,
     which is balanced by imparting no IETF-wide status to the
     document and issuing it only through the non-archival
     Internet-Drafts process.


4.2. PS
     
     The status of Proposed Standard is the entry-level standards
     label, resulting from IETF-wide technical review and
     approval. Many Proposed Standards documents already reflect
     implementation and testing history, because this improves
     both the technical quality and the credibility of the work.
     The new process requires "running code" for all PS
     specifications. However only one implementation is required.
     Therefore the requirement for PS is not as demanding as the
     current Draft Standard.
     
     In order to keep the IETF inventory from having unused
     and/or buggy specifications, documents are allowed to reside
     at PS for only a limited time.


4.3. IS
     
     The Internet Standard label is assigned to a specification
     that has received the convincing demonstration of community
     support, namely community use.  Hence the label is not
     assigned due to technical evaluation, but rather by virtue
     of demonstrated utility.
     
     Hence the requirements for achieving IS status are to have
     been at PS and then to receive community rough consensus
     that the specification has established a track record of
     significant usefulness to the community.



5.   SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
     
     This document contains to text with security issues, except
     perhaps the security of the IETF standards process.



6.   REFERENCES
     
     Informative
     
     [BRAD]    Bradner, S., "An Idea for an Alternate IETF
               Standards Track", draft-bradner-ietf-stds-trk-
               00.txt, July 2003.
     
     [DAWK]    Dawkins, S., C. E. Perkins, "Two Stage
               Standardization Approach", draft-dawkins-pstmt-
               twostage-00.txt
     
     Normative
     
     [GUIDE]   Bradner, S., "Working Group Guidelines", RFC 2418,
               September 1998
     
     [STD]     Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process --
               Revision 3", RFC 2026, October 1996.



7.   AUTHOR CONTACT INFORMATION

     Spencer Dawkins
     Mobile Communications and Security Research Labs
     1547 Rivercrest Blvd.
     Allen, TX 75002
     
     Email:    spencer@mcsr-labs.org
     Phone:    +1.214.755.3870
     
     Charles E. Perkins
     Communications Systems Lab
     Nokia Research Center
     313 Fairchild Drive
     Mountain View, California 94043

     Email:    charles.perkins@nokia.com
     Phone:    +1.650.625.2986
     Fax:      +1.650.625.2502

     Dave Crocker
     Brandenburg InternetWorking
     675 Spruce Dr.
     Sunnyvale, CA  94086
     
     Email:    dcrocker@brandenburg.com
     Tel:      +1.408.246.8253
