

SIP WG                                                        V. Gurbani
Internet-Draft                         Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
Updates:  3261 (if approved)                                 S. Lawrence
Intended status:  Best Current                             Pingtel Corp.
Practice                                                      A. Jeffrey
Expires:  September 6, 2007            Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
                                                           March 5, 2007


      Domain Certificates in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                   draft-gurbani-sip-domain-certs-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document attempts to clarify the use of domain certificates in
   the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).






Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Key Words  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Abstract Syntax Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  SIP Domain To Host Resolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Identifying a specific host  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Mutual Interdomain Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Conveying Identity in Certificates . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Restricting Usage To SIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1.  Extended Key Usage Values for SIP Domains  . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  UAC Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  UAS Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Proxy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Guidelines for CA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. Virtual SIP Servers and Certificate Content  . . . . . . . . . 10
   12. Wildcards in dNSName Type  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   13. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   14. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   15. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     15.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     15.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix A.  ASN.1 Module  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15
























Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


1.  Terminology

1.1.  Key Words

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

1.2.  Abstract Syntax Notation

   All X.509 certificate X.509 [5] extensions are defined using ASN.1
   X.680 [6],X.690 [7].


2.  Introduction

   Transport Layer Security (TLS) [3] has started to appear in an
   increasing number of Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [2]
   implementations.  TLS depends on the Internet X.509 Public Key
   Infrastructure [4] for its proper use and function.

   Despite the appearance of TLS in SIP implementations, an enduring
   question has remained regarding the contents of the certificates for
   domain verification.  We hope that the discussion in this document
   provides clarity in this area.  Moreover, TLS by itself only provides
   security guarantees for the transport layer.  In this document, we
   also discuss the requirements of SIPS message processing to ensure
   that these security guarantees are also provided at the application
   layer.

   The discussion in this document is pertinent to a certificate used
   for a TLS connection.  It may not apply in its entirety to a
   certificate used in S/MIME, for instance.


3.  Problem Statement

   TLS uses X.509 Public Key Infrastructure [4] to bind an identity, or
   a set of identities, to the holder of a X.509 v3 certificate.
   Accordingly, the recommendations of the SIP working group have been
   to populate the X.509v3 subjectAltName extension with an identity.
   However, this is under-specified in RFC 3261, which mentions
   subjectAltName in conjunction with S/MIME only and not TLS.  For
   S/MIME certificates, the subjectAltName provides additional
   identities of the certificate holder, some in the form of a SIP
   Uniform Resource Identifier (URI).  RFC 3261 does not provide any
   guidelines on the identity (or identities) to be populated in
   subjectAltName for TLS certificates.  This leads to problems when



Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


   attempting to interpret the certificate contents in a uniform manner.

   The use of TLS in SIP should address two concerns:  first, it should
   identify a SIP resource in the form of a domain over which the
   certificate is asserting its authority; and second, it should provide
   a guarantee at the transport layer that the peer with whom a TLS
   connection is being established is indeed who they purport to be.
   The latter deals with identifying hosts at the transport layer for a
   secure TLS connection, and the former identifies a SIP domain for the
   application using the TLS connection to perform any authorization,
   should such a need arise.

   The two concerns enumerated above correspond to two specific problem
   areas that are currently visible in SIP's use of X.509 certificates.
   First, the contents of certificates must be such that it allows for
   mutual inter-domain authentication; and second, there must be means
   available to allow an upstream SIP host to deterministically "pin" a
   route through one proxy from a farm of downstream proxies.

   The rest of the document is organized as follows:  Section 4 further
   explores the areas of concern identified above.  Section 5 proposes
   the use of two identitied in an X.509 certificate to solve the
   concerns identified above.  Section 6 defines a mechanism to allow a
   host to to assert its authority over a SIP domain.  Section 7 and
   Section 8 contain considerations for user agent clients (UACs) and
   user agent servers (UAS), respectively, and Section 9 discusses the
   effect on proxies.  Section 10 outlines the guidelines for a
   certificate authority (CA) when it issues certificates for SIP use.
   Section 11, Section 12 and Section 13 discusses aspects related to
   contents of certificates for virtual SIP servers, the presence of
   wildcards in domain certificates, and security considerations,
   respectively.


4.  SIP Domain To Host Resolution

   Routing in SIP is performed by executing RFC3263 procedures on a URI.
   There are two cases to consider; we first take the simplest of cases:
   a request is to be routed based on a generic URI
   (sips:alice@example.com.)  Through a series of untrusted Domain Name
   Service (DNS) manipulations, a connection is established to a server
   that presents a certificate with an identity of "sip:example.com".
   Here, since the host portion of the URI (example.com) matches the
   identity stored in the certificate, the connection is deemed to be
   authenticated (to be sure, other checks must be done on the received
   certificate, for example, ensuring that the certificated is rooted in
   a trusted hierarchy, and ensuring that the certificate is in its
   validity period).



Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


      This is the way HTTPS operates, and SIPS simply borrows this
      behavior from HTTP.

4.1.  Identifying a specific host

   A more complicated case in SIP occurs when the URI that is used to
   route a request does not correspond to the identity in the presented
   certificate.  For instance, what is the expected behavior if the URI
   used for routing is "sips:downtown.example.com" and the certificate
   presented contains an identity of "sip:example.com"?  Here,
   "downtown" could be a specific host in the "example.com" domain, or
   it could be a subordinate domain.

      Note that a domain name in an X.509 certificates should be
      interpreted only as a sequence of octets that should match the URI
      used to reach the host.  No inference should be made based on the
      DNS name hierarchy.

   In such cases, the general recommendation has been that the host that
   is contacted using a specific URI should present a certificate that
   contains exactly that same URI.  In terms of SIP, this generally
   implies that a proxy that wants to remain on the path of subsequent
   signaling must insert into the Record-Route header an URI that it is
   guaranteed to possess credentials for.  If the proxy wanted to insert
   a fully qualified domain name (FQDN) in the Record-Route header, it
   should have a certificate that states this credential, otherwise, it
   should insert a domain URI into the Record-Route header (i.e., "sips:
   example.com" instead of "sips:downtown.example.com").

   A potential problem in inserting a domain URI is that RFC 3263 [8]
   resolution on that URI may result in a different proxy than the one
   that originally inserted the URI.  While this is not a concern when
   choosing any proxy from a server farm, it is a problem when the
   choice of a proxy needs to be deterministic (the "pinning" problem.)
   One way to combat this is to arrange for the proxy to possess two
   certificates -- one corresponding to the identity "sip:example.com"
   and the other corresponding to the identity "sip:
   downtown.example.com" -- and have it present the right one when
   contacted.  While technically this is feasible through the use of TLS
   extensions [10], administratively it requires the proxy vendor to
   acquire two distinct certificates.

   In this document, we propose the use of one certificate with two
   identities as described above to solve the "pinning" problem as well
   as the mutual inter-domain authentication problem.






Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


4.2.  Mutual Interdomain Authentication

   [2] section 26.3.2.2 "Interdomain Requests" discusses the requirement
   that when a TLS connection is created between two proxies, those
   proxies should each validate the certificate presented by the other
   during the TLS handshake.  For example, suppose that
   alice@example.com creates an INVITE for bob@example.net; her user
   agent routes the request to some proxy in her domain, example.com.

   Suppose, now, that example.com is a large organization that maintains
   several SIP proxies, and normal resolution rules cause her INVITE to
   be sent to an outbound proxy proxyA.example.com, which then uses RFC
   3263 [8] resolution and finds that proxyB.example.net is a valid
   proxy for example.net using TLS. proxyA.example.com requests a TLS
   connection to proxyB.example.net, and each presents a certificate to
   authenticate that connection.

   The authentication problem for proxyA is straightforward - if we
   assume secure DNS, then proxyA already knows that proxyB is a valid
   proxy for the SIP domain example.net, so it only needs a valid
   certificate from proxyB that contains the fully qualified host name
   proxyB.example.net, or a SIP URI that asserts proxy B's authority
   over example.net domain, i.e., a certificate that asserts the
   identity "sip:example.net".

   The problem for proxyB is different, however; it is presented with a
   connection from a specific host, but what it needs to determine is
   whether or not that connection can be treated as coming from a
   particular SIP domain.  If it receives a certificate that contains
   only the name proxyA.example.com, then it cannot determine that
   proxyA is authorized to act as a SIP outbound proxy for example.com,
   because example.com may use different systems for inbound messages so
   SIP DNS resolution of example.com may not lead to proxyA.example.com
   (if this is the case, proxyB should not reuse this connection if it
   needs to send a request to example.com).  The certificate usage in
   SIP should not require that every outbound proxy for a domain must
   also be an inbound proxy for that domain, but should provide for
   certificate based binding of the SIP domain name to a particular
   connection.


5.  Conveying Identity in Certificates

   As a possible answer to the problem of conveying identities, we
   propose that TLS certificates contain two identities in
   subjectAltName X.509v3 extensions.  The first identity is a SIP URI
   for the domain.  This URI asserts that the system is authoritative
   for the SIP domain that it names (e.g., "sip:example.com").  The



Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


   second identity is a domain name system label, more specifically, the
   canonical name of the host (e.g., "sip:downtown.example.com"); this
   second name asserts that the system is authoritative for the name
   used for the transport address.

   Including both identities solves the problem identified in Section
   5.1 of [11], as well as satisfying the RFC 3261 concept of what
   should be contained in a site (or domain) certificate (Section 26.3.1
   of RFC 3261, quoted below).

      Proxy servers, redirect servers and registrars SHOULD possess a
      site certificate whose subject corresponds to their canonical
      hostname.

   As an example, consider that the autonomous domain example.com is
   applying for a certificate from an authority.  As part of the
   certificate request, it will ask the following two identities be
   bound to the generated certificate:  "URI:sips:example.com", and
   "DNS:downtown.example.com".  The latter DNS label provides assurance
   at the transport layer that the the certificate corresponds to a host
   that was the target of the TLS connection, while the former SIPS URI
   binds the holder of the certificate with a domain URI for which it is
   authoritatively responsible.  This information may be subsequently
   used by the application to make authorization decisions of the form
   outlined in Section 26.3.2.2 of RFC3261.

   Currently, there isn't a strong consensus in the WG around the issue
   of maintaining two identities in a certificate, even though it
   appears to solve the "pinning" problem described above.  The main
   barrier to the lack of consensus are financial and administrative.
   While technically this solution is attractive because it binds a
   certificate to an identity at the transport and application layers,
   it does imply that a service provider will need to obtain multiple
   certificates from a CA.  This may be cost- prohibitive, and
   furthermore there is an administrative cost to the service provider
   as it ensures that the certificate is bound to the appropriate host.

   There are two other proposals for "pinning" a deterministic proxy
   from a proxy farm.

   1.  The use of "maddr" parameter has been proposed to carry the FQDN
       of the proxy; i.e., "Record-Route:  <sips:
       example.com;maddr=proxy1.example.com;lr>".  The advantages are
       backwards compatiblity, reduces the need to obtain multiple
       certificates (each corresponding to a FQDN of a host).
   2.  The outbound-discovery [13] draft provides an alternative way for
       proxies to construct the URI that they use in the Record-Route
       header such that the domain parts of these URIs always match



Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


       their TLS certificates.  The advantage of this scheme is that it
       works across NATs, but the disadvantage is its complexity.


6.  Restricting Usage To SIP

   The intent of this draft is to define certificate usage for binding a
   SIP domain name to a connection.  A SIP domain name is frequently
   (perhaps even usually) textually identical to the same DNS name used
   for other purposes.  For example, the DNS name example.com may serve
   as a SIP domain name, an email domain name, and web service name.
   Since these different services within a single organization may well
   be administered independently and hosted separately, it should be
   possible to create a certificate that binds the DNS name to its usage
   as a SIP domain name without creating the implication that the usage
   is also valid for some other purpose.  RFC 3280 [4] section 4.2.1.13
   defines a mechanism for this purpose:  an "Extended Key Usage"
   attribute.  Certificates to be used as described by this document MAY
   include an id-kp-SIPdomain attribute to indicate that the name
   bindings are restricted to usage in SIP.

6.1.  Extended Key Usage Values for SIP Domains

   RFC 3280 [4] specifies the extended key usage X.509 certificate
   extension.  The extension indicates one or more purposes for which
   the certified public key may be used.  The extended key usage
   extension can be used in conjunction with key usage extension, which
   indicates the intended purpose of the certified public key.

   The extended key usage extension syntax is repeated here for
   convenience:

         ExtKeyUsageSyntax  ::=  SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF KeyPurposeId

         KeyPurposeId  ::=  OBJECT IDENTIFIER

   This specification defines the KeyPurposeId id-kp-sipDomain.
   Inclusion of this KeyPurposeId in a certificate indicates usage of
   any DNS names in the certificate is restricted to SIP.  Whether or
   not to include this restriction is up to the certificate issuer, but
   if it is included, it MUST be marked as critical so that
   implementations that do not understand it will not accept the
   certificate for any other purpose.

         id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
            { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
              security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 3 }




Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


         id-kp-sipDomain  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=  { id-kp VALUE-TBD }


7.  UAC Considerations

   When a UAC receives a certificate from a server, it MUST ensure that
   the certificate asserts one of the two identities that the UAC used
   to reach the server:  If the UAC performed RFC3263 resolution on the
   URI to reach the server, the SIP or SIPS identity stored in the
   certificate MUST be matched.  Otherwise, if RFC3263 resolution on the
   URI failed, the UAC MUST match the DNS label in the certificate with
   the name of the server that it opened a TLS connection to.


8.  UAS Considerations

   When a UAS accepts a TLS connection, it presents its X.509
   certificate to the client.  A UAS may optionally ask the upstream
   client for a certificate.  If the client is in possession of one, it
   will be presented to the UAS for mutual authentication.  If the UAS
   has a policy to only accept TLS connections from trusted peers, it
   MAY inspect the domain in the SIP URI of the certificate.  If the
   domain is one that is allowed by such a policy, the TLS connection
   can be considered to be authenticated.

      The specifics of creating such a policy and of providing it to the
      UAS are outside the scope of standardization and are not discussed
      in this document.


9.  Proxy Considerations

   A proxy acts as a UAS for requests arriving to it, and as a UAC when
   it proxies request downstream.  As a UAS, it MUST follow the behavior
   of Section 8; and as a UAC, it MUST follow the behavior specified in
   Section 7.


10.  Guidelines for CA

   When issuing a certificate with two identities as described in this
   recommendation, a certificate authority should validate the authority
   for both usages; that the party to whom the certificate is
   authoritative for both names.

   Note that the two names may not have any relationship at all in the
   DNS.  For example, if a service provider (example.net) is hosting SIP
   services for a customer (example.com), then each proxy in the



Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


   example.net farm may need to be able to present certificates with the
   SIP identity URI:sip:example.com and the transport layer identity
   DNS:proxy1.example.net.


11.  Virtual SIP Servers and Certificate Content

   The closest guidance in SIP today regarding certificates and virtual
   SIP servers occurs in SIP Identity ([12], Section 13.4).  The quoted
   section states that, "... certificates have varying ways of
   describing their subjects, and may indeed have multiple subjects,
   especially in the 'virtual hosting' cases where multiple domains are
   managed by a single application."

   This appears to imply that one certificate will have multiple SANs
   (or Subject) fields, each such field corresponding to a discrete
   virtual server that represents a single domain?  Since only one
   certificate is needed for multiple domains, the keying material
   management is simpler, but what happens if one of the domains no
   longer wants to continue the business relationship with the hosting
   service?  Is the entire certificate to be revoked?

   Is it conceivable that each domain have a distinct certificate that
   is provided to the hosting service?  Certainly, this means that the
   domain must share the domain's private key with the hosting service.
   TLS extensions [10] like the extended client hello allow TLS clients
   to provide to the TLS server the name of the server they are
   contacting.  Thus, the server can present the correct certificate to
   establish the TLS connection.

   TODO:  Need some more discussion on the mailing list around this
   issue.  What is the recommended procedure here?


12.  Wildcards in dNSName Type

   RFC 2818 (HTTP over TLS) [9] allows the dNSName component to contain
   a wildcard; e.g., "DNS:*.example.com".  RFC 3280 [4], while not
   disallowing this explicitly, leaves the interpretation of wildcards
   to the individual specification.

   RFC 3261 does not provide any guidelines on the presence of wildcards
   in certificates.  The consensus from the working group discussion
   leans in the favor of not using them in SIP.







Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


13.  Security Considerations

   The goals of TLS include the following security guarantees at the
   transport layer:

   Confidentiality:  packets tunneled through TLS can only be read by
      the sender and receiver.
   Integrity:  packets tunneled through TLS can only be modified by the
      sender and receiver.
   Authenticity:  each principal is authenticated to the other as
      posessing a private key for which a certificate has been issued.
      Moreover, this certificate has not been revoked, and is backed by
      a certificate chain leading to a mutually trusted trust anchor.

   We expect that appropriate processing requirements of domain
   certificates will provide the following security guarantees at the
   application level:

   Confidentiality:  SIPS messages from alice@example.com to
      bob@example.edu can only be read by alice@example.com,
      bob@example.edu, and SIP proxies issued with domain certificates
      for example.com or example.edu.
   Integrity:  SIPS messages from alice@example.com to bob@example.edu
      can only be modified by alice@example.com, bob@example.edu, and
      SIP proxies issued with domain certificates for example.com or
      example.edu.
   Authenticity:  alice@example.com and proxy.example.com are mutually
      authenticated, and moreover proxy.example.com is authenticated to
      alice@example.com as an authoritative proxy for domain
      example.com.  Similar mutual authentication guarantees are given
      between proxy.example.com and proxy.example.edu and between
      proxy.example.edu and bob@example.edu.  As a result,
      alice@example.com is transitively mutually authenticated to
      bob@example.edu (assuming trust in the authoritative proxies for
      example.com and example.edu).


14.  Acknowledgments

   The following IETF contributors provided substantive input to this
   document:  Jeroen van Bemmel, Michael Hammer, Cullen Jennings, Paul
   Kyzivat, Derek MacDonald, Dave Oran, Jon Peterson, Eric Rescorla,
   Jonathan Rosenberg, and Russ Housley.


15.  References





Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


15.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [3]   Dierks, T. and C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0",
         RFC 2246, January 1999.

   [4]   Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W., and D. Solo, "Internet X.509
         Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate
         Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280, April 2002.

   [5]   International International Telephone and Telegraph
         Consultative Committee, "Information Technology - Open Systems
         Interconnection - The Directory: Authentication Framework",
         CCITT Recommendation X.509, November 1988.

   [6]   International International Telephone and Telegraph
         Consultative Committee, "Specification of Abstract Syntax
         Notation One (ASN.1): Specification of Basic Notation",
         CCITT Recommendation X.680, July 1994.

   [7]   International Telecommunications Union, "Information Technology
         - ASN.1 encoding rules: Specification of Basic Encoding Rules
         (BER), Canonical Encoding Rules (CER) and Distinguished
         Encoding Rules (DER)", ITU-T Recommendation X.690, 1994.

15.2.  Informative References

   [8]   Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation Protocol
         (SIP): Location SIP Servers", RFC 3263, June 2002.

   [9]   Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [10]  Blake-Wilson, S., Nystrom, M., Hopwood, D., Mikkelsen, J., and
         T. Wright, "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions",
         RFC 4366, April 2006.

   [11]  Gurbani, V. and A. Jeffrey, "The Use of Transport Layer
         Security (TLS) in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
         draft-gurbani-sip-tls-use-00.txt (work in progress),
         February 2006.

   [12]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for Authenticated



Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


         Identity Management in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
         draft-ietf-sip-identity-06.txt (work in progress),
         October 2005.

   [13]  Rosenberg, J., "Discovering Outbound Proxies and Providing High
         Availability  with Client Initiated Connections in the Session
         Initiation Protocol  (SIP)",
         draft-rosenberg-sip-outbound-discovery-mid-dialog-00.txt (work
         in progress), October 2006.


Appendix A.  ASN.1 Module

      SIPDomainCertExtn
        { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
          security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
          id-mod-sip-domain-extns2007(VALUE-TBD) }

      DEFINITIONS IMPLICIT TAGS ::=
      BEGIN

      -- OID Arcs

      id-pe  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
         { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
           security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 1 }

      id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
         { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
           security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 3 }

      id-aca  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
         { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
           security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 10 }

      -- Extended Key Usage Values

      id-kp-sipDomain  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=  { id-kp VALUE-TBD }

      END











Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Vijay K. Gurbani
   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
   2701 Lucent Lane
   Room 9F-546
   Lisle, IL  60532
   USA

   Phone:  +1 630 224-0216
   Email:  vkg at bell hyphen labs dot com


   Scott Lawrence
   Pingtel Corp.
   400 West Cummings Park
   Suite 2200
   Woburn, MA  01801
   USA

   Phone:  +1 781 938 5306
   Email:  slawrence@pingtel.com


   Alan S.A. Jeffrey
   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
   2701 Lucent Lane
   Room 9F-534
   Lisle, IL  60532
   USA

   Email:  ajeffrey at bell hyphen labs dot com



















Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                Domain Certs                    March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Gurbani, et al.         Expires September 6, 2007              [Page 15]

