

Network Working Group                                        Jerry Ash
Internet Draft                                                    AT&T
<draft-ash-mpls-dste-bcmodel-max-alloc-resv-01.txt>
Expiration Date:  October 2003                                       
                                                           March, 2003


   Max Allocation with Reservation Bandwidth Constraint Model for
            MPLS/DiffServ TE & Performance Comparisons

       <draft-ash-mpls-dste-bcmodel-max-alloc-resv-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

This document complements the DiffServ-aware MPLS TE (DSTE) requirements 
document by giving a functional specification for the Maximum Allocation 
with Reservation (MAR) bandwidth constraint model.  Examples of the 
operation of the MAR bandwidth constraint model are presented.  MAR 
performance is analyzed relative to the criteria for selecting a 
bandwidth constraint model, in order to provide guidance to user 
implementation of the model in their networks.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction
   2. Definitions           
   3. Functional Specification of the MAR Bandwidth Constraint Model
      3.1 MAR Bandwidth Allocation Rules
      3.2 MAR Bandwidth Allocation Parameters
   4. Examples of MAR Operation
   5. Summary
   6. Security Considerations                                            
   7. Acknowledgments
   8. References  
   9. Authors' Addresses
   ANNEX A. Analysis of MAR Bandwidth Allocation Performance             

1. Introduction

DiffServ-aware MPLS traffic engineering (DSTE) requirements and protocol 
extensions are specified in [DSTE-REQ, DSTE-PROTO]. A requirement for 
DSTE implementation is the specification of bandwidth constraint models 
for use with DSTE.  The bandwidth constraint model provides the 'rules' 
to support the allocation of bandwidth to individual class types (CTs).  
CTs are groupings of service classes in the DSTE model, which are 
provided separate bandwidth allocations, priorities, and QoS objectives. 
 Several CTs can share a common bandwidth pool on an integrated, 
multiservice MPLS/DiffServ network.

This document is intended to complement the DSTE requirements document 
[DSTE-REQ] by giving a functional specification for the Maximum 
Allocation with Reservation (MAR) bandwidth constraint model.  Examples 
of the operation of the MAR bandwidth constraint model are presented.  
MAR performance is analyzed relative to the criteria for selecting a 
bandwidth constraint model, in order to provide guidance to user 
implementation of the model in their networks.

Two other bandwidth constraint models are being specified for use in 
DSTE:

1. maximum allocation (MA) model [MAM1, MAM2] - the maximum allowable 
bandwidth usage of each CT is explicitly specified.
2. Russian doll (RD) model [RDM] - the maximum allowable bandwidth usage 
is done cumulatively by grouping successive CTs according to priority 
classes.

MAR is similar to the MA model in that a maximum bandwidth allocation is 
given to each CT.  However, through the use of bandwidth reservation and 
protection mechanisms, CTs are allowed to exceed their bandwidth 
allocations under conditions of no congestion but revert to their 
allocated bandwidths when overload and congestion occurs.

All bandwidth constraint models should meet these objectives:

1. applies equally when preemption is either enabled or disabled (when 
preemption is disabled, the model still works 'reasonably' well),
2. Bandwidth efficiency, i.e., good bandwidth sharing among CTs under 
both normal and overload conditions,
3. bandwidth isolation, i.e., a CT cannot hog the bandwidth of another 
CT under overload conditions,
4. protection against QoS degradation, at least of the high-priority CTs 
(e.g. high-priority voice, high-priority data, etc.), and
5. reasonably simple, i.e., does not require additional IGP extensions 
and minimizes signaling load processing requirements.

In Annex A modeling analysis is presented which shows that the MAR model 
meets all these objectives, and provides good network performance 
relative to full sharing models, under normal and abnormal operating 
conditions.  It is demonstrated that simultaneously achieves bandwidth 
efficiency, bandwidth isolation, and protection against QoS degradation 
without preemption. 

In Section 3 we give a functional specification of the MAR bandwidth 
constraint model, and in Section 4 we give examples of its operation.  
In Annex A, MAR performance is analyzed relative to the criteria for 
selecting a bandwidth constraint model, in order to provide guidance to 
user implementation of the model in their networks.

2. Definitions

For readability a number of definitions from [DSTE-REQ, DSTE-PROTO] are 
repeated here:

Traffic Trunk: an aggregation of traffic flows of the same class (i.e. 
which are to be treated equivalently from the DSTE perspective) which 
are placed inside an LSP.

Class-Type (CT): the set of Traffic Trunks crossing a link that is 
governed by a specific set of Bandwidth constraints. CT is used for the 
purposes of link bandwidth allocation, constraint based routing and 
admission control. A given Traffic Trunk belongs to the same CT on all 
links.

Up to 8 CTs (MaxCT = 8) are supported.  They are referred to as CTc, 
0 <= c <= MaxCT-1 = 7.  Each CT is assigned either a Bandwidth 
Constraint, or a set of Bandwidth Constraints.  Up to 8 Bandwidth 
Constraints (MaxBC = 8) are supported and they are referred to as BCb, 
0 <= b <= MaxBC-1 = 7.

Reserved Bandwidth for CT c "Reserved(CTc)" is defined as:

Reserved (CTc): For a given Class-Type CTc (0 <= c <= MaxCT), 
Reserved(CTc) = sum of the bandwidth reserved by all established LSPs 
which belong to CTc.

TE-Class: A pair of: i. a CT ii. a preemption priority allowed for that 
CT. This means that an LSP transporting a Traffic Trunk from that CT can 
use that preemption priority as the set-up priority, as the holding 
priority or both.

Normalized(CTc): Normalized(CTc) = Reserved(CTc)/LOM(c), where LOM(c) 
is the Local Overbooking Multiplier for CTc defined in [DSTE-PROTO].

3. Functional Specification of the MAR Bandwidth Constraint Model

In the MAR bandwidth constraint model, the bandwidth allocation control 
for each CT is based on estimated bandwidth needs, bandwidth use, and 
status of links. The LER makes needed bandwidth allocation changes, and 
uses [RSVP-TE], for example, to determine if link bandwidth can be 
allocated to a CT. Bandwidth allocated to individual CTs is protected as 
needed but otherwise shared. Under normal non-congested network 
conditions, all CTs/services fully share all available bandwidth.  When 
congestion occurs for a particular CTi, bandwidth reservation acts to 
prohibit traffic from other CTs from seizing the allocated capacity for 
CTi.  Associated with each CT are the allocated bandwidth (BWalloc) and 
maximum bandwidth (BWmax) parameters to govern bandwidth allocation and 
protection.  An allowed load state (ALS) parameter controls the 
bandwidth allocation on individual links in a CT, based on their 
available bandwidth.  These parameters are illustrated with examples in 
Section 4.

In performing MAR bandwidth allocation for a given flow, the LER first 
determines the egress LSR address, service-identity, and CT.  The 
connection request is allocated an equivalent bandwidth to be routed on 
a particular CT. The LER then accesses the CT priority, QoS/traffic 
parameters, and routing table between the LER and egress LSR, and sets 
up the connection request using the MAR bandwidth allocation rules.  The 
LER selects a first choice path and determines if bandwidth can be 
allocated on the path based on the MAR bandwidth allocation rules given 
in the next Section.  If the first choice path has insufficient 
bandwidth, the LER may then try alternate paths, and again applies the 
MAR bandwidth allocation rules now described. 

3.1 MAR Bandwidth Allocation Rules

MAR bandwidth allocation is done on a per-CT basis, in which aggregated 
CT bandwidth is managed to meet the overall bandwidth requirements of CT 
service needs.  Individual flows are allocated bandwidth in the 
corresponding CT according to CT bandwidth availability.  A fundamental 
principle applied in MAR bandwidth allocation methods is the use of 
bandwidth reservation techniques.

Bandwidth reservation gives preference to the preferred traffic by 
allowing it to seize any idle bandwidth on a link, while allowing the 
non-preferred traffic to only seize bandwidth if there is a minimum 
level of idle bandwidth available called the reserved bandwidth RBW.  
Burke [BUR] first analyzed bandwidth reservation behavior from the 
solution of the birth-death equations for the bandwidth reservation 
model.  Burke's model showed the relative lost-traffic level for 
preferred traffic, which is not subject to bandwidth reservation 
restrictions, as compared to non-preferred traffic, which is subject to 
the restrictions. Bandwidth reservation protection is robust to traffic 
variations and provides significant dynamic protection of particular 
streams of traffic.  It is widely used in large-scale network 
applications [ASH1, MUM].

Bandwidth reservation is used in two ways in MAR bandwidth allocation, 
first to control sharing of link bandwidth across different CTs, and 
second to prevent inefficient (long) routing paths from degrading 
network performance.  On a given link, a small amount of bandwidth RBW 
is reserved (say 1% of the total link bandwidth), and the reserved 
bandwidth can be accessed when a given CT has bandwidth-in-use below its 
 allocated bandwidth BWalloc.  That is, if the available link bandwidth 
ABW exceeds RBW, then any CT is free to access the available bandwidth 
on the link.  However, if ABW is less than RBW, then the CT can utilize 
the available bandwidth only if its current bandwidth usage is below the 
allocated amount BWalloc. In this way, bandwidth can be fully shared 
among CTs if available, but is protected by bandwidth reservation if 
below the reservation level.

Bandwidth reservation is also used to prevent inefficient (long) routing 
paths from degrading network performance, which if uncontrolled can lead 
to network "instability" and severely reduce throughput in periods of 
congestion, perhaps by as much as 50 percent of the traffic-carrying 
capacity of a network. Bandwidth reservation is used to prevent this 
unstable behavior by having the preferred traffic on a link be the 
traffic on the primary, shortest path, and the non-preferred traffic, 
subjected to bandwidth reservation restrictions as described above, be 
the alternate-routed traffic on longer paths. In this way the 
alternate-routed traffic is inhibited from selecting longer alternate 
paths when sufficient idle trunk capacity is not available on all links 
of an alternate-routed connection, which is the likely condition under 
network and link congestion.  Through the bandwidth reservation 
mechanism, MAR bandwidth allocation also gives preference to 
high-priority CTs, in comparison to normal-priority and best-effort 
priority CTs. 

Hence, bandwidth allocated to each CT is protected by bandwidth 
reservation methods, as needed, but otherwise shared.  Each LER monitors 
CT bandwidth use on each CT, and determines if connection requests can 
be allocated to the CT bandwidth.  For example, for a bandwidth request 
of DBW on a given flow, the LER determines the CT priority (high, 
normal, or best-effort), CT bandwidth-in-use, and CT bandwidth 
allocation thresholds, and uses these parameters to determine the 
allowed load state threshold (ALSi) to which capacity can be allocated.  
In allocating bandwidth DBW to a CT on given LSP, say A-B-E, each link 
in the path is checked for available bandwidth in comparison to ALSi.  
If bandwidth is unavailable on any link in path A-B-E, another LSP could 
by tried, such as A-C-D-E.  Hence determination of the link load state 
is necessary for MAR bandwidth allocation, and three link load states 
are distinguished: available (non-reserved) bandwidth (ABW), 
reserved-bandwidth (RBW), and bandwidth-not-available (BNA).  Management 
of CT capacity uses the link state and the ALS threshold to determine if 
a bandwidth allocation request can be accepted on a given CT.

3.2 MAR Bandwidth Allocation Parameters

The ALS threshold is a simple function of bandwidth-in-progress, CT 
priority, and bandwidth allocation thresholds, as follows:

                            Table 1
              Allowed Load State (ALS) Threshold

Allowed	      High- 	          Normal-Priority CT         Best-Effort
Load Statei   Priority CT    ---------------------------     Priority CT
                             First Choice      Alternate
                             Path              Path
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RBW           If BWIPi <=    If BWIPi <=       Not Allowed   Note 1
              2 X BWmaxi     BWalloci
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ABW           If 2 X BWmaxi  If BWalloci <     If BWalloci   Note 1
              < BWIPi        BWIPi             BWIPi
------------------------------------------------------------------------

where

BWIPi     = bandwidth-in-progress on CT-i
BWalloci  = allocated (minimum guaranteed) bandwidth for CT-i
BWmaxi    = bandwidth allocation threshold for high-priority CTs
Note 1    = allocated bandwidth BWalloc = 0; DiffServ queuing admits 
            BE packets only if there is available bandwidth on a link

The link load state definition is as follows:

                            Table 2
                  Link Load State Thresholds

Link Load State                         Condition
------------------------------------------------------------
Bandwidth-Not-Available	BNA             ILBWk < DBW
Reserved-Bandwidth      RBW             ILBWk - RBWrk < DBW
Available-Bandwidth	ABW             DBW <= ILBWk - RBWrk
------------------------------------------------------------

where

ILBWk     = idle link bandwidth on link k
DBW       = delta bandwidth requirement for a bandwidth allocation
            request
RBWrk     = reserved bandwidth for link k
          = .01 x TLBWk
TLBWk     = total link bandwidth on link k

4. Examples of MAR Operation

In the first example, assume there are three class-types: CT0, CT1, CT2. 
 We consider a particular link with capacity 100.

In practice, MAR allocates CT bandwidth for the normal traffic loads, so 
in an engineered network it never winds up that the BWalloc values on a 
given link add to 100% of the link bandwidth.  For example these could 
be typical allocated bandwidths:

CT0-BWalloc = 30
CT1-BWalloc = 20
CT2-BWalloc = 20

These are based on the normal traffic loads.  This leaves 100 - 70 = 
30 units of spare bandwidth on the link under normal loading.  With MAR, 
any of the CTs is allowed to exceed its BWalloc as long a there is at 
least RBW (reserved bandwidth on the link) units of spare bandwidth 
remaining.

Let's say RBW = 10.  So under overload, if

CT0 has taken 50 units of bandwidth,
CT1 has taken 30 units of bandwidth,
CT2 has taken 10 units of bandwidth,

CT0 and CT1 can no longer increase their bandwidth on the link, since 
they are above their BWalloc values and there is only RBW=10 units of 
spare bandwidth left on the link.  But CT2 can take the additional 
bandwidth (up to 10 units) if the demand arrives, since it is below its 
BWalloc value.

RBW is set such that the probability that each CT can get at least its 
BWalloc is quite high. 

As also discussed in Section 3, if best effort traffic is present, it 
can always seize whatever spare bandwidth is available on the link at 
the moment (30 units average for this example), but is subject to being 
lost at the queues in favor of the higher priority traffic.

We now expand the example to give some illustration of the use of Table 
1 and Table 2 in Section 3.

We still assume 3 CTs: CT0, CT1, CT2, all with 'normal' priority, and a 
particular link with capacity = 100.  BWalloc values and RBW are as in 
the above example:

BWalloc for CT0 = BWalloc0 = 30
BWalloc for CT1 = BWalloc1 = 20
BWalloc for CT2 = BWalloc2 = 20
Reserved bandwidth (RBW) = 10

This leaves 100 - 70 = 30 units of spare bandwidth on the link under 
normal loading.  With MAR, any of the CTs is allowed to exceed its 
BWalloc as long a there is at least RBW (reserved bandwidth on the link) 
units of spare bandwidth remaining.

Now assume an overload condition, such that

CT0 has taken 50 units of bandwidth (bandwidth-in-progress for CT0 = 
BWIP0 = 50),
CT1 has taken 30 units of bandwidth (bandwidth-in-progress for CT1 = 
BWIP1 = 30),
CT2 has taken 10 units of bandwidth (bandwidth-in-progress for CT2 = 
BWIP2 = 10),

Therefore, for this loading,
Idle link bandwidth (ILBW) = 100 - 50 - 30 - 10 = 10

Let's say a flow arrives for CT0 needing 5 units of bandwidth (i.e., DBW 
= 5).  We need to decide based on Table 2 and Table 1 whether to admit 
this flow or not.

The link load state is determined from Table 2.  Since ILBW - RBW < DBW 
(i.e., 10 - 10 < 5), Table 2 says the link is in the RBW (reserved 
bandwidth) state.

The allowed load state is determined from Table 1 (the allowed load 
state is the minimum level of bandwidth that must be available on a link 
to admit the flow).  Since for CT0 (normal priority) BWalloc0 < BWIP0 
(30 < 50), Table 2 says the allowed load state is ABW (available 
bandwidth).

Hence since the link has less bandwidth (RBW state) than the allowed 
load state level of bandwidth required to admit the flow (ABW), the flow 
is rejected/blocked.

Now let's say a flow arrives for CT2 needing 5 units of bandwidth (i.e., 
DBW = 5).  We need to decide based on Table 2 and Table 1 whether to 
admit this flow or not.

The link load state is determined from Table 2.  Since ILBW - RBW < DBW 
(i.e., 10 - 10 < 5), Table 2 says the link is in the RBW (reserved 
bandwidth) state.

The allowed load state is determined from Table 1 (the allowed load 
state is the minimum level of bandwidth that must be available on a link 
to admit the flow).  Since for CT2 (normal priority) BWIP2 < BWalloc2 
(10 < 20), Table 2 says the allowed load state is RBW (reserved 
bandwidth).

Hence since the link has sufficient bandwidth (RBW state) compared to 
the allowed load state level of bandwidth required to admit the flow 
(also RBW), the flow is admitted.

Hence, in the above example, in the current state of the link and the 
current CT loading, CT0 and CT1 can no longer increase their bandwidth 
on the link, since they are above their BWalloc values and there is only 
RBW=10 units of spare bandwidth left on the link.  But CT2 can take 
the additional bandwidth (up to 10 units) if the demand arrives, since 
it is below its BWalloc value.

5. Summary

The proposed MAR bandwidth constraint model includes the following: a) 
allocate bandwidth to individual CTs, b) protect allocated bandwidth by 
bandwidth reservation methods, as needed, but otherwise fully share 
bandwidth, c) differentiate high-priority, normal-priority, and 
best-effort priority services, and d) provide admission control to 
reject connection requests when needed to meet performance objectives.  
Modeling results presented in Annex A show that MAR bandwidth allocation 
a) achieves greater efficiency in bandwidth sharing while still 
providing bandwidth isolation and protection against QoS degradation, 
and b) achieves service differentiation for high-priority, 
normal-priority, and best-effort priority services.

5. Security Considerations

No new security considerations are raised by this document, they are the 
same as in the DSTE requirements document [DSTE-REQ].

6. Acknowledgements

DSTE and bandwidth constraint models have been an active area of 
discussion in the TEWG.  I would like to thank Wai Sum Lai for his 
support and review of this draft.  I also appreciate helpful discussions 
with Francois LeFaucher.

7. References

[AKI] Akinpelu, J. M., The Overload Performance of Engineered Networks 
with Nonhierarchical & Hierarchical Routing, BSTJ, Vol. 63, 1984.
[ASH1] Ash, G. R., Dynamic Routing in Telecommunications Networks, 
McGraw-Hill, 1998.
[ASH2] Ash, G. R., et. al., Routing Evolution in Multiservice Integrated 
Voice/Data Networks, Proceeding of ITC-16, Edinburgh, June 1999.
[ASH3] Ash, G. R., Traffic Engineering & QoS Methods for IP-, ATM-, & 
TDM-Based Multiservice Networks, work in progress.
[BUR] Burke, P. J., Blocking Probabilities Associated with Directional 
Reservation, unpublished memorandum, 1961.
[E.360] ITU-T Recommendations, QoS Routing & Related Traffic Engineering 
Methods for Multiservice TDM-, ATM-, & IP-Based Networks.
[DIFF-MPLS] Le Faucheur, F., et. al., "MPLS Support of Diff-Serv", RFC 
3270, May 2002.
[DSTE-REQ] Le Faucheur, F., et. al., "Requirements for Support of 
Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering," work in progress.
[DSTE-PROTO] Le Faucheur, F., et. al., "Protocol Extensions for Support 
of Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering," work in progress.
[DIFFSERV] Blake, S., et. al., "An Architecture for Differentiated 
Services", RFC 2475, December 1998.
[KEY] Bradner, S., "Key words for Use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.
[KRU] Krupp, R. S., "Stabilization of Alternate Routing Networks", 
Proceedings of ICC, Philadelphia, 1982.
[LAI] Lai, W., "Traffic Engineering for MPLS, Internet Performance and 
Control of Network Systems III Conference", SPIE Proceedings Vol. 4865, 
pp. 256-267, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 29 July-1 August 2002 
(http://www.columbia.edu/~ffl5/waisum/bcmodel.pdf).
[MAM1] Lai, W., "Maximum Allocation Bandwidth Constraints Model for 
Diffserv-TE & Performance Comparisons", work in progress.
[MAM2] Le Faucher, F., "Maximum Allocations Bandwidth Constraints Model 
for Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering", work in progress.
[MUM] Mummert, V. S., "Network Management and Its Implementation on the 
No. 4ESS, International Switching Symposium", Japan, 1976.
[NAK] Nakagome, Y., Mori, H., Flexible Routing in the Global 
Communication Network, Proceedings of ITC-7, Stockholm, 1973.
[MPLS-ARCH] Rosen, E., et. al., "Multiprotocol Label Switching 
Architecture," RFC 3031, January 2001.
[RDM] Le Faucher, F., "Russian Dolls Bandwidth Constraints Model for 
Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering", work in progress.
[RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.
[RSVP-TE] Awduche, D., et. al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

8. Authors' Addresses

Jerry Ash
AT&T
Room MT D5-2A01
200 Laurel Avenue
Middletown, NJ 07748, USA
Phone: +1 732-420-4578
Email: gash@att.com

ANNEX A - Analysis of MAR Bandwidth Allocation Performance

In this Annex, modeling analysis is presented in which MAR bandwidth 
allocation is shown to provide good network performance relative to full 
sharing models, under normal and abnormal operating conditions.  A 
large-scale MPLS/DiffServ TE simulation model is used, in which several 
CTs with different priority classes share the pool of bandwidth on a 
multiservice, integrated voice/data network.  MAR methods have also been 
analyzed in practice for TDM-based networks [ASH1], and in modeling 
studies for IP-based networks [ASH2, ASH3, E.360].

All bandwidth constraint models should meet these objectives:

1. applies equally when preemption is either enabled or disabled (when 
preemption is disabled, the model still works 'reasonably' well),
2. Bandwidth efficiency, i.e., good bandwidth sharing among CTs under 
both normal and overload conditions,
3. bandwidth isolation, i.e., a CT cannot hog the bandwidth of another 
CT under overload conditions,
4. protection against QoS degradation, at least of the high-priority CTs 
(e.g. high-priority voice, high-priority data, etc.), and
5. reasonably simple, i.e., does not require additional IGP extensions 
and minimizes signaling load processing requirements.

The use of any given bandwidth constraint model has significant impacts 
on the performance of a network, as explained later. Therefore, the 
criteria used to select a model must enable us to evaluate how a 
particular model delivers its performance, relative to other models. Lai 
[LAI, MAM1] has analyzed the MA and RD models and provided valuable 
insights into the relative performance of these models under various 
network conditions.

In environments where preemption is not used, the MA model is attractive 
because a) it is good at achieving isolation, and b) it achieves 
reasonable bandwidth efficiency with some QoS degradation of lower 
classes.  When preemption is used, the RD model is attractive because it 
can achieve bandwidth efficiency under normal load.  However, the RD 
model cannot provide service isolation under high load or when 
preemption is not used.

Our performance analysis of MAR bandwidth allocation methods is based on 
a full-scale, 135-node simulation model of a national network together 
with a multiservice traffic demand model to study various scenarios and 
tradeoffs [ASH3].  Three levels of traffic priority - high, normal, and 
best effort -- are given across 5 CTs: normal priority voice, high 
priority voice, normal priority data, high priority data, and best 
effort data.

The performance analyses for overloads and failures include a) the MAR 
bandwidth constraint model, as described in Section 2, and b) the full 
sharing bandwidth constraint model.  In the full sharing bandwidth 
constraint model, no reservation or protection of CT bandwidth is 
applied, and bandwidth allocation requests are admitted if bandwidth is 
available.

Table 3 gives performance results for a six-times overload on a single 
network node at Oakbrook IL.  The numbers given in the table are the 
total network percent lost (blocked) or delayed traffic.  Note that in 
the focused overload scenario studied here, the percent lost/delayed 
traffic on the Oakbrook node is much higher than the network-wide 
average values given. 

                             Table 3
                      Performance Comparison 
          for MAR & Full Sharing Bandwidth Constraint Models
6X Focused Overload on Oakbrook (Total Network % Lost/Delayed Traffic)

Class Type                  MAR Bandwidth       Full Sharing Bandwidth 
                            Constraint Model    Constraint Model
----------------------------------------------------------------------
NORMAL PRIORITY VOICE       0.16                10.83
HIGH PRIORITY VOICE         0.00                8.47
NORMAL PRIORITY DATA        3.18                12.88
HIGH PRIORITY DATA          0.00                0.46
BEST EFFORT PRIORITY DATA   12.32               9.75
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Clearly the performance is better with MAR bandwidth allocation, and the 
results show that performance improves when bandwidth reservation is 
used.  The reason for the poor performance of the full sharing model, 
without bandwidth reservation, is due to the lack of protection of 
allocated bandwidth, and the tendency to admit flows on longer paths 
rather than protect shorter primary paths under network congestion.  
Without bandwidth reservation, networks can exhibit unstable behavior in 
which essentially all connections are established on longer alternate 
paths as opposed to shorter primary paths, which greatly reduces network 
throughput and increases network congestion [AKI, KRU, NAK].  If we add 
the bandwidth reservation mechanism, then performance of the network is 
greatly improved.

Table 4 illustrates the performance of the MAR and full sharing 
bandwidth constraint models for a high-day network load pattern with a 
50% general overload.  The numbers given in the table are the total 
network percent lost (blocked) or delayed traffic.

                             Table 4
                       Performance Comparison 
          for MAR & Full Sharing Bandwidth Constraint Models
      50% General Overload (Total Network % Lost/Delayed Traffic)

Class Type                  MAR Bandwidth       Full Sharing Bandwidth 
                            Constraint Model    Constraint Model
----------------------------------------------------------------------
NORMAL PRIORITY VOICE       0.03                2.00
HIGH PRIORITY VOICE         0.00                2.41
NORMAL PRIORITY DATA        0.01                1.90
HIGH PRIORITY DATA          0.00                2.04
BEST EFFORT PRIORITY DATA   11.15               24.95
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Again, we can see the performance is always better when MAR bandwidth 
allocation and reservation is used, including the best effort traffic.

Lai's results [LAI, MAM1] show the trade-off between bandwidth sharing 
and service protection/isolation, using an analytic model of a single 
link. He shows that the RD model has a higher degree of sharing than the 
MA model. Furthermore, for a single link, the overall loss probability 
is the smallest under full sharing and largest under MA, with the RD 
model being intermediate. Hence, on a single link, Lai shows that the 
full sharing model yields the highest link efficiency and MA model the 
lowest, and that full sharing has the poorest service protection 
capability.

The results of the present study show that when considering a network 
context, in which there are many links and multiple-link routing paths 
are used, full sharing does not necessarily lead to maximum network-wide 
bandwidth efficiency.  In fact, the results in Table 2 show that the 
full sharing model not only degrades total network throughput, but also 
degrades the performance of every CT.  Allowing more bandwidth sharing 
may improve performance up to a point, but can severely degrade 
performance if care is not taken to protect allocated bandwidth under 
congestion.

Both Lai's study and this study show that increasing the degree of 
bandwidth sharing among the different CTs leads to a tighter coupling 
between CTs. Under normal loading conditions, there is adequate capacity 
for each CT, which minimizes the effect of such coupling. Under overload 
conditions, when there is a scarcity of capacity, such coupling can 
cause severe degradation of service, especially for the lower priority 
CTs.

Thus, the objective of maximizing efficient bandwidth usage, as stated 
in bandwidth constraint model objectives, must be exercised with care.  
Due consideration needs to be given also to achieving bandwidth 
isolation under overload, in order to minimize the effect of 
interactions among the different CTs. The proper tradeoff of bandwidth 
sharing and bandwidth isolation needs to be achieved in the selection of 
a default bandwidth constraint model.  Bandwidth reservation supports 
greater efficiency in bandwidth sharing while still providing bandwidth 
isolation and protection against QoS degradation.

In summary, the proposed MAR bandwidth constraint model includes the 
following: a) allocate bandwidth to individual CTs, b) protect allocated 
bandwidth by bandwidth reservation methods, as needed, but otherwise 
fully share bandwidth, c) differentiate high-priority, normal-priority, 
and best-effort priority services, and d) provide admission control to 
reject connection requests when needed to meet performance objectives.   


In the modeling results, the MAR bandwidth constraint model compares 
favorably with methods that permit more bandwidth sharing.  In 
particular, some of the conclusions from the modeling are as follows:

*	MAR bandwidth allocation is effective in improving performance over 
methods that lack bandwidth protection and allow more bandwidth sharing 
under congestion,
*	MAR achieves service differentiation for high-priority, 
normal-priority, and best-effort priority services,
*	bandwidth reservation supports greater efficiency in bandwidth sharing 
while still providing bandwidth isolation and protection against QoS 
degradation, and is critical to stable and efficient network 
performance.

Full Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or 
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included 
on all such copies and derivative works.

However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by 
removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or 
other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
developing Internet standards in which case the procedures  for 
copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, 
or as required to translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT 
INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF   MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
