


Network Working Group                                          L. Daigle
Internet-Draft                                                       Ed.
Expires: June 24, 2007                       Internet Architecture Board
                                                                   (IAB)
                                                       December 21, 2006


                  Process for Publication of IAB RFCs
                         draft-iab-publication

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 24, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).













Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


Abstract

   From time to time, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) publishes
   documents as Requests for Comments (RFCs).  This document defines the
   process by which those documents are produced, reviewed, and
   published in the RFC series.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Review and Approval  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  IAB RFC Publication Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IAB members at the time of approval  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11
































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


1.  Introduction

   From time to time, the IAB has cause to publish documents as Requests
   for Comments (RFCs).  These occasions include:

   o  documents that arise from consideration of an issue by the IAB and
      are authored by the IAB through a nominated editor.

   o  documents that report on IAB activities, such as workshop reports
      and are authored by a nominated editor, generally from among the
      activity participants.

   o  documents that are not the outcome of an IETF Working Group
      effort, but which the IAB has determined would be of benefit to
      the IETF community to publish.  Such document need not necessarily
      be authored or revised by the IAB.

   The majority of documents published by the IAB will be classified as
   Informational RFCs (see [3]).  Generally-speaking, the IAB does not
   publish Standards-track or Experimental RFCs.  If the IAB has cause
   to publish a document as a BCP, it would fall under the approval
   process of the IETF Standards stream of RFCs (see [1]).





























Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


2.  Review and Approval

   In many cases, the IAB publishes documents to provide a permanent
   record of an IAB statement or position.  In such cases, the IAB uses
   its internal discussion processes to refine the expression and
   technical content of the document, and the document is approved for
   publication if, and only if, the IAB is in agreement on its
   substantive content.

   For certain documents, it may not be appropriate for the IAB to take
   responsibility for technical correctness.  For example, where the IAB
   has sponsored a workshop where not all the participants were members
   of the IAB and/or not all the members of the IAB were present,
   approval by the IAB of a report of the workshop is used only to
   assert that the report is a faithful report of the proceedings of the
   workshop and that the matter is of interest to the community.

   Documents for which the IAB takes responsibility for technical
   correctness (the most usual case) will be indicated by noting the IAB
   as an author of the document, with individuals noted as editors or
   text authors.  Other documents, such as workshop reports, will not
   specify the IAB as an author (although this does not preclude
   individual IAB members from being authors or editors).

   In general, the document (introductory) text should make plain the
   role of the IAB in publishing and supporting the text.  Should the
   IAB have significant issues with any individual item in the document,
   a note may be included in the document explaining the issue.























Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


3.  IAB RFC Publication Process

   The following is a description of the process used by the IAB to
   publish IAB documents as RFCs.

   1.  The document is determined to be an IAB document by the IAB, as
       described in Section 1.

   2.  The IAB publishes an IAB draft (draft-iab-*).  Comments on the
       draft are reviewed and may be integrated into successive
       iterations of the draft.  In addition to considering comments
       received on the draft, the IAB may elect to refer the document to
       individuals or groups and explicitly solicit comments as
       appropriate.

   3.  For documents intended to be published as BCPs, the document is
       passed to the IESG with a sponsoring Area Director (AD), and
       follows the process outlined in [2].

   4.  For documents intended to be Informational RFCs, the remainder of
       this process is followed.

   5.  The chair of the IAB issues an IETF-wide Call For Comment on the
       IETF Announce mailing list.  The comment period is normally no
       shorter than four weeks.

   6.  Comments received are considered for integration into the draft.
       The IAB shall determine whether the document is ready for
       publication based on the comments received, or whether another
       round of document editing and, optionally, a further call for
       input is required.

   7.  The document is passed to the RFC editor for publication as an
       IAB document Informational RFC.

















Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not discuss matters with any particular security
   implications.















































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no action on IANA's part.
















































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


6.  IAB members at the time of approval

   To be filled in.
















































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


7.  References

   [1]  Daigle, L., "The RFC Series and RFC Editor",
        draft-iab-rfc-editor (work in progress), December 2006.

   [2]  Arkko, J., "Guidance on Area Director Sponsoring of Documents",
        draft-iesg-sponsoring-guidelines (work in progress),
        October 2006.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        RFC 2026, October 1996.








































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007     [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Leslie L. Daigle
   Ed.

   Email: ledaigle@cisco.com, leslie@thinkingcat.com


   (IAB)

   Email: iab@iab.org
   URI:   http://www.iab.org/







































Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007    [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-publication-00           December 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Daigle & Internet Architecture Board  Expires June 24, 2007    [Page 11]

