

Network Working Group                                         P. Hoschka
INTERNET DRAFT                                                       W3C
draft-hoschka-smil-media-type-02.txt                         August 1998


                    The application/smil Media Type


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document specifies the Media Type of the Synchronized Multimedia
   Integration Language (SMIL 1.0, pronounced "smile"). SMIL allows
   integrating a set of independent multimedia objects into a
   synchronized multimedia presentation.

1.  Introduction

   The World Wide Web Consortium has issued a Recommendation [1], which
   defines version 1 of  the Synchronized Multimedia Integration
   Language. This memo provides information about the application/smil
   Media Type.

   The definition is based on the definition of the "application/xml"
   media type [3]. The "application/smil" media type cannot be
   implemented without reading and understanding the document describing
   the "application/xml" media type [3].



Expiration Date: January 1999                                  [Page 1]
+AAw-
INTERNET DRAFT                                                 July 1998


2.  Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language

   SMIL allows integrating a set of independent multimedia objects into
   a synchronized multimedia presentation. Using SMIL, an author can

   1.describe the temporal behavior of the presentation
   2.describe the layout of the presentation on a screen
   3.associate hyperlinks with media objects

   SMIL is defined using XML [2], and the definition of the SMIL media
   type is based on the defintion of XML media types [3].

3.  Registration Information

   To: ietf-types@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of MIME media type application/smil

   MIME media type name: application

   MIME subtype name: smil

   Required parameters: none

   Optional parameters: charset

   All of the considerations for "application/xml" media type [3] also
   apply to the SMIL media type.

Encoding considerations:

All of the considerations for "application/xml" media type [3] also
apply to the SMIL media type.

Security considerations:

   SMIL documents contain a construct that allows "infinite loops".
   This is indispensible for a multimedia format. However, SMIL clients
   should foresee provisions such as a "stop" button that lets users
   interrupt such an "infinite loop".

   As with HTML, SMIL documents contain links to other media
   (images,sounds, videos, text, ...) and those links are typically
   followed automatically by software, resulting in the transfer of
   files without the explicit request of the user for each one. The
   security considerations of each linked file are those of the
   individual registered types.

   In addition, SMIL has some of the same security considerations as



Expiration Date: January 1999                                  [Page 2]
+AAw-
INTERNET DRAFT                                                 July 1998


   specified in [3], with the following exceptions: the section on XML
   entities does not apply, since SMIL 1.0 disallows entities.

Interoperability considerations:

   SMIL documents contain links to other media objects. The SMIL player
   must be able to decode the media types of these media in order to
   display the whole document. To increase interoperability, SMIL has
   provisions for including alternate versions of a media object in a
   document.

Published specification: see [1]

Applications which use this media type:

SMIL players

Additional information:

Semantics of fragment identifiers in URIs: The SMIL media type allows to
append a fragment identifier to a URI pointing to a SMIL resource (e.g.
http://www.example.com/test.smil#foo).  The semantics of fragment
identifers for SMIL resources are defined in [1].

Magic number(s): none

   All of the considerations for "application/xml" media type [3] also
   apply to the SMIL media type.

File extension(s): .smil, .smi, .sml

NOTE: On the Windows operating system, the ".smi" extension is
used by another format. To avoid conflicts, it is thus
strongly recommended not to use the extension ".smi" for storing
SMIL files on systems running the Windows operating system.

Macintosh File Type Code(s): "TEXT"
Object Identifier(s) or OID(s): none

Person & email address to contact for further information:

The author of this memo.

Intended usage: COMMON

Author/Change controller:

   The SMIL specification is a work product of the World Wide Web



Expiration Date: January 1999                                  [Page 3]
+AAw-
INTERNET DRAFT                                                 July 1998


   Consortium's SYMM Working Group, and was edited by:

   Philipp Hoschka (ph@w3.org)

   The W3C has change control over the SMIL specification.

5.  References

   [1]  "Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL) 1.0
        Specification", W3C Recommendation REC-smil-19980615,
        http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/REC-smil/, July 1998.

   [2]  "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0", W3C Recommendation
         REC-xml-19980210, http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/,
        February 1998.

   [3]  E. J. Whitehead Jr., M. Murata. "XML Media Types", RFC XXXX
        (pending), UC Irvine, Fuji Xerox Info. Systems, XXX 1998.

6.  Author's Address

   Philipp Hoschka
   W3C/INRIA
   2004, route des Lucioles - B.P. 93
   06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex
   FRANCE

   Phone: +-33 (0)492387984
   Fax:+-33 (0)493657765
   EMail: ph@w3.org

7.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and

   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than



Expiration Date: January 1999                                  [Page 4]
+AAw-
INTERNET DRAFT                                                 July 1998


   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."








































Expiration Date: January 1999                                  [Page 5]
