HTTP                                                          Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft                                                  Ex-Sun Employee
Intended status: Standards Track                                        Individual
Expires: Jan 21, 2019                                                 Jul 21, 2018
                                                                
                                                          

                 Need for http user information from clients
                         draft-pradeepkumarxplorer-httpuserinfo-00

Abstract

    This document describes the need for an httpi protocol similar to
    https/http used for intelligent surfing of information.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Jan 21,2019.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jan 21, 2019             [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Need for http user information from clients   Jul 21, 2018

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3

1. Introduction

    To have two classes of http users, authenticated with some user information
    credentials other than IP address of machine used and location information and others 
    anonymous or unauthenticated without any user information and only IP address of machine 
    used and location information.

2. Background
     RIght now as a WWW publisher i cannot program my website to say that only authenticated
     users can view my website and anonymous users with just IP address and location information
     should not be able to view my website

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jan 21, 2019             [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Need http user information from clients   Jul 21, 2018
        
3. General Information of the service
        
    Right now to hide sensitive or subscription based information i have to implement username
    password restrictions in the website code i am publishing.I should be able to say that
    only a HTTP client request that has in addition to location and IP address some User information
    should be served information from my website. This user information can be queried using a
    service similar to whois domainname.com to find out what is publicly available about the
    browser of information.Right now a user from say Newyork can login to my website in Utah Create
    fake user name and passwords and access information for free or for a usage fee. If i dont have
    username password subscription services and all my information is available for free, then the
    only guaranteed information i have about the user is IP address and location information.

4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com, pradeep@explodingmoon.org
    URI: http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com

5.Acknowledgement  

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jan 21, 2019             [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Need for http user information from clients  Jul 21, 2018