   Personal                                             P. Roberts  
   Internet Draft                                      J. Loughney 
   Category: Informational                       November 21, 2001  
   Expires: May 21, 2002 
     
     
     
                Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement 
         <draft-proberts-local-subnet-mobility-problem-02.txt> 
        
        
   Status of This Memo  
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are 
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
        
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
        
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:  
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
     
     
Abstract  
     
   This document specifies a problem statement for investigation within 
   the IRTF.  There are a couple of seemingly unrelated problems that 
   have led investigators to converge on the desirability of 
   implementing a routing protocol whose purpose is to allow a mobile 
   node to retain connectivity via its current IP subnet while it moves 
   within the scope of the micro mobility domain. In general this 
   domain is expected to be contained within an autonomous system so 
   that global aggregation of subnets is still preserved. An additional 
   benefit of the protocols is that mobile nodes may more quickly react 
   to failed links.  The problem is to investigate the limits and 
   issues with using (a) new protocol(s) to implement per node routes 
   to facilitate better the movement of nodes and recovery of the 
   network in the presence of failed links or routers.  The document is 
   a brief statement of the problem to be investigated with references 
   to lots of other work that has been done already by many others in 
   the area.    








Internet Draft   Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement   Nov 21, 2001 



Abstract.............................................................1 
1. Introduction......................................................3 
 1.1  Scope of This Document.........................................3 
 1.2 Background......................................................3 
2. Problems For Investigation........................................3 
 2.1 Problem One.....................................................4 
 2.2 Problem Two.....................................................4 
 2.3 Problem Three...................................................4 
3. Next Steps........................................................5 
4. Acknowledgements..................................................5 
5. Addresses.........................................................5 
6. References........................................................5 













































Roberts                                                     [Page 2] 


Internet Draft   Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement   Nov 21, 2001 
 
 
1. Introduction  
     
   The design of Internet routing has evolved largely based on the 
   assumption that most end systems are stationary. As the idea of 
   mobile devices came along, Mobile IP provided an easy migration path 
   for supporting end system mobility without significant change or 
   impact to the Internet infrastructure. This was achieved primarily 
   by placing the support for routing to mobile devices on the end 
   systems and at a limited number of centralized points within the 
   infrastructure, effectively "hiding" the end system mobility from 
   the infrastructure routing protocols. However, as we anticipate the 
   desire to support real-time traffic flows to mobile devices and the 
   possibility that mobile devices may become a significant portion of 
   all Internet end nodes, investigation of alternative designs merit 
   consideration. Many investigators in this area have converged on 
   solutions that propose the use of local subnet mobility routing to 
   support mobility within a limited domain, effectively exposing the 
   mobility of end systems to the routers.  
    
1.1  Scope of This Document      
 
   This draft represents a problem statement to enable investigation of 
   how a local subnet mobility routing protocol can be employed to 
   enable mobility and fast network recovery.  It is a problem 
   statement based on a lot of work done in attempting to provide low 
   latency handover in mobile networks and fast recovery in networks 
   with fast recovery requirements.   
    
   It is not the intention of this document to compete with other 
   mobility solutions, such as Mobile IP, but rather investigate 
   micromobility issues. 
    
1.2 Background 
     
   A number of protocols have been proposed for micromobility such as 
   Cellular IP [CIP], Hawaii [HAW], EMA [EMA], etc. 
    
   A good summary of the problem as it pertains to network recovery is 
   [MC].  The micromobility design team of the Seamoby working group 
   produced a problem statement as well, which directly lead to this 
   work.  
    
   See the reference list for lots of previous work that has been done 
   especially in the area of mobility with alternate proposals from 
   Mobile IP.  
        
2. Problems For Investigation  
        
   This section proposes questions that have led to a perceived need 
   for investigation of node routing within the IRTF.  Why is there a 
   perceived need for a non-tunnel-based routing solution for mobility? 
 
Roberts                                                     [Page 3] 


Internet Draft   Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement   Nov 21, 2001 
 
 
   While Mobile IP provides transparency of the mobility to 
   correspondent nodes communicating with hosts on the mobile network, 
   Mobile IP does not provide transparency for any state contained 
   within routers along the paths from correspondent nodes and the 
   mobile node's home agent. That is, state in routers which is 
   dependent on the stability of the source or destination address in 
   the IP header will be negatively impacted by the mobile node's 
   change of care of addresses. For example, when a mobile node changes 
   its care of address, the mobile node's current reservation would 
   require that the filter specs be updated with the new care of 
   address. By instead treating the mobility as a topology change 
   within the local area, these unpleasant second order effects can be 
   avoided.   
          
2.1 Problem One   
        
   There are applications that involve supporting real-time traffic 
   flows to end devices that are mobile.  These applications require 
   that there be minimal (ideally no) interruption to the packet flows 
   and that these flows need to preserve the existing QoS and security 
   characteristics as the end station moves.  In addition the movement 
   of the end devices should not cause excessive signaling in the 
   network as the devices move.  Such applications often also run on 
   networks in which link failures or router failures can cause a 
   significant service disruption.  Is it possible to use a similar 
   protocol to allow for faster restoration of service during link 
   failures?  Could such mobility requirements and fast restoration 
   requirements be met in a way that is more efficient and simpler than 
   approaches based on Mobile IP and current intradomain routing 
   protocols by using a routing protocol that implements local subnet 
   mobility within a limited scope within the network?  What would the 
   limits of such a solution be in terms of scaling?  Specifically how 
   many nodes could be supported across what kind of network breadth 
   and depth at what cost of complexity in the routers around the edge 
   of such a network?  Is it possible to meet traffic engineering 
   requirements using such a protocol?  Could it simplify management of 
   QoS in the part of the network where mobility is most readily felt?  
        
2.2 Problem Two  
        
   One of the primary principles of the Internet has been end-to-end 
   communication. Most (if not all) of the protocols running over IP 
   have been designed with end-to-end signaling in mind.  Currently, 
   changes due to mobility induce unwanted end-to-end signaling. This 
   may cause applications running over IP to fail due to delay and 
   latency induced by unwanted signaling.  Security, QoS and AAA 
   signaling all suffer due to this.  Could a local subnet mobility 
   protocol aid in this respect?  
        
2.3 Problem Three  
        
 
Roberts                                                     [Page 4] 


Internet Draft   Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement   Nov 21, 2001 
 
 
   Why is there a need for an investigation of it in the IRTF rather 
   than a direct move to work on a standard within a working group of 
   the IETF?  The area directors overseeing the activities of the 
   Seamoby working group and the mobile-ip working group have raised 
   questions about the scale of local subnet mobility routing and the 
   potential need to introduce both another routing protocol and 
   another mobility protocol. A comparison with existing mobility 
   management and routing protocols are involved in making such an 
   assessment both in terms of relative scalability, performance and 
   complexity.  
    
3. Next Steps 
    
   To further the discussion on this subject, discussion on the 
   applicability of existing solutions the problems outlined in this 
   document could be useful.  Additionally, clarification of the 
   problem space and terminology would be beneficial. 
    
4. Acknowledgements  
        
   The authors of this work would like to be considered more as 
   compilers, rather than authors.  They would like to acknowledge all 
   the contributors who have produced work relating to host routing for 
   the various problems.   
    
   Vince Park and Michael Thomas specifically contributed valuable text 
   for this problem statement.    
      
5. Addresses  
        
   Phil Roberts 
   Megisto Systems, Inc. 
   proberts@megisto.com 
    
   John Loughney 
   Nokia 
   john.Loughney@nokia.com 
    
6. References  
        
   [MC]           M. Scott Corson, A. O'Neill, G. Tsirtsis.  IP Fast 
                  Restoration. Work in Progress.  Draft-corson-
                  fastrestore-00.txt, November 2000.  
    
   [FHO]          G. Tsirtsis, et. al.  "Fast Handovers for Mobile 
                  Ipv6."  Work in Progress.  Draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-
                  mipv6-02.txt, July 2001.  
    
   [MT]           M. Thomas.  "Analysis of Mobile IP and RSVP 
                  Interactions."  Work in Progress.  Draft-thomas-
                  seamoby-rsvp-analysis-00.txt, February 2001.  



 
Roberts                                                     [Page 5] 



Internet Draft   Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement   Nov 21, 2001 
 
 
    
   [CI]           Z. Shelby, et. al.  "Cellular IP v6."  Work in 
                  Progress.  draft-shelby-seamoby-cellularipv6-01.txt, 
                  July 2001.  
    
   [HSR]          A. O'Neill.  "Host Specific Routing."  Work in 
                  Progress.  Draft-oneill-li-hst-00.txt, November 2000.  
    
   [IMMP]         A. Campbell and J. Gomez.  "IP Micro-mobility 
                  Protocols."  ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computer and 
                  Communications Review (MC2R), 2001, available at 
                  http://www.comet.columbia.edu/micromobility.  
    
   [CIP]          Campbell, et. al.  "Cellular IP."  Work in Progress.  
                  Draft expired, but available at 
                  http://www.comet.columbia.edu/micromobility.  
    
   [HAW]          Ramjee, et. al.  "Hawaii."  Work in Progress.  Draft 
                  expired, but available at 
                  http://www.comet.columbia.edu/micromobility.  
    
   [EMA]          M. Scott Corson, and Alan O'Neill. An Approach to 
                  Fixed/Mobile Converged Routing. University of 
                  Maryland, Institute for Systems Research, Technical 
                  Report, TR 2000-5. 2000. Available at 
                  http://www.isr.umd.edu/TechReports/ISR/2000/TR_2000-
                  5/TR_2000-5.phtml  
    
        
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    




Roberts                                                     [Page 6] 



Internet Draft   Local Subnet Mobility Problem Statement   Nov 21, 2001 
 
 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
        







































 
Roberts                                                     [Page 7] 
