



Network Working Group                                         M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Informational                              12 July 2021
Expires: 13 January 2022


          The Harmful Consequences of the Robustness Principle
                   draft-iab-protocol-maintenance-05

Abstract

   The robustness principle, often phrased as "be conservative in what
   you send, and liberal in what you accept", has long guided the design
   and implementation of Internet protocols.  The posture this statement
   advocates promotes interoperability in the short term, but can
   negatively affect the protocol ecosystem over time.  For a protocol
   that is actively maintained, the robustness principle can, and
   should, be avoided.

Note to Readers

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Architecture-Discuss
   mailing list (architecture-discuss@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/architecture-discuss/
   (https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/architecture-discuss/).

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/intarchboard/protocol-maintenance
   (https://github.com/intarchboard/protocol-maintenance).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 January 2022.





Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Fallibility of Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Protocol Decay  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Ecosystem Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Active Protocol Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Virtuous Intolerance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Exclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   11. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   The robustness principle has been hugely influential in shaping the
   design of the Internet.  As stated in IAB RFC 1958 [PRINCIPLES], the
   robustness principle advises to:

      Be strict when sending and tolerant when receiving.
      Implementations must follow specifications precisely when sending
      to the network, and tolerate faulty input from the network.  When
      in doubt, discard faulty input silently, without returning an
      error message unless this is required by the specification.

   This simple statement captures a significant concept in the design of
   interoperable systems.  Many consider the application of the
   robustness principle to be instrumental in the success of the
   Internet as well as the design of interoperable protocols in general.





Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   Time and experience shows that negative consequences to
   interoperability accumulate over time if implementations apply the
   robustness principle.  This problem originates from an assumption
   implicit in the principle that it is not possible to affect change in
   a system the size of the Internet.  That is, the idea that once a
   protocol specification is published, changes that might require
   existing implementations to change are not feasible.

   Many problems that might lead to applications of the robustness
   principle are avoided for protocols under active maintenance.  Active
   protocol maintenance is where a community of protocol designers,
   implementers, and deployers work together to continuously improve and
   evolve protocol specifications alongside implementations and
   deployments of those protocols.  A community that takes an active
   role in the maintenance of protocols can greatly reduce and even
   eliminate opportunities to apply the robustness principle.

   There is good evidence to suggest that many important protocols are
   routinely maintained beyond their inception.  In particular, a
   sizeable proportion of IETF activity is dedicated to the stewardship
   of existing protocols.  This document serves primarily as a record of
   the hazards inherent in applying the robustness principle and to
   offer an alternative strategy for handling interoperability problems
   in deployments.

   Ideally, protocol implementations never have to apply the robustness
   principle.  Or, where it is unavoidable, use of the robustness
   principle is viewed as a short term workaround that needs to be
   quickly reverted.

2.  Fallibility of Specifications

   The context from which the robustness principle was developed
   provides valuable insights into its intent and purpose.  The earliest
   form of the principle in the RFC series (in RFC 760 [IP]) is preceded
   by a sentence that reveals the motivation for the principle:

      While the goal of this specification is to be explicit about the
      protocol there is the possibility of differing interpretations.
      In general, an implementation should be conservative in its
      sending behavior, and liberal in its receiving behavior.

   This formulation of the principle expressly recognizes the
   possibility that the specification could be imperfect.  This
   contextualizes the principle in an important way.






Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   An imperfect specification is natural, largely because it is more
   important to proceed to implementation and deployment than it is to
   perfect a specification.  A protocol, like any complex system,
   benefits greatly from experience with its use.  A deployed protocol
   is immeasurably more useful than a perfect protocol.  The robustness
   principle is a tool that is suited to early phases of system design.

   As [SUCCESS] demonstrates, success or failure of a protocol depends
   far more on factors like usefulness than on on technical excellence.
   Timely publication of protocol specifications, even with the
   potential for flaws, likely contributed significantly to the eventual
   success of the Internet.

   The problem is therefore not with the premise, but with its
   conclusion: the robustness principle itself.

3.  Protocol Decay

   The application of the robustness principle to the early Internet, or
   any system that is in early phases of deployment, is expedient.
   Applying the principle defers the effort of dealing with
   interoperability problems, which prioritizes progress.  However,
   deferral can amplify the ultimate cost of handling interoperability
   problems.

   Divergent implementations of a specification emerge over time.  When
   variations occur in the interpretation or expression of semantic
   components, implementations cease to be perfectly interoperable.

   Implementation bugs are often identified as the cause of variation,
   though it is often a combination of factors.  Application of a
   protocol to uses that were not anticipated in the original design, or
   ambiguities and errors in the specification are often confounding
   factors.  Disagreements on the interpretation of specifications
   should be expected over the lifetime of a protocol.

   Even with the best intentions, the pressure to interoperate can be
   significant.  No implementation can hope to avoid having to trade
   correctness for interoperability indefinitely.

   An implementation that reacts to variations in the manner recommended
   in the robustness principle sets up a feedback cycle.  Over time:

   *  Implementations progressively add logic to constrain how data is
      transmitted, or to permit variations in what is received.

   *  Errors in implementations or confusion about semantics are
      permitted or ignored.



Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   *  These errors can become entrenched, forcing other implementations
      to be tolerant of those errors.

   A flaw can become entrenched as a de facto standard.  Any
   implementation of the protocol is required to replicate the aberrant
   behavior, or it is not interoperable.  This is both a consequence of
   applying the robustness principle, and a product of a natural
   reluctance to avoid fatal error conditions.  Ensuring
   interoperability in this environment is often referred to as aiming
   to be "bug for bug compatible".

   For example, in TLS [TLS] extensions use a tag-length-value format,
   and they can be added to messages in any order.  However, some server
   implementations terminate connections if they encounter a TLS
   ClientHello message that ends with an empty extension.  To maintain
   interoperability, client implementations are required to be aware of
   this bug and ensure that a ClientHello message ends in a non-empty
   extension.

   The original JSON specification [JSON] demonstrates the effect of
   specification shortcomings.  RFC 4627 omitted critical details on a
   range of key details including Unicode handling, ordering and
   duplication of object members, and number encoding.  Consequently, a
   range of interpretations were used by implementations.  An updated
   specification [JSON-BIS] did not correct these errors, concentrating
   instead on identifying the interoperable subset of JSON.  I-JSON
   [I-JSON] takes that subset and defines a new format that prohibits
   the problematic parts of JSON.  Of course, that means that I-JSON is
   not fully interoperable with JSON.  Consequently, I-JSON is not
   widely implemented in parsers.  Many JSON parsers now implement the
   more precise algorithm specified in [ECMA262].

   The robustness principle therefore encourages a reaction that can
   create interoperability problems.  In particular, the application of
   the robustness principle is particularly deleterious for early
   implementations of new protocols as quirks in early implementations
   can affect all subsequent deployments.

4.  Ecosystem Effects

   Once deviations become entrenched, it can be extremely difficult - if
   not impossible - to rectify the situation.

   Interoperability requirements for protocol implementations are set by
   other deployments.  Specifications and - where they exist -
   conformance test suites might guide the initial development of
   implementations, but implementations ultimately need to interoperate
   with deployed implementations.



Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   For widely used protocols, the massive scale of the Internet makes
   large-scale interoperability testing infeasible for all but a
   privileged few.  The cost of building a new implementation using
   reverse engineering increases as the number of implementations and
   bugs increases.  Worse, the set of tweaks necessary for wide
   interoperability can be difficult to discover.

   Consequently, new implementations might be forced into niche uses,
   where the problems arising from interoperability issues can be more
   closely managed.  However, restricting new implementations into
   limited deployments risks causing forks in the protocol.  If
   implementations do not interoperate, little prevents those
   implementations from diverging more over time.

   This has a negative impact on the ecosystem of a protocol.  New
   implementations are important in ensuring the continued viability of
   a protocol.  New protocol implementations are also more likely to be
   developed for new and diverse use cases and often are the origin of
   features and capabilities that can be of benefit to existing users.

   The need to work around interoperability problems also reduces the
   ability of established implementations to change.  An accumulation of
   mitigations for interoperability issues makes implementations more
   difficult to maintain and can constrain extensibility (see also
   [USE-IT]).

   Sometimes what appear to be interoperability problems are symptomatic
   of issues in protocol design.  A community that is willing to make
   changes to the protocol, by revising or extending it, makes the
   protocol better in the process.  Applying the robustness principle
   instead conceals problems, making it harder, or even impossible, to
   fix them later.

5.  Active Protocol Maintenance

   The robustness principle can be highly effective in safeguarding
   against flaws in the implementation of a protocol by peers.
   Especially when a specification remains unchanged for an extended
   period of time, incentive to be tolerant of errors accumulates over
   time.  Indeed, when faced with divergent interpretations of an
   immutable specification, the only way for an implementation to remain
   interoperable is to be tolerant of differences in interpretation and
   implementation errors.

   From this perspective, application of the robustness principle to the
   implementation of a protocol specification that does not change is
   logical, even necessary.  But that conclusion relies on an assumption
   that existing specifications and implementations are unable to



Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   change.  Applying the robustness principle in this way
   disproportionately values short-term gains over the negative effects
   on future implementations and the protocol as a whole.

   For a protocol to have sustained viability, it is necessary for both
   specifications and implementations to be responsive to changes, in
   addition to handling new and old problems that might arise over time.

   Maintaining specifications so that they closely match deployments
   ensures that implementations are consistently interoperable and
   removes needless barriers for new implementations.  Maintenance also
   enables continued improvement of the protocol.  New use cases are an
   indicator that the protocol could be successful [SUCCESS].

   Protocol designers are strongly encouraged to continue to maintain
   and evolve protocol specificationss beyond their initial inception
   and definition.  This might require the development of revised
   specifications, extensions, or other supporting material that
   documents the current state of the protocol.  Involvement of those
   who implement and deploy the protocol is a critical part of this
   process, as they provide input on their experience with how the
   protocol is used.

   Most interoperability problems do not require revision of protocols
   or protocol specifications.  For instance, the most effective means
   of dealing with a defective implementation in a peer could be to
   email the developer responsible.  It is far more efficient in the
   long term to fix one isolated bug than it is to deal with the
   consequences of workarounds.

   Early implementations of protocols have a stronger obligation to
   closely follow specifications as their behavior will affect all
   subsequent implementations.  In addition to specifications, later
   implementations will be guided by what existing deployments accept.
   Tolerance of errors in early deployments is most likely to result in
   problems.  Protocol specifications might need more frequent revision
   during early deployments to capture feedback from early rounds of
   deployment.

   Neglect can quickly produce the negative consequences this document
   describes.  Restoring the protocol to a state where it can be
   maintained involves first discovering the properties of the protocol
   as it is deployed, rather than the protocol as it was originally
   documented.  This can be difficult and time-consuming, particularly
   if the protocol has a diverse set of implementations.  Such a process
   was undertaken for HTTP [HTTP] after a period of minimal maintenance.
   Restoring HTTP specifications to relevance took significant effort.




Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   Maintenance is most effective if it is responsive, which is greatly
   affected by how rapidly protocol changes can be deployed.  For
   protocol deployments that operate on longer time scales, temporary
   workarounds following the spirit of the robustness principle might be
   necessary.  If specifications can be updated more readily than
   deployments, details of the workaround can be documented, including
   the desired form of the protocols once the need for workarounds no
   longer exists and plans for removing the workaround.

6.  Extensibility

   Good extensibility [EXT] can make it easier to respond to new use
   cases or changes in the environment in which the protocol is
   deployed.

   The ability to extend a protocol is sometimes mistaken for an
   application of the robustness principle.  After all, if one party
   wants to start using a new feature before another party is prepared
   to receive it, it might be assumed that the receiving party is being
   tolerant of unexpected inputs.

   A well-designed extensibility mechanism establishes clear rules for
   the handling of things like new messages or parameters.  This depends
   on having clear rules for the handling of malformed or illegal inputs
   so that implementations behave consistently in all cases that might
   affect interoperation.  If extension mechanisms and error handling
   are designed and implemented correctly, new protocol features can be
   deployed with confidence in the understanding of the effect they have
   on existing implementations.

   In contrast, relying on implementations to consistently apply the
   robustness principle is not a good strategy for extensibility.  Using
   undocumented or accidental features of a protocol as the basis of an
   extensibility mechanism can be extremely difficult, as is
   demonstrated by the case study in Appendix A.3 of [EXT].

   A protocol could be designed to permit a narrow set of valid inputs,
   or it could allow a wide range of inputs as a core feature (see for
   example [HTML]).  Specifying and implementing a more flexible
   protocol is more difficult; allowing less variability is preferable
   in the absence of strong reasons to be flexible.

7.  Virtuous Intolerance

   A well-specified protocol includes rules for consistent handling of
   aberrant conditions.  This increases the chances that implementations
   will have consistent and interoperable handling of unusual
   conditions.



Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   Intolerance of any deviation from specification, where
   implementations generate fatal errors in response to observing
   undefined or unusual behaviour, can be harnessed to reduce
   occurrences of aberrant implementations.  Choosing to generate fatal
   errors for unspecified conditions instead of attempting error
   recovery can ensure that faults receive attention.

   This improves feedback for new implementations in particular.  When a
   new implementation encounters a peer that is intolerant of an error,
   it receives strong feedback that allows the problem to be discovered
   quickly.

   To be effective, intolerant implementations need to be sufficiently
   widely deployed that they are encountered by new implementations with
   high probability.  This could depend on multiple implementations
   deploying strict checks.

   This does not mean that intolerance of errors in early deployments of
   protocols have the effect of preventing interoperability.  On the
   contrary, when existing implementations follow clearly specified
   error handling, new implementations or features can be introduced
   more readily as the effect on existing implementations can be easily
   predicted; see also Section 6.

   Any intolerance also needs to be strongly supported by
   specifications, otherwise they encourage fracturing of the protocol
   community or proliferation of workarounds; see Section 8.

   Intolerance can be used to motivate compliance with any protocol
   requirement.  For instance, the INADEQUATE_SECURITY error code and
   associated requirements in HTTP/2 [HTTP2] resulted in improvements in
   the security of the deployed base.

8.  Exclusion

   Any protocol participant that is affected by changes arising from
   maintenance might be excluded if they are unwilling or unable to
   implement or deploy changes that are made to the protocol.

   Deliberate exclusion of problematic implementations is an important
   tool that can ensure that the interoperability of a protocol remains
   viable.  While compatible changes are always preferable to
   incompatible ones, it is not always possible to produce a design that
   protects the ability of all current and future protocol participants
   to interoperate.  Developing and deploying changes that risk
   exclusion of previously interoperating implementations requires some
   care, but changes to a protocol should not be blocked on the grounds
   of the risk of exclusion alone.



Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   Exclusion is a direct goal when choosing to be intolerant of errors
   (see Section 7).  Exclusionary actions are employed with the
   deliberate intent of protecting future interoperability.

   Excluding implementations or deployments can lead to a fracturing of
   the protocol system that could be more harmful than any divergence
   resulting from following the robustness principle.  RFC 5704
   [UNCOORDINATED] describes how conflict or competition in the
   maintenance of protocols can lead to similar problems.

9.  Security Considerations

   Sloppy implementations, lax interpretations of specifications, and
   uncoordinated extrapolation of requirements to cover gaps in
   specification can result in security problems.  Hiding the
   consequences of protocol variations encourages the hiding of issues,
   which can conceal bugs and make them difficult to discover.

   The consequences of the problems described in this document are
   especially acute for any protocol where security depends on agreement
   about semantics of protocol elements.  For instance, use of unsafe
   security mechanisms, such as weak primitives [MD5] or obsolete
   mechanisms [SSL3], are good examples of where forcing exclusion
   (Section 8) can be desirable.

10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

11.  Informative References

   [ECMA262]  "ECMAScript(R) 2018 Language Specification", ECMA-262 9th
              Edition, June 2018, <https://www.ecma-
              international.org/publications/standards/Ecma-262.htm>.

   [EXT]      Carpenter, B., Aboba, B., Ed., and S. Cheshire, "Design
              Considerations for Protocol Extensions", RFC 6709,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6709, September 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6709>.

   [HTML]     "HTML", WHATWG Living Standard, 8 March 2019,
              <https://html.spec.whatwg.org/>.

   [HTTP]     Fielding, R., Ed. and J. Reschke, Ed., "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing",
              RFC 7230, DOI 10.17487/RFC7230, June 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7230>.




Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   [HTTP2]    Belshe, M., Peon, R., and M. Thomson, Ed., "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol Version 2 (HTTP/2)", RFC 7540,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7540, May 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7540>.

   [I-JSON]   Bray, T., Ed., "The I-JSON Message Format", RFC 7493,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7493, March 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7493>.

   [IP]       Postel, J., "DoD standard Internet Protocol", RFC 760,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC0760, January 1980,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc760>.

   [JSON]     Crockford, D., "The application/json Media Type for
              JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)", RFC 4627,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4627, July 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4627>.

   [JSON-BIS] Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", RFC 7159, DOI 10.17487/RFC7159, March
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7159>.

   [MD5]      Turner, S. and L. Chen, "Updated Security Considerations
              for the MD5 Message-Digest and the HMAC-MD5 Algorithms",
              RFC 6151, DOI 10.17487/RFC6151, March 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6151>.

   [PRINCIPLES]
              Carpenter, B., Ed., "Architectural Principles of the
              Internet", RFC 1958, DOI 10.17487/RFC1958, June 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1958>.

   [SSL3]     Barnes, R., Thomson, M., Pironti, A., and A. Langley,
              "Deprecating Secure Sockets Layer Version 3.0", RFC 7568,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7568, June 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7568>.

   [SUCCESS]  Thaler, D. and B. Aboba, "What Makes for a Successful
              Protocol?", RFC 5218, DOI 10.17487/RFC5218, July 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5218>.

   [TLS]      Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446>.







Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Protocol Maintenance                 July 2021


   [UNCOORDINATED]
              Bryant, S., Ed., Morrow, M., Ed., and IAB, "Uncoordinated
              Protocol Development Considered Harmful", RFC 5704,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5704, November 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5704>.

   [USE-IT]   Thomson, M., "Long-term Viability of Protocol Extension
              Mechanisms", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-iab-
              use-it-or-lose-it-00, 7 August 2019,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-iab-use-it-
              or-lose-it-00>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   Constructive feedback on this document has been provided by a
   surprising number of people including Bernard Aboba, Brian Carpenter,
   Stuart Cheshire, Mark Nottingham, Russ Housley, Henning Schulzrinne,
   Robert Sparks, Brian Trammell, and Anne Van Kesteren.  Please excuse
   any omission.

Author's Address

   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla

   Email: mt@lowentropy.net

























Thomson                  Expires 13 January 2022               [Page 12]
