

   MMUSIC
   Internet Draft                                            J.C. Rojas
                                                               S. Leroy
   Document: draft-rojas-mmusic-qosreq-00.txt                   Alcatel
   Expires: December, 2002                                  M. Holdrege
                                                                Verison
                                                              June 2002


       Requirements for the QoS negotiation at the Application Layer
                   < draft-rojas-mmusic-qosreq-00.txt >


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document identifies requirements for an end-to-end negotiation
   of the Quality of Service (QoS) aspects of each media component of a
   multi-media session at the application level, before requesting the
   transport layer for bearer setup.

   It is believed that in the future, QoS will be one of the major
   differentiators in the context of a new generation of multi-media
   services based on the IP technology. As such, QoS cannot be
   considered anymore as a matter of bearer handling only, but it has
   also to include the application layer. Moreover, QoS has to be
   considered as part of the media component description, and
   therefore, to be negotiated or re-negotiated during the session
   life.

Conventions used in this document


Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 1]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002



   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [11].

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Motivation.....................................................3
   3. Requirements...................................................4
      3.1 Functional requirements....................................4
      3.2 Expressiveness requirements................................6
      3.3 Dependency requirements....................................7
      3.4 Performance requirements...................................7
   4. Exclusions.....................................................7
   5. Conclusion.....................................................8
   Security Considerations...........................................8
   References........................................................9
   Acknowledgments..................................................10
   Author's Addresses...............................................10


1. Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol, SIP [3] is an application-layer
   control protocol for creating, modifying and terminating sessions
   such as Internet multimedia conferences, Internet telephone calls
   and multimedia distribution. The SIP messages used to create
   sessions carry a session description, which allows participants to
   agree on a set of compatible media types. The session description,
   commonly formatted in SDP [4], is a well-defined format for
   conveying sufficient information to discover and participate in a
   multimedia session.

   Although SIP [3] and SDP [4] offer an attractive set of mechanisms
   for multimedia session control and description, several IETF drafts
   have already shown the need for extensions to these protocols,
   especially for delivering services with guaranteed end-to-end
   Quality of Service (QoS).
   Moreover, some existing drafts propose already extensions to SDP or
   SDPng to cover such needs [10][11].

   Finally, draft [7] recognized that there is a requirement from the
   IETF Multiparty Multimedia Session Control (MMUSIC) working group to
   specify additional QoS parameters for SDPng. The current SDPng draft
   also mentions QoS parameters as one of the possible extensions [12].

   This draft is organised as follows. Section 3 delineates the
   motivations for QoS at application layer. Section 4 describes the


Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 2]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


   requirements themselves, which are split in four sub-sets:
   functional requirements, expressiveness requirements, dependency
   requirements, and performance requirements. Section 5 handles the
   Exclusions, that is, what this draft is not asking for, in order to
   avoid any misunderstanding. Section 6 analyses the security issues
   raised by the negotiation of QoS information. Finally, section 7
   summarises and concludes this work.

   It has to be noted that it should be possible to apply the
   requirements presented in this document to any session signalling
   protocol; therefore, not only SIP has to be taken into account but
   also other protocols like SAP, RTSP, Megaco, etc.

2. Motivation

   It is now generally accepted that in the future, Quality of Service
   (QoS) will be one of the main differentiator aspects to provide
   high-quality voice and in general, multi-media services over an
   integrated IP network.

   Thus, service providers are becoming more and more aware of the
   possibility of getting new revenues by selling new services and not
   only some transport capacity.

   The main consequence is that QoS cannot be considered anymore as a
   transport layer matter only. The Application layer has to be also
   involved in the negotiation of the service characteristics,
   including the QoS level to be delivered to the end-users.

   Depending on the characteristics of each media component of the
   multi-media session, the QoS requirements will be very likely
   different, as e.g. between voice, video on one side, and instant
   messaging and application sharing on the other side. Even for well-
   known codecs, the QoS requirements could be different according to
   the end-user expectations, and the related subscription profile.

   From this point of view, QoS has to be considered as part of the
   description of the media components in the multi-media session.

   In the SIP model, the characteristics of the media components
   provided in the session description are negotiated at the beginning
   of the session using a standard procedure based on the Offer/Answer
   model [8], and next, it can be re-negotiated at any moment, by any
   of the involved end-users. This means that the QoS aspects of each
   media component can be negotiated and renegotiated following
   existing rules and procedures.

   It has to be noted that this negotiation at the application level
   does not include the transport level. End-users are intended to



Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 3]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


   agree on "what to do", before actually trying to do it. In other
   words, end-users are intended to negotiate the media component
   characteristics including the network aspects, before asking the
   transport network to allocate the corresponding resources.

3. Requirements

   This section describes the requirements for QoS negotiation at the
   application layer. For the sake of simplicity, the set of
   requirements has been split into four sub-sets, as described below:

   -   Functional requirements, that is, requirements having a
       functional meaning for the application layer.

   -   Expressiveness requirements, that is, requirements catching the
       type of QoS information to be exchanged.

   -   Dependency requirements, that is, requirements describing the
       dependence of the QoS negotiation procedures and other layers,
       protocols, and technologies.

   -   Performance requirements, that is, requirements on the global
       performances concerning the session establishment.

3.1 Functional requirements

   -   End-to-end QoS negotiation at the application layer.
       Session control elements of all the involved parties SHALL be
       able to participate in the negotiation process (end-user, local
       access network, service provider), before going down to the
       transport layer to setup the corresponding bearers. Which
       parties participate in the QoS negotiation is dependent on the
       applied service domain and policy management model, and is
       outside the scope of this document.

   -   QoS negotiation per media component.
       It MUST be possible to describe the requested QoS level for each
       media component separately, in order to ensure a maximum of
       flexibility.
       This requirement does not preclude in anyway the possibility to
       have a mechanism allowing to specify the QoS requirement
       globally for the entire multi-media session.

   -   Explicit QoS information exchange
       Sometimes, it is possible to derive some QoS information
       directly from the codec, when the latter and the related service
       are well known. However, several IETF drafts have shown that
       this is not always possible [10][11], since it depends strongly
       on the codec implementation, and the application itself.


Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 4]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


       Therefore, it SHALL be possible to exchange explicit QoS
       information between all the involved parties to negotiate the
       QoS level to be delivered.
       Any parameter or protocol element to be defined to convey QoS
       information at the application levels SHALL always be considered
       as optional parameters.
       The fallback strategy SHOULD always be the current situation,
       where no QoS can be explicitly signaled at the application
       level. This way of doing guarantees full backward compatibility.
       Do note however that in some cases, the service provider could
       be unable to fullfill the contractual obligation with the
       customer, if explicit QoS information cannot be exchanged.

   -   Target QoS level and Minimum QoS level.
       It SHALL be possible to negotiate two different levels of QoS:
       the Target QoS, that is, the level of QoS that SHALL be provided
       to the end-user, and the Minimum QoS, that is, the level of QoS
       under which the contractual definition of the service is
       definitely violated.
       The case of a single QoS level is covered using a Minimum QoS
       level equal to the Target QoS level.
       In case of temporary congestion, the network is authorised to
       adapt the QoS up to the Minimum QoS level without re-negotiating
       the session description. At any later point, the network may
       upgrade the QoS again to achieve the desired target QoS level.
       Do note that Best Effort has not to be considered as synonym of
       bad quality, but as the level were there is no guaranteed QoS.
       As an example, a given service could be provided with a certain
       level of QoS, but accepting to be downgraded to Best Effort, in
       case of temporary network congestion. The word "temporary" has a
       commercial meaning and scope; its definition is therefore out of
       the scope of this document.

   -   Successful establishment of media components.
       An end-user SHALL be able to specify for each media component
       whether successful establishment of the corresponding bearer
       with a specific level of QoS is required for the session
       completion.
       Do note that this requirement is already covered by the
       pre-conditions mechanism [5].

   -   Synchronisation between the application layer and the bearer
       layer.
       It SHALL be possible to correlate the resources authorized by
       the application layer and the actual network resources requested
       by the end-user at bearer setup.
       Do note that this requirement is already covered by the media
       authorisation mechanism [6].




Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 5]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


   -   Personal mobility.
       The QoS negotiation procedure SHALL be possible also in case of
       personal mobility, that is, regardless of the network access
       point where the end-user is connected to the network.

   -   Roaming scenario.
       The QoS negotiation procedure SHALL be applicable for both the
       roaming and the non-roaming scenarios, that is, regardless if
       the end-user is connected to the home network or to a visited
       network.
       In the latter case, a roaming agreement is assumed between both
       networks. The specification of such roaming agreement is out of
       the scope of this document.

3.2 Expressiveness requirements

   -   Application layer view of the QoS information.
       The QoS information to be used in the negotiation process at the
       application layer SHALL reflect the application layer perception
       of the service to be provided.
       The application is totally unaware of the transport technology
       (IP headers, MPLS labels, etc.), and the actual methods used in
       the transport network generating transport overhead (IP tunnels,
       IPsec headers, authentication information, etc.).
       This means that e.g., a bandwidth specification indicates the
       application layer requirements to provide the given service, and
       therefore, not including transport headers.

   -   Traffic Information and Sensitivity Information.
       It SHALL be possible to describe separately two types of QoS
       related information : the Traffic Information and the
       Sensitivity Information.
       Per application QoS level/codec combination the Traffic
       Information specifies the amount and characteristics of
       resources that the transport network should provide, typically
       bandwidth, burstiness, maximum packet size, etc.
       The Sensitivity Information specifies the constraints for
       implementing the media component in the transport network with
       respect to the Traffic Information, typically delay, jitter,
       packet loss ratio, etc.

   -   QoS Parameters and QoS Classes.
       It SHALL be possible to convey QoS information related to the
       Sensitivity aspects using well-defined QoS Parameters (delay,
       packet loss, etc.), or using QoS Classes, seen as an abbreviated
       notation form of a well-defined set of QoS parameters.

   -   Standard QoS Classes and Private QoS Classes.
       QoS Classes MAY be defined as a set of standard values,


Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 6]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


       especially for well known media components like voice, and the
       associated codecs.
       Nevertheless, it SHALL be possible to exchange non-standard QoS
       information between two end-points , and therefore having a
       meaning only for those end-points. In other words, it SHALL be
       possible to define a standardised way of carrying non-standard
       QoS information.
       One concrete example of the Private QoS Classes is the relation
       between the end-user and the service provider, allowing the
       latter to sell a package of services, including globally a QoS
       level definition. In this case, the service provider is
       responsible of translating the Private QoS Class into a standard
       set of QoS information, expressed either as QoS Parameters or
       Standard QoS Classes.

3.3 Dependency requirements

   -   Independence of the session signalling protocol.
       The QoS description of the media components MUST not be related
       to any given session signalling protocol like e.g. SIP, SAP,
       RTSP, etc.

   -   Independence of the network technology.
       The QoS description of the media components MUST be independent
       of the actual technology used in the transport network.
       As an example, the QoS description negotiated at the application
       layer MUST not encompass transport technology specific
       information like a DiffServ Code Point (DSCP), or an MPLS Label.

   -   Relation with the transport network architecture.
       There SHALL not be any restriction about what architecture to
       use for network/transport resource signalling/provisioning at
       session initiation time. Additionally, the session signalling
       (together with the session description, and including the QoS
       information) MAY take a different network path than data in the
       user plane.

3.4 Performance requirements

   -   Session establishment delay.
       The impact of the QoS negotiation procedure on the performances
       of session establishment MUST be limited as much as possible.
       Therefore, new messages exchanges have to be avoided, if
       possible.

4. Exclusions

   -   Relation to bearer control protocols.
       The requirements expressed in this document do not interfere


Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 7]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


       with the development of protocols and mechanisms in the bearer
       transport layer, including QoS handling.
       The latters are covered by other IETF working groups, like e.g.
       the recently created NSIS group [9].

   -   Mapping on IP bearer parameters.
       The mapping between the QoS information negotiated at the
       application layer, and the IP QoS information to be provided to
       the transport layer is considered as part of the commercial
       strategy of the service provider or the application.
       Therefore, this mapping has to be considered out of the scope of
       these requirements.

   -   Terminal mobility.
       The Application QoS negotiation procedure is not related in
       anyway to the terminal mobility, in case of radio based access
       networks. The main reason is that handling of radio connection
       is a transport issue, and not an application issue; therefore,
       the radio segment is intended to be handled separately, using
       specific procedures.
       Do note however that a loss of radio, or a bad radio quality can
       imply the re-negotiation of the session description, and
       therefore, including the QoS aspects.

5. Conclusion

   This document described a set of requirements related to the end-to-
   end negotiation at the application layer, of the Quality of Service
   of each media component of a multi-media session.

   The QoS negotiation is performed before requesting the transport
   layer for bearer setup; therefore, the requirements described in
   this document do not overlap the scope of other IETF working groups,
   like e.g. NSIS.

   QoS is considered as part of the media component description;
   therefore, it should be possible to integrate the QoS negotiation
   procedure to already standardised procedures.

Security Considerations

   Generally speaking, the fact of negotiating the QoS characteristics
   at the application layer SHOULD not bring new security issues, as it
   is proposed that in case of SIP, the negotiation process SHALL be
   based on the existing Offer-Answer model. The ongoing work to secure
   the existing session description SHOULD cover the security aspects
   of the QoS negotiation at the application layer.




Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 8]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


   A man-in-the-middle attack could be possible if an entity in the
   middle of two end-users modify the QoS information being exchanged
   for negotiation purposes. Integrity protection can be used to avoid
   these type of attacks.

   An entity controlling resource reservation devices can be an easy
   target for a denial of service attack upon reception of
   unathenticated requests carrying QoS information. Any QoS
   information exchange SHOULD be authenticated.

References


                    

   1
   1  Bradner S, "The Internet Standard Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9,
      RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2..Bradner S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   3  Rosenberg J., Schulzrinne H., Handley M., Schoooler E., "SIP,
      session Inintiation Protocol", draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-09.txt,
      work in progress

   4  M. Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Perkins, "SDP: Session Description
      Protocol", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-new-10.txt, work in progress

   5  W. Marshall et al., "Integration of resource management and SIP",
      draft-ietf-sip-manyfolks-resource-07.txt, work in progress

   6  W. Marshall et al., "SIP Extensions for Media Authorisation",
      draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-06.txt, work in progress

   7  Kutscher, Ott, Bormann and Curcio, "Requirements for Session
      Description and Capability Negotiation", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdpng-
      req-01.txt, Expired draft.

   8  Rosenberg J., Schulzrinne H., "An offer/answer model with SDP",
      draft-rosenberg-mmusic-sdp-offer-answer-02.txt, Work in Progress.

   9  Brunner M., "Requirements for QoS Signaling Protocols",
      draft-ietf-nsis-req-02.txt, Work in Progress

   10 Bos L. et al., "SDPng extensions for Quality of Service
      Negotiation", draft-bos-mmusic-sdpng-qos-00.txt, Work in Progress






Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002               [Page 9]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002



                                                                        

   11 Guenkova, T. et al., "Efficient End-to-End QoS Signaling -
      concepts and features", draft-guenkova-mmusic-e2enp-sdpng-00.txt,
      work in progress

   12 Kutscher et al. "Session Description and Capability Negotiation",
      draft-ietf-mmusic-sdpng-04.txt, Work in progress.


Acknowledgments

   This document is a result of an ongoing discussion among people from
   Alcatel and Verison. We would hereby like to thank all the people
   who provided valuable comments and input that improved the quality
   of this document.

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

Author's Addresses

   Suresh Leroy
   Alcatel
   Francis Wellesplein 1
   2018 Antwerpen
   Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240 85 50
   Email: Suresh.Leroy@Alcatel.be


   Juan-Carlos Rojas
   Alcatel
   Le Mail
   44708 Orvault Cedex
   France
   Phone: +33 2 5178 1282
   Email: Juan-Carlos.Rojas@Alcatel.fr


   Matt Holdrege
   Verison
   223 Ximeno Avenue
   Long Beach, CA 90803
   U.S.A.
   Email: Matt.Holdrege@verizon.net

Full Copyright statement




Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002              [Page 10]

                 QoS negotiation at Application Layer        June 2002


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


























Rojas et al.           Expires - December 2002              [Page 11]


