Network Working Group                                       Terry Martin
Internet-Draft                                             M2networx INC
Expiration Date:                                              B. Hickman
                                                          Netcom Systems
                                                           November 2000

          Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls
              <draft-ietf-bmwg-firewall-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
  Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Table of Contents
 
   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
   2. Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   3. Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   4. Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
      4.1 Test Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
        4.1.1 Virtual Client/Servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
        4.1.2 Test Traffic Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
        4.1.3 DUT/SUT Traffic Flows  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
        4.1.4 Multiple Client/Server Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
        4.1.5 NAT(Network Address Translation) . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
        4.1.6 Rule Sets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
        4.1.7 Web Caching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
        4.1.8 Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5. Benchmarking Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
      5.1 Concurrent Connection Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7  
      5.2 Maximum Connection Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
      5.3 Connection Establishment Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
      5.4 Denial Of Service Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
      5.5 Single Application Goodput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
        5.5.1 FTP Goodput  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12



Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 1]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

        5.5.2 SMTP Goodput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
        5.5.3 HTTP Goodput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
      5.6 Concurrent Application Goodput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
      5.7 Illegal Traffic Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19  
      5.8 Latency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Appendices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   A. File Transfer Protocol(FTP)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
      A.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
      A.2 Connection Establishment/Teardown  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
      A.3 Object Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   B. Simple Mail Transfer Protocol(SMTP)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
      B.1 Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
      B.2 Connection Establishment/Teardown  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
      B.3 Object Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   C. HyperText Transfer Protocol(HTTP)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
      C.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
      C.2 Version Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
      C.3 Object Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   E. TCP establishment/teardown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   D. GoodPut Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   F. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

1. Introduction

   This document is intended to provide methodology for the benchmarking
   of firewalls. It provides methodologies for benchmarking forwarding 
   performance, connection performance, latency and filtering. In
   addition to defining the tests, this document also describes specific
   formats for reporting the results of the tests.

   A previous document, "Benchmarking Terminology for Firewall
   Performance" [1], defines many of the terms that are used in this
   document. The terminology document SHOULD be consulted before
   attempting to make use of this document.

2. Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

3. Scope

   Firewalls can provide a single point of defense between two
   networks--it protects one network from the other. Usually, a firewall
   protects the company's private network from the public or shared
   networks to which it is connected. A firewall can be as simple as a
   device that filters different packets or as complex as a group of
   devices providing solutions that offers combined packet filtering
   and application-level proxy or network translation services. This RFC
   will focus on developing benchmark testing of systems from an
   application perspective and will be developed independent of any
   firewall implementation. These tests will evaluate the ability of

Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 2]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

   firewall devices to control and manage applications services used
   by today's businesses such as applications like the World Wide Web,
   File transfer procedures and e-mail.

   Even through there are many different control methods of managing
   application level being implemented, this RFC does not condone or
   promote any aforementioned process or procedure.  It's goal is to
   present a procedure that will evaluate firewall performance
   independent of their implementation.

4. Test Setup

   Test configurations defined in this document will be confined to
   dual-homed and tri-homed as shown in figure 1 and figure 2
   respectively.

   Firewalls employing Dual-Homed configurations connect two networks.
   One interface of the firewall is attached to the unprotected network,
   typically the public network(i.e. - Internet). The other interface is
   connected to the protected network, typically the internal LAN. In
   the case of Dual-Homed configurations, servers which are made
   accessible to the public(Unprotected) network are attached to the
   private(Protected) network. 

      +----------+                                       +----------+
      |          |    |       +----------+        |      |          |
      | Servers/ |----|       |          |        |------| Servers/ |                        
      | Clients  |    |       |          |        |      | Clients  |        
      |          |    |-------|  DUT/SUT |--------|      |          |
      +----------+    |       |          |        |      +----------+
                      |       +----------+        |
           Protected  |                           | Unprotected
            Network                                   Network
                           Figure 1(Dual-Homed)

   Tri-homed[1] configurations employ a third segment called a DMZ. With
   tri-homed configurations, servers accessible to the public network
   are attached to the DMZ. Tri-Homed configurations offer additional
   security by separating server accessible to the public network from
   internal hosts.














Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 3]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000


      +----------+                                       +----------+
      |          |    |       +----------+        |      |          |
      | Clients  |----|       |          |        |------| Servers/ |                        
      |          |    |       |          |        |      | Clients  |        
      +----------+    |-------|  DUT/SUT |--------|      |          |
                      |       |          |        |      +----------+
                      |       +----------+        |
            Protected |            |              | Unprotected
             Network               |                   Network
                                   |
                                   |
                           -----------------
                                       |    DMZ
                                       |
                                       |
                                +-----------+
                                |           |
                                | Servers   |
                                |           |
                                +-----------+
      
                             Figure 2(Tri-Homed)

4.1 Test Considerations

4.1.1 Virtual Clients/Servers

   Since firewall testing may involve data sources which emulate multiple
   users or hosts, the methodology uses the terms virtual clients/servers.
   For these firewall tests, virtual clients/servers specify application
   layer entities which may not be associated with a unique physical
   interface. For example, four virtual clients may originate from the
   same data source[1]. The test report SHOULD indicate the number of
   virtual clients and virtual servers participating in the test on a per
   interface(See 4.1.3) basis.

   Need to include paragraph for synchronize start of test. Data sources
   MUST be synchronized to start initiating connections within a specified
   time of each other.
 
4.1.2 Test Traffic Requirements

   While the function of a firewall is to enforce access control
   policies, the criteria by which those policies are defined vary
   depending on the implementation. Firewalls may use network layer
   and/or, in many cases, application-layer criteria to make 
   access-control decisions. Therefore, the test equipment used to
   benchmark the DUT/SUT performance MUST consist of real clients and
   servers generating legitimate layer 7 conversations.

   The tests defined in this document use HTTP, FTP, and SMTP sessions
   for benchmarking the performance of the DUT/SUT. Other layer 7

Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 4]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000


   conversations are outside the scope of this document. See appendices
   for specific information regarding the transactions involved in
   establishing/tearing down connections as well as object formats
   for each of the aforementioned protocols.

4.1.3 DUT/SUT Traffic Flows

   Since the number of interfaces are not fixed, the traffic flows will
   be dependent upon the configuration used in benchmarking the DUT/SUT.
   Note that the term "traffic flows" is associated with client-to-
   server requests. 

   For Dual-Homed configurations, there are two unique traffic flows:
 
      Client	   Server
	------         ------
	Protected   -> Unprotected
	Unprotected -> Protected

   For Tri-Homed configurations, there are three unique traffic flows: 

      Client	   Server
	------         ------
	Protected ->   Unprotected
	Protected ->   DMZ
      Unprotected -> DMZ

4.1.4 Multiple Client/Server Testing

   One or more clients may target multiple servers for a given
   application. Each virtual client MUST initiate requests(Connection,
   file transfers, etc.) in a round-robin fashion. For example, if
   the test consisted of six virtual clients targeting three servers,
   the pattern would be as follows:


          Client		   Target Server(In order of request)

           #1	        	      1     2     3     1...
	     #2		      	2     3     1     2...
	     #3			      3     1     2     3...
	     #4			      1     2     3     1...
	     #5			      2     3     1     2...
	     #6			      3     1     2     3...

4.1.5 NAT(Network Address Translation)

   Most firewalls come with Network Address Translation(NAT)networks
   built in which translates internal host IP addresses attached to the
   protected network to a virtual IP address for communicating across the
   unprotected network(Internet). This involves additional processing
   on the part of the DUT/SUT and may impact on performance. Therefore,

Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 5]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000
 
   tests SHOULD be ran with NAT disabled and NAT enabled to determine the
   performance differentials. The test report SHOULD indicate whether NAT
   was enabled or disabled.

4.1.6 Rule Sets

   Rule sets[1] are a collection of access control policies that
   determines which packets the DUT/SUT will forward and which it will
   reject. The criteria by which these access control policies may be
   defined will vary depending on the capabilities of the DUT/SUT. The
   scope of this document is limited to how the rule sets should be
   applied when testing the DUT/SUT.

   The firewall monitors the incoming traffic and checks to make sure
   that the traffic meets one of the defined rules before allowing it to
   be forwarded. It is RECOMMENDED that a rule be entered for each
   host(i.e. - Virtual client). Although many firewalls permit groups
   of IP addresses to be defined for a given rule, tests SHOULD be
   performed with large rule sets, which are more stressful to the
   DUT/SUT.

   The DUT/SUT SHOULD be configured to denies access to all traffic which
   was not previously defined in the rule set.

4.8 Web Caching

   Some firewalls include caching agents in order to reduce network 
   load. When making a request through a caching agent, the caching
   agent attempts to service the response from its internal resources.
   The cache itself saves responses it receives, such as responses for
   HTTP GET requests. The report SHOULD indicate whether web caching
   was enabled or disabled on the DUT/SUT. The test report SHOULD
   indicate whether NAT was enabled or disabled. 

4.9 Authentication

  Access control may involve authentication processes such as user,
  client or session authentication. Authentication is usually performed
  by devices external to the firewall itself, such as an authentication
  servers and may add to the latency of the system. Any authentication
  processes MUST be included as part of connection setup process.













Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 6]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

5. Benchmarking Tests

5.1 Concurrent Connection Capacity

5.1.1 Objective

   To determine the maximum number of concurrent connections supported
   by the DUT/SUT, as defined in RFC2647[1]. This test will employ a
   step search algorithm to obtain the maximum number of concurrent
   FTP,HTTP or SMTP connections the DUT/SUT can maintain.  
 
5.1.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each parameters is
   configured with the following considerations.

   Connection Attempt Rate - The rate at which new connection requests
   are attempted. The rate SHOULD be set lower than maximum rate at
   which the DUT/SUT can accept new connection requests.

   Connection Step count - Defines the number of additional connections
   attempted for each iteration of the step search algorithm.

   Object/Message - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred across
   each connection. 

5.1.3 Procedure

   Each virtual client will attempt to establish connections to their
   target server(s) at a fixed rate in a round robin fashion. Each
   iteration will involve the virtual clients attempting to establish a
   fixed number of additional connections. This search algorithm will
   be repeated until either:

      - One or more of the additional connection attempts fail to
        complete
      - One or more of the previously established connections failed.

   Data transfers SHOULD be performed on each connection after the
   given connection is established. Data transfers MUST be performed on
   all connections after all of the addition connection have been
   established.

   When benchmarking with FTP, virtual clients will issue NOOP command's
   to validate that work can be performed across each connection. The
   virtual clients must receive a Command Successful reply from the
   target server in order to be considered a valid connection.







Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 7]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls       June 2000

   When benchmarking with other applications such as HTTP or SMTP,
   validation of the connection will be performed by initiating
   object/message transfers. All bytes associated with the object/message
   transfers MUST be received by the requesting virtual client in order
   to be considered a valid connection.   

5.1.5 Measurements

   Total number of connections that were successfully completed in a
   step. Test equipment MUST be able to track each connection to verify
   all required transaction between the virtual client and server
   completed successfully. This includes successful completion of both
   the command sequences and exchanging of any data across each of those
   connections. 

5.1.6 Reporting Format

   Maximum concurrent connections reported MUST be the aggregate number
   of connections completed for the last successful iteration. Report
   SHOULD also include:

      - Connection Attempt Rate.
	- Connection Step Count.

   A log file MAY be generated which includes for each step iteration:

	- Pass/Fail Status.
	- Total connections established.
	- Number of previously established connections dropped.
	- Number of the additional connections that failed to complete.


5.2 Maximum Connection Setup Rate

5.2.1 Objective

   To determine the maximum connection rate which can be supported
   through the DUT/SUT. As with the Concurrent Connection Capacity test,
   FTP,HTTP and SMTP sessions will be used to determine this metric.

5.2.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each test parameter is
   configured with the following considerations.
   
   Initial Attempt Rate - The rate at which the initial connection
   requests are attempted.







Martin, Hickman                                                 [Page 8]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls       June 2000


   Number of Connections - Defines the number of connections that must
   be established. The number MUST be between the number of
   participating virtual clients and the maximum number supported by the
   DUT/SUT. It is RECOMMENDED not to exceed the concurrent connection
   capacity found in section 5.1. The connection rate may vary depending
   on the number of connections attempted.

   Object/Message - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred across
   each connection.

5.2.3 Procedure

   An iterative search algorithm will be used to determine the maximum
   connection rate. This test iterates through different connection rates
   with a fixed number of connections attempted by the virtual clients to
   their associated server(s).

   Each iteration will use the same connection establishment and
   connection validation algorithms defined in the concurrent capacity
   test(See 5.1). After each iteration, the tester MUST close all
   connections prior to continuing to the next iteration.

5.2.4 Measurements

   The highest connection rate, in connections per second, for which
   all connections completed successfully. Test equipment MUST be able
   to track each connection to verify all required transaction between
   the virtual client and server completed successfully. This includes
   successful completion of both the command sequences and exchanging
   of any data across each of those connections. 

5.2.5 Reporting Format

   The maximum connection rate reported MUST be the maximum rate for
   which all connections successfully completed. 

   A log file MAY be generated which includes for each step iteration:

	- Pass/Fail Status.
	- Connection attempt rate.
	- Number of the connections that failed to complete.
	- Total connections established.











Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 9]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

5.3 Connection Establishment Time

5.3.1 Objective

   To characterize the connection establishment time[1] through or with
   the DUT/SUT as a function of the number of open connections.

5.3.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each parameters is
   configured with the following considerations.

   Connection Attempt Rate - The rate at which new connection requests
   are attempted. The rate SHOULD be set lower than maximum rate at
   which the DUT/SUT can accept new connection requests.

   Connection Step count - Defines the number of additional connections
   attempted for each iteration of the step algorithm.

   Object/Message - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred across
   each connection.


5.3.3 Procedure

   The test will use the same algorithm as defined in the Concurrent
   Capacity Test. This includes both the connection establishment and
   validation of each connection by transferring data across each
   connection.

5.3.4 Measurement

   For each iteration, the tester MUST measure the Min/Avg/Max connection
   times for the additional connections. It is RECOMMENDED that in addition
   to the application layer, the tester include measurements at the lower
   layer protocols(i.e. - TCP, ATM) when applicable. For each of the
   protocols which the tester is measuring, the connection establishment
   time shall consist of all transactions required to enable data to be
   transferred across the given connection.

   For example, FTP requires the user to login prior to being able to get
   files, view directories and so forth. Connection establishment times
   MUST include all of these transactions. In the case of TCP, the
   connection establishment time would consist of the three-way handshake
   between the two hosts(See Appendix D).
   
5.3.5 Reporting Format

  Graph of the min/avg/maximum connection establishment times versus the
  number of open connections. The report MUST identify the layer for which
  the measurement was taken(i.e. - Application, transport, etc).

   

Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 10]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000
   
5.4 Denial Of Service Handling  

5.4.1 Objective

   To determine the effect of a denial of service attack on connection
   establishment rates through the DUT/SUT. The Denial Of Service Handling
   test should be ran after obtaining baseline measurements from section
   5.2. 

   When a normal TCP connection starts, a destination host receives a SYN
   (synchronize/start)packet from a source host and sends back a SYN ACK
   (synchronize acknowledge). The destination host must then hear an ACK
   (acknowledge) of the SYN ACK before the connection is established. The
   TCP SYN attack exploits this design by having an attacking source host
   generate TCP SYN packets with random source addresses towards a victim
   host, thereby consuming that hosts resources.

   Some firewalls employ one or more mechanisms to guard against SYN
   attacks. If such mechanisms exist on the DUT/SUT, tests SHOULD be ran
   with these mechanisms enabled to determine how well the DUT/SUT can
   maintain the baseline connection rates determined in section 5.2
   under such attacks.   

5.4.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each parameter is configured
   with the following considerations.
   
   Initial Attempt Rate - The rate at which the initial connection
   requests are attempted.

   Number of Connections - Defines the number of connections that must
   be established. The number MUST be between the number of
   participating clients and the maximum number supported by the
   DUT/SUT. It is RECOMMENDED not to exceed the concurrent connection
   capacity found in section 5.1.

   SYN Attack Rate - Defines the rate at which the server(s) are targeted
   with TCP SYN packets.  

5.4.3 Procedure

   This test uses the same procedure as defined in the maximum connection
   setup rate, with the addition of TCP SYN packets targeting the
   server(s) IP address or NAT proxy address.

   The tester originating the TCP SYN attack MUST be attached to the
   Unprotected network. In addition, the tester MUST not respond to the
   SYN ACK packets sent by target server in response to the SYN packet.





Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 11]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

5.4.4 Measurements

   The highest connection rate, in connections per second, for which
   all legitimate connections completed successfully. Test equipment
   MUST be able to track each connection to verify all required
   transaction between the virtual client and server completed
   successfully. This includes successful completion of both the command
   sequences and exchanging of any data across each of those connections.

   In addition, the tester SHOULD track SYN packets associated with the
   SYN attack which the DUT/SUT forwards on the protected or DMZ
   interface(s).

5.4.5 Reporting Format

   The maximum connection rate reported MUST be the maximum rate for
   which all connections successfully completed. The report SHOULD
   include what percentage of TCP SYN packets were forwarded by the
   DUT/SUT.

   A log file MAY be generated which includes for each step iteration:

	- Pass/Fail Status.
	- Connection attempt rate.
	- Number of the connections that failed to complete.
	- Total connections established.

5.5 Single Application Goodput

   This section defined the procedures for base lining the Goodput[1] of the
   DUT/SUT for FTP, HTTP and SMTP traffic. 

5.5.1 FTP Goodput

5.5.1.1 Objective

   The File Transfer Protocol is a common application used by companies
   to transfer files from one device to another.  Evaluating FTP Goodput
   will allow individuals to measure how much successful traffic has
   been forwarded by the DUT/SUT.

5.5.1.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each parameter is configured
   with the following considerations.

   Number of Connections - Defines the number of connections to be 
   opened for transferring data objects. Number MUST be equal or 
   greater than the number of virtual clients participating in the
   test. The number SHOULD be a multiple of the virtual client
   participating in the test.



Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 12]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

   Connection Rate - Defines the rate at which connections are established. 
    
   Object Size - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred across each
   connection.

5.5.1.3 Procedure

   Each virtual client will establish a FTP connection to its respective
   server(s) in a round robin fashion at the connection rate. The
   transaction involved in establishing the FTP connection should follow
   the procedure defined in Appendix A. 

   After the login process has been completed, the virtual client will
   initiate a file transfer by issuing a "Get" command. The "Get"
   command will target a predefined file of Object Size bytes.
   
   Once the file transfer has completed, the virtual client will close
   the FTP connection by issuing the QUIT command. 

5.5.1.4 Measurement

   The Goodput for each interface of the DUT/SUT MUST be measured. See
   appendix D for details in regards to measuring the Goodput of the
   DUT/SUT. Only file transfers which have been completed are to be
   included in the Goodput measurements.

  The average transaction time each object successfully transferred MAY
   be measured. The start time will begin when the time the "Get"
   commands is initiated and end at the time when the client receives
   an acknowledgment from the server that file transfer has completed.

5.5.1.5 Reporting Format

   The Goodput for each interface of the DUT/SUT MUST be reported in
   bits per second. This will be the aggregate of session Goodput's
   measured for a given interface.

   Failure analysis:

      The report SHOULD include the percentage of connections that
      failed. This includes:

	  - Connections which failed to establish
	  - Connections which failed to complete the object transfer

   Transaction Processing analysis:
   
      The report SHOULD include average transaction time in transactions
      per second.

   The report SHOULD also include the object size(Bytes) being transferred.



Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 13]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

5.5.2 SMTP Goodput

5.5.2.1 Objective

   Another application commonly in use today is the mail transfer. One
   the common transport mechanisms for mail messages is the Simple Mail
   Transfer Protocol(SMTP). The SMTP Goodput will allow individuals to
   measure how much successful SMTP traffic has been forwarded by the
   DUT/SUT.

5.5.2.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each parameter is
   configured with the following considerations.

   Number of Connections - Defines the number of connections to be 
   opened for transferring data objects. Number MUST be equal or 
   greater than the number of virtual clients participating in the
   test. The number SHOULD be a multiple of the virtual client
   participating in the test.

   Connection Rate - Defines the rate at which connections are
   attempted. 

   Message Size - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred across
   each connection.

5.5.2.3 Procedure

   Each virtual client will establish a SMTP connection to its
   respective server(s) in a round robin fashion at the connection rate.
   The transaction involved in establishing the SMTP connection should
   follow the procedure defined in Appendix B.

   After the greeting exchanges have been completed, the client will
   initiate the transfer of the message by initiating the MAIL command.
   The client will then send the predefined message of Object Size.

   Once the message has been acknowledged as being received by the
   server, the virtual client will then close the connection.
   
5.5.2.4 Measurement

   The Goodput for each interface of the DUT/SUT MUST be measured. See
   appendix D for details in regards to measuring the Goodput of the
   DUT/SUT. Only message transfers which have been completed are to be
   included in the Goodput measurements.

   The average transaction time for each message transferred MAY be
   measured. The start time will begin when the time the "MAIL" command
   is initiated and end at the time when the client receives an 
   acknowledgment from the server that the message has been received.


Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 14]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

5.5.2.5 Reporting Format

   Goodput analysis:

      The Goodput for each interface of the DUT/SUT MUST be reported in
      bits per second. This will be the aggregate of session Goodput's
      measured for a given interface.

   Failure analysis:

      The report SHOULD include the percentage of connections that
      failed. This includes:

	  - Connections which failed to establish
	  - Connections which failed to complete the object transfer

   Transaction Processing analysis:
   
      The report SHOULD include average transaction time in transactions
      per second.

   The report SHOULD also include the object size(Bytes) being transferred.

5.5.3 HTTP Goodput Goodput

5.5.3.1 Objective

   Another common application is the World Wide Web (WWW) application
   that can access documents over the Internet. This application uses
   the Hypertext Transfer Control Protocol (HTTP) to copy information
   from one system to another.

   HTTP Goodput measurement is actually determined by evaluating the 
   Forwarding rate of packets.  This is based on measuring only data
   that has successfully been forwarded to the destination interface.

   When benchmarking the performance of the DUT/SUT, consideration of
   the HTTP version being used must be taken into account. Appendix C
   of this document discusses enhancements to the HTTP protocol which
   may impact performance results.

5.5.3.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each variable is 
   configured with the following considerations.

   Number of Connections - Defines the number of HTTP connections
   to be opened for transferring data objects. Number MUST be equal or 
   greater than the number of virtual clients participating in the
   test. The number SHOULD be a multiple of the virtual client
   participating in the test.



Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 15]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

   Connection Rate - Defines the rate at which connections are
   attempted. 

   Object Size - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred
   across each connection. 

5.5.3.3 HTTP Procedure

   For the HTTP Goodput tests, it is RECOMMENDED to determine which
   version of HTTP the DUT/SUT has implemented and use the same
   version for the test. To determine the version of HTTP, the user
   documentation of the DUT/SUT SHOULD be consulted.

   Each client will attempt to establish HTTP connection's to their
   respective servers a user defined rate. The clients will attach to
   the servers using either the servers IP address or NAT proxy
   address.

   After the client has established the connection with the server,
   the client will initiate GET command(s) to retrieve predefined
   web page(s).

   When employing HTTP/1.0 in benchmarking the performance of the
   DUT/SUT, only one object will be retrieved for each of the defined
   object sizes. After the object has been transferred, the connection
   should then be torn down. When defining multiple objects, object
   transfers must be completed and the connections closed for all
   of the participating clients prior testing the next object size.
   This process is repeated until all of the defined objects are
   tested.

   When employing HTTP/1.1, all objects defined by the user will
   be requested with a GET request over the same connection. The
   connection should then be torn down after all of the objects
   have been transferred.

5.5.3.4 Measurement

   The Goodput for each of the objects sizes transferred MUST be
   measured. See appendix D for details in regards to measuring the
   Goodput of the DUT/SUT. Only objects which have been successfully
   acknowledged by the server are to be included in the Goodput
   measurements.

   The transaction times for each object transferred MUST measured.
   The transaction connection time starts when the connection is
   made and will end when the web pages is completely mapped  on the
   virtual client (when the client sends an acknowledgment packet is
   sent from the client).





Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 16]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

5.5.3.5 Reporting Format

   Goodput analysis:

      The Goodput for each interface of the DUT/SUT MUST be reported in
      bits per second. This will be the aggregate of session Goodput's
      measured for a given interface.

   Failure analysis:

      The report SHOULD include the percentage of connections that
      failed. This includes:

	  - Connections which failed to establish
	  - Connections which failed to complete the object transfer

   Transaction Processing analysis:
   
      The report SHOULD include average transaction time in transactions
      per second.

   The report SHOULD also include the object size(Bytes) being transferred.

   Version Information

      Report MUST include the version of HTTP used for the test. In
      addition, if the HTTP/1.1 is used, the number of concurrent GET's 
      allowable(Pipelining) SHOULD be reported.

5.6 Concurrent Application Goodput

5.6.1 Objective

   To determine the Goodput of the DUT/SUT when offering a mix of FTP,
   SMTP and HTTP traffic flows. Real world traffic does not consist
   of a single protocol, but a mix of different applications. This
   test will allow an individual to determine how well the DUT/SUT
   handles a mix of applications by comparing the results to the
   individual baseline measurements. 

5.6.2 Setup Parameters

   The following parameters MUST be defined. Each variable is 
   configured with the following considerations.

   Number of Connections - Defines the aggregate number of connections
   to be opened for transferring data/message objects. Number MUST be
   equal to or greater than the number of virtual clients participating
   in the test. The number SHOULD be a multiple of the virtual client
   participating in the test.   




Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 17]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

   Connection Rate - Defines the rate at which connections attempts are 
   opened. Number MUST be evenly divided among all of the virtual
   clients participating in the test.

   Object/Message Size - Defines the number of bytes to be transferred
   across each connection. RECOMMENDED message sizes still needs to be
   determined.

   At a minimum, at least one of the following parameters MUST be
   defined. In addition, the cumulative percentage all the defined
   percentages MUST equal 100%.


   FTP Percentage - Defines the percentage of traffic connections
   which are to consist of FTP file transfers.
 
   SMTP Percentage - Defines the percentage of traffic connections
   which are to consist of SMTP Message transfers.

   HTTP Percentage - Defines the percentage of traffic connections
   which are to consist of HTTP GET requests.
    
5.6.3 Procedure

   This test will run each of the single application Goodput tests,
   for which there is a defined percentage, concurrently. For each
   of the defined traffic types, the connection establishment,
   data/message transfer and teardown procedures will be the same
   as defined in the individual tests.

5.6.4 Measurements

   As with the individual tests, the Goodput for each of the defined
   traffic types MUST be measured. See appendix D for details in
   regards to measuring the Goodput of the DUT/SUT. Only messages/data
   which have been successfully acknowledged as being transferred are
   to be included in the Goodput measurements.
 
   The transaction times for each of the defined applications MUST be
   measured. See the appropriate single application Goodput test for
   the specifics of measuring the transaction times for each of the
   defined traffic types.

5.6.5 Reporting Format

   Goodput analysis:
      Reporting SHOULD include a graph of the number of connections
      versus the measured Goodput in Mbps for each of the defined
      traffic types(FTP, SMTP, HTTP).
       
   Failure analysis:	
      Reporting should include a graph of number of connections versus
      percent success for each of the defined traffic types.

Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 18]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

   Transaction Processing analysis:
      Reporting should include a graph of number of virtual connections
      versus average transaction for each of the defined traffic types.

5.7 Illegal Traffic Handling

   To determine the behavior of the DUT/SUT when presented with a 
   combination of both legal and Illegal traffic.

5.7.1 Procedure

     Still Needs to be determined

5.7.2 Measurements

     Still Needs to be determined

5.7.3 Reporting Format

     Still Needs to be determined

5.8 Latency

   Determine the latency of application layer data through the DUT/SUT.

5.8.1 Procedure

   Still Needs to be determined

5.8.2 Measurements

   Still needs to be determined.

5.8.3 Reporting format

   Still needs to be determined.

APPENDICES

APPENDIX A: FTP(File Transfer Protocol)

A.1 Introduction

   The FTP protocol was designed to be operated by interactive end users
   or application programs. The communication protocol to transport this
   service is TCP. The core functions of this application enable users
   to copy files between systems, view directory listings and perform
   house keeping chores - such as renaming, deleting and copying files.
   Unlike other protocols, FTP uses two connections. One connection,
   called the control connection, is used to pass commands between
   the client and the server. The other, called the data connection, is  
   used to transfer the actual data(Files, directory lists, etc.).


Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 19]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

A.2 Connection Establishment/Teardown(Control)

   FTP control connections are established by issuing OPEN command
   targeting either the URL or a specific IP address. Since the
   methodology does not include DNS servers, OPEN commands should
   target specific IP address of target server. A TCP connection
   will be established between the client and target server. 

   The client will then begin the login process. When logging in,
   it is RECOMMENDED to perform the test using Anonymous FTP Login
   and should use the following syntax:

		User ID: Anonymous
		Password:  will correspond to the System ID
    (client1_1@test.net through client 1_8@test.net)

   Once a successful login acknowledgment is received from the server,
   the client may then initiate a file transfer. After all transfer
   operations have been completed, the FTP connection may be closed by
   issuing a QUIT command.

A.3 Data Connection

   The data connection is established each time the user requests a file
   transfer and torn down when the transfer is completed. FTP supports
   two modes of operation, namely normal mode and passive mode, which
   determine who initiates the data connection. In normal mode
   operation, the server initiates the data connection, targeting a
   predefined PortID specified in the PORT command. In passive mode, the
   client initiates the data connection, targeting the PortID returned
   in response to the PASV Command. It is RECOMMENDED to perform the
   tests in normal mode operation.

   File transfers are initiated by using the "Get" or "Put" command and
   specifying the desired filename. The tests defined in this document
   will use the "Get" command to initiate file transfers from the target
   server to the client.

A.4 Object Format    

   Need to define the object format.













Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 20]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

APPENDIX B: SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)

B.1 Introduction

   The SMTP defines a simple straight forward way to move messages
   between hosts. There are two roles in the SMTP protocol, one is the
   sender and one is the receiver.  The sender acts like a client and
   establishes a TCP connection with the receiver which acts like a
   server. The transactions defined in this section will use the terms
   client and server in place of sender and receiver.

B.2 Connection Establishment/Teardown

   Each connection involves a connection greeting between the
   sender(Client) and receiver(Server). The syntax used to identify each
    other's hostnames during this greeting exchange SHOULD be: 

		"SMTPRcv_<Virtual_Server>.com"
		"SMTPSender_<Virtual Client>.com"

            where <Virtual_Client> and <Virtual_Server> represent a
            unique virtual number for the client and server
            respectively.

   The basic transactions in moving mail between two hosts involve three
   basic steps which are outlined below. These are:

	1) Client issuing a MAIL command identifying the message originator
         for that session. Syntax used to identify the originator SHOULD
         be as follows:

		connection1,2,3...@hostname

	2) Client issues an RCPT command identifying the recipient of the
         message for that session. Syntax used to identify the recipient
         of the message SHOULD be as follows:

		reciever1,2,3...@hostname

	3) Client issues a DATA command. After receiving the
         acknowledgment from the server, the client will then transfer
         the message which MUST include a line with a period to
         indicate to the server the end of the message. Once the end of
         message is received by the server, it will acknowledge the end
         of message.


   The client may initiate another message transfer or close the session
   by initiating the QUIT command.





Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 21]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000

B.3 Message Format

   As Internet e-mail has evolved, SMTP extensions have been added to
   support both audio and video message transfers. For these firewall
   tests, messages SHOULD consist of plain text ASCII.

APPENDIX C: HTTP(HyperText Transfer Protocol)

C.1 Introduction

   As HTTP has evolved over the years, changes to the protocol have
   occurred to both fix problems of previous versions as well as improve
   performance. The most common versions in use today are HTTP/1.0 and
   HTTP/1.1 and are and are discussed below.

C.2 Version Considerations

   HTTP/1.1 was approved by the WWW Consortium in July 1999 as an IETF
   Draft Standard. This is a formal recognition of the fact that all
   known technical issues have been resolved in the specification which
   was brought out in June 1997. HTTP/1.1 is also downward compatible
   with  HTTP/1.0.  Both protocols on the popular browsers in use today.
   The following is a list of features that are offered in HTTP 1.1 that
   are not in HTTP 1.0.

   - Persistent connections and pipelining

   Though both use TCP for data transfer, but differ in the way it is
   used, with the later version being more efficient. Once a connection
   is opened, it is not closed until the HTML document and all objects
   referred by it are downloaded. This technique is called persistent
   connection. By serving multiple requests on the same TCP segment,
   many control packets (which are not part of actual data transfer)
   are avoided. The technique of containing multiple requests and
   responses within the same TCP segment over a persistent connection
   is called pipelining. 

   - Data compression
  
   HTTP/1.1 provides for compression of documents before file transfer.
   Since most other objects like images and binaries are already
   compressed, this feature applies only to HTML and plain text
   documents. 

  - Range request and validation

   Bandwidth saving measure is the introduction of two new fields in
   an HTTP request header, viz. If-Modified-Since: and If-Unmodified-
   Since:. The significance of this feature is that if a browser
   identifies a file in its cache, it needn't reload it unless it has
   changed since the last time it was used. 



Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 22]
INTERNET-DRAFT    Benchmarking Methodology for Firewalls   November 2000


   - Support for multiple hosts

   It is common for an ISP to host more than one Web site on a single
   server. In such a case, each domain requires its own IP address.

C.3 Object Format

   Object SHOULD be an HTML formatted object. 


Append D. GOODPUT Measurements.


   The Goodput will measure the number of bits per second forwarded by
   the DUT/SUT and will be referenced to the application level data. The
   formula for determining Goodput of the DUT/SUT is as follows:
   

                               ObjectSize(Bytes) * 8 
      Goodput(Bits/Sec) =      Transfer Time(Seconds)


   Transfer Time starts when the first bit of the object/message is
   received at the destination port of the tester. The transfer time ends
   when the last bit of the object/message is received at the destination
   port of the tester.



Appendix E.  References

  [1] Newman, "Benchmarking Terminology for Firewall Devices", RFC 2647,
           February 1998.

  [2] J. Postel, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 821, August 1982.

  [3] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H Frystyk, T. Berners, "Hypertext
           Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", January 1997

  [4] J. Postel, J. Reynolds, "File Transfer Protocol(FTP)", October 1985













Martin, Hickman                                                [Page 23]

