


Network Working Group                                           Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft                                                    google
Intended status: Standards Track                                 Mar 22, 2021
Expires: Sept 22,2021

			Parallel distributed information retrieval services
                       draft-pradeepkumarxplorer-pdirsd-00

Abstract

   To have a pdirsd daemon with http servers

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 22, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Freed                  Expires September 19, 2021               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              WildCard Extensions                March 2021


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

Parellel Distributed Information retrieval services
Rudimentary idea first phase
I propose Parallel Dsitributed Information retrieval services where the index is
not with just one company like google or yahoo.
Each access of something results in being indexed or upgraded in rank to be
retrieved.
So if someone access dhyanayoga.info/Californian.html it would be
automatically indexed.
Right now if i am the author of the file i have to manually use some indexing
software given by google or yahoo. I have not done it. Most websites
google.com yahoo.com are not providing easy indexers as well.
So each Webserver would have a PDIRSD daemon or software in the website
If i access https://goodspaguide.co.uk/features/balinese-massage-explained
then my webserver indexes it.
Each PDIRSD webserver would have also a indexer in the website
So if my website is walkonyourtoes.com it would have an indexer
walkonyourtoes/indexer
So i am in Dalung and accessing a URL in canada it might be a transient file,
so dalung would have some list of PDIRSD webservers, the nearest to my client
browser would index the file or information in Canada that i accessed
So the WWW would have many PDISRD servers and a search invokation from
your desktop or smart fone screen would use some algorithm to search for
some PDISRD servers in the WWW
and give you the result.

There has to be way to know what URLS are accessed most using this
and there can be a topsites.com that shows most accessed URls as well.
This can be like a standard to have the daemon in all the WWW servers.



   

Freed                  Expires September 22, 2021               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              WildCard Extensions 		March 2021


 
Author's Address

   Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
   Google

   Email: pradeepan88@hotmail.com













































Freed                  Expires September 16, 2021            