    

 
 
 
 
Internet Engineering Task Force                             Mike Pierce
INTERNET DRAFT                                                    Artel
Expires August, 2002
                                                               Don Choi
                                                                   DISA

                                                          February 2002



   Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice over IP


            draft-pierce-sipping-assured-service-01.txt


Status of This Memo 
   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet Drafts. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed a
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.text 
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   
Copyright Notice
   
   Copyright (c) Internet Society 2002.  All rights reserved. 
   Reproduction or translation of the complete documents, but not of
   extracts, including this notice, is freely permitted. 
   



Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 1]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


Abstract
   
   Assured Service refers to the set of capabilities used to ensure that
   mission critical communications are setup and remain connected. This
   memo describes the requirements for such capabilities in support of
   specific networks such as those used by the US military and
   government.
   


Table of Contents
   
   
   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.   High Level Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.   Functional Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.1  Precedence Level Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.2  Authentication/Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.3  Preferential Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.4  Diversion if Not Answered  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.5  Notifications to Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.7  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure  . . . . 7
   5.   Current Situation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.1  IPv4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.2  DiffServ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.3  IntServ/RSVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.4  MPLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   5.5  SIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.   Possible Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.1  Precedence Level Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.2  Authentication/Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.2.1  Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.2.2  Authentication Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.2.3  Authorization Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.3  Preferential Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.4  Diversion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.5  Notification to Preempted Party  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.7  Protection of Signaling Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.1  Authentication/authorization of User Access  . . . . . . . . 14
   7.2  Security of Signaling Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.3  Security of Routing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16


Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 2]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   10.  Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   ANNEX A Example Mapping of Call Precedence Levels
           to DiffServ Codepoints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   A.1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   A.2 Packet Forwarding Treatment Using DiffServ  . . . . . . . . . 18
   A.3 Packet Forwarding Treatment without DiffServ  . . . . . . . . 19
   Annex B Example Call Preferential Treatment Using
           Over Committing andPacket Discard . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Full Copyright Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   
   
1.   Introduction
   
   Throughout many decades of evolution of the telephony network and its
   supporting protocols, there has been a need to provide special
   services to a limited subset of the users and calls within a network
   or domain in order to ensure completion of important calls. Examples
   of this need have been in support of emergency traffic for natural
   disasters, network restoration traffic, and high priority traffic in
   a military network. Provision of the required capabilities with the
   signaling protocols and within the switching systems has been defined
   in a number of national and international standards, most notably a
   service referred to as Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption as
   defined in an American National Standard [T1.619] in the US and in
   corresponding ITU-T Recommendations [I.255.3, Q.735.3, and Q.955.3].
   In addition, a service called High Probability of Completion (HPC)
   was defined in [T1.631] and, most recently, two ITU-T Recommendations
   define the requirements for the International Emergency Preference
   Scheme (IEPS) [E.106] and the International Emergency Multimedia
   Service (IEMS) [F.706].
   
   Other drafts submitted to the IETF have addressed aspects of MLPP and
   IEPS. Some of these are [Polk1], which discusses some of the possible
   solutions for MLPP within IP; [Folts], which presents the functional
   requirements, features, and objectives for the Emergency
   Telecommunications Service (ETS); and [Carlberg], which provides a
   framework for IEPS for telephony over IP.
   
   MLPP was the solution to providing Assured Service capabilities
   within the circuit switched environment. It is essential that
   equivalent Assured Service capabilities are defined and implemented
   for the packet-based, connectionless environment of the Internet, and
   specifically SIP. Without these capabilities, SIP can not be used for
   those applications which require such capabilities, and is less than
   optimal for many other uses.
   
   This memo builds on these references and identifies the specific


Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 3]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   requirements for Assured Service capabilities in support of these
   specific types of environments.  The term "Assured Service" is used
   to refer to the required capabilities, rather than the previous terms
   of MLPP or IEPS, since the envisioned set of capabilities and
   protocols to achieve them are not expected to be the same as those
   previously defined services.
   
   Although these requirements are derived from previous military and
   government applications, many of the same requirements and
   capabilities may be applied for non-military or government networks,
   for example, in support of commercial network restoration efforts. A
   presentation in the TEWG at London [Ash] demonstrated real-life
   situations from the past in which total network failures required
   extensive efforts, presumably including communication via other
   unaffected networks, to bring the affected network back on line. If
   one considered a situation in which the very network which had failed
   was needed to carry the network management traffic required to get it
   back on line, it would be hard to imagine how it could ever be
   brought back up in the face of overwhelming customer attempts.
   Capabilities would be required to give priority to the network
   management traffic, even to the extent of blocking all non-emergency
   traffic for a period of time.
   
   
2.   Background
   
   In the circuit switched environment, specific circuits or channels
   were used for each call. These were typically 64 kbit/s channels
   which were a part of a TDM transmission structure. Later developments
   used packet/cell based transport instead of dedicated 64 kbit/s
   channels, however, the effect was the same. There was still a
   dedicated transport capacity assigned for each call.
   
   Assured Service in the circuit switched environment may be provided
   by one or more of the following techniques. Note that the
   capabilities included within IEPS [E.106], are included here for
   reference but not dealt with further in this memo. They are further
   dealt with in [Folts]:
   
      - Giving priority to return of dial tone (IEPS).
   
      - Marking of signaling messages for better handling, for example,
        being last to be dropped in case of congestion in the signaling
        network (HPC).
   
      - Extra routing possibilities for higher priority calls. (IEPS)
   
      - Exemption from restrictive management controls (IEPS) such as

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 4]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


        hard-to-reach codes and code gapping.
   
      - Reservation of specific facilities (trunks) for higher priority
        traffic (IEPS).
   
      - Higher priority calls may preempt existing lower priority calls,
        causing the network to release the lower priority call to free
        up resources for immediate reuse by the higher priority call
       (MLPP).
   
   Identification of traffic authorized to use one or more of these
   techniques may be via the following methods:
   
      - Calls placed from physical lines or devices authorized for its
        use
   
      - Calls placed to specific telephone numbers or blocks of numbers
   
      - Entry of a special ID code and PIN from any telephone device
   
   
3.   High Level Requirements
   
   While the existing requirements and capabilities have been developed
   with the circuit switched environment in mind, many are directly
   applicable to the packet environment and specifically the Voice over
   IP application being defined using SIP. Some of the capabilities need
   to be adapted or modified for application in the packet mode
   environment. In addition, there will likely be new techniques which
   can be defined specifically for the SIP case.
   
   At a high level, the Assured Service requirements can be stated as
   the need to ensure that mission critical voice-mode calls get set up
   and remain connected.
   
   
4.   Functional Requirements
   
   The functional requirements for Assured Service being detailed here
   are specifically those needed to support the US government
   requirements, primarily for the military environment. This memo
   concentrates on those portions mentioned in Section 2 which are
   derived from the requirements for MLPP as defined in [T1.619].
   
   The basic requirements can be defined as follows;
   
4.1  Precedence Level Marking
   

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 5]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   It must be possible for the originator to select and signal one of
   five precedence levels for a call, with the call defaulting to the
   lowest if none is specified. It must be possible to carry this call
   associated precedence level though the IP network. It must be
   possible to deliver the originally signaled precedence level to the
   called party.
   
   
4.2  Authentication/Authorization
   
   It must be possible to verify that the calling party is authorized to
   use the Assured Service and the requested value and to take the
   appropriate action if the calling party attempts to use a higher
   level. The preferred action is to reject the call, and send an
   indication of the reason to the caller.
   
4.3  Preferential Treatment
   
   It must be possible to provide preferential treatment to higher
   precedence calls in relation to lower precedence calls. Examples of
   preferential treatments are:
   
      - reservation of network resources for precedence calls
   
      - usage of higher Call Acceptance limits for higher precedence
        calls
   
      - preferential queuing of signaling messages based on precedence
        level
   
      - preferential queuing of user data packets based on precedence
        level
   
      - discarding of packets of lower precedence call
   
      - preemption of one or more existing calls of lower precedence
        level
   
      - preemption of some of the resources being used by a call of
        lower precedence level
   
      - preemption of the reservation of resources being held for other
        traffic
   
4.4  Diversion if Not Answered
   
   If a precedence call (one higher that the lowest level) does not
   answer within a designated time or the called party is busy with a

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 6]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   call of equal or higher precedence such that an indication of the new
   call can not be given to the intended called party, the call must be
   diverted to a predetermined alternate party. In general, this must
   operate similar to a normal "Call Forwarding on No Answer" service.
   
4.5  Notifications to Preempted Party
   
   All preempted parties must be provided with a distinct notification
   informing them that their call has been preempted.
   
4.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party
   
   When an existing call is preempted for delivery of a higher
   precedence call to the same party, after the party is notified that a
   new call is being presented, the party must acknowledge the
   preemption before the new call is connected. That is, there must be a
   positive acknowledgement before any audio information is transferred
   in either direction.
   
4.7  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure
   
   Although protection is not actually an integral part of the Assured
   Service functionality, it is specifically identified here since this
   capability is always required in those networks which are assumed to
   be the primary users of Assured Service.
   
   It is required that sensitive information not be made available to
   non-secure portions of the network or to any non-secure network
   through which the traffic passes. It is also important that it not be
   accessible by users connected to the network. This non-disclosure
   requirement especially applies to information which is used to
   control link state routing protocols based on knowledge of the
   current traffic load at each precedence level on each route.
   
   Further, it is desirable that the precedence information regarding
   each call (as well as the other information such as calling/called
   party identity) be protected from disclosure to the greatest extent
   possible.
   
5.   Current Situation
   
   Current support for Assured Service within various IETF defined
   protocols and ongoing initiatives is not considered to be sufficient.
   
5.1  IPv4
   
   Although support for the traditional five precedence levels was
   included in the TOS field of IPv4 from the earliest days, support for

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 7]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   this field is not universal, and it only provides packet level
   priority. It does not provide call setup priority or control of call
   retention.
   
5.2  DiffServ
   
   Although it is possible to map the required five precedence levels to
   the Assured Forwarding classes defined in RFC 2597, this also
   provides only per packet priority treatment. While this may provide a
   fundamental subcomponent of the Assured Service requirements detailed
   in this memo, it does not support the basic call setup priority that
   is required.
   
   While a mapping could be defined between the required five precedence
   levels and the four Assured Forwarding classes, there is no explicit
   order or preferential treatment defined for those AF classes. This
   may need to be done.
   
   Additionally, the Expedited Forwarding PHB may provide a needed
   capability for the transfer of signaling messages for high priority
   traffic. On the other hand, it is likely that it will be necessary to
   use this PHB for all call control signaling in order to meet any
   acceptable delay limit on the transfer of messages for even the
   lowest priority calls.
   
5.3  IntServ/RSVP
   
   Although RSVP includes mention of preemption of existing reservations
   in favor of other higher priority ones, it does not provide detailed
   procedures for doing so. In principle, it should be straightforward
   to do so. However, it is not believed that the procedures required
   for establishment of a path using RSVP, and the additional procedures
   that would be necessary for preemption of an existing path, would
   allow this to be useful for the provision of Assured Service
   capabilities to individual calls.
   
   RSVP may be applicable for the establishment of trunk groups between
   switching points, with each trunk group serving a different
   precedence level of calls. No preemption of these trunk groups is
   required.
   
5.4  MPLS
   
   Since MPLS is fundamentally a means to emulate circuit-mode operation
   by establishment of a "path" which then functions like a
   "connection", the principles of priority and preemption could be
   applied to the setup and retention of this path the same as they are
   in the circuit-mode environment. RFC 2702 describes the requirements

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 8]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   for such capabilities as applied to "traffic trunks". However, it
   uses the term "traffic trunk" to refer to a facility which is
   established to carry an aggregate of traffic, i.e., many telephone
   calls. This is the equivalent of a "trunk group" in standard
   telephony terminology [T1.523]. Because of the extensive procedures
   that are required to establish and remove such a Label Switched Path,
   it is believed that this prevents MPLS from being used to setup paths
   for individual calls.
   
   MPLS may be applicable for the establishment of the equivalent of
   dedicated trunk groups between switching entities (if such entities
   were to exist in the SIP network architecture). Each of these "trunk
   groups" or "traffic trunks" could exist to support a specific
   precedence level of traffic between two points and could be setup
   using the procedures defined in [MPLS-CR-LDP] or those in [RFC3209].
   These documents allow the signaling of the required five levels of
   precedence as well as separate setup and holding priorities.
   
5.5  SIP
   
   The initial version of SIP [RFC2543] defined four tokens for priority
   levels to be used to control call setup, however, they do not equate
   to the levels required for Assured Service. It should also be noted
   that no explicit ordering of these four defined values (emergency,
   urgent, normal, non-urgent) can be found. The current draft revision
   [SIP-2543bis] adds the notion of a fifth value or "token" for
   "other-priority", but it does not define how this would be used.
   While the intention of this addition might be to allow the definition
   of whatever tokens are desired in various applications, this does not
   provide a standard to ensure interoperability without the additional
   burden of a coordination function such as that provided by IANA.
   
   Security is discussed in the draft revision to RFC 2543 [SIP-
   2543bis], but it has been recognized in various Working Group
   discussions that security for all aspects of call control needs to be
   considered in a unified manner. Security for each individual
   component of call setup and release can not be designed separately.
   
   The procedure being proposed for authorization of call set-up and
   media allocation [SIP-CALL-AUTH] appears to be too time consuming to
   expect it to occur each time a user attempts to place a telephone
   call, especially a high-priority one. The probable delay in
   establishing this authorization would be contrary to the goals and
   requirements for Assured Service. Overloads of the proxies
   responsible for the Call Authorization would prevent or unacceptably
   delay setup of the high precedence call.
   
   

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 9]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002



6.   Possible Approaches
   
   The following identify possible approaches to meeting the
   requirements stated above. This section is included in the draft to
   stimulate discussion on ways of meeting the requirements, but is not
   expected to be included in the final version when it is advanced
   toward RFC status.
   
6.1  Precedence Level Marking
   
   The approaches to be used for precedence level marking may need to be
   different for each of the following cases:
   
   A. Individual call setup:
   
   There needs to be a definition of a field to be carried in SIP which
   identifies the precedence levels of 0-4 of the call setup. Currently,
   the US military uses five values which have specific meanings (as
   currently defined in MLPP) and the standard may reflect these
   meanings. However, it is preferable to provide easy support for other
   network applications which utilize a different number of levels or
   different meanings.
   
   The specification may allow more than 5 levels. There is no need for
   the 65k levels defined in [RFC2751] nor is there currently a
   requirement to carry the separate preemption and defending priorities
   of [RFC2751] or the separate setup and holding priorities proposed in
   [MPLS-CR-LDP] and [RFC3209].
   
   [Polk2] is expected to result in a draft which satisfies this
   requirement.
   
   B. Packet forwarding:
   
   To support preferential treatment on the packet transfer level, the
   currently defined priority levels in IPV4 and the Assured Forwarding
   and Expedited Forwarding PHBs of DiffServ will provide the required
   functionality. Appropriate mappings from the call level precedence
   levels to these PHBs should be defined in BCPs for various networks.
   An example of such mapping is provided in Annex A.
   
   C. Trunk group establishment:
   
   For MPLS, RFC 2702 defines the idea of a "traffic trunk" for which a
   priority may be signaled by the label distribution protocol in order
   to establish telephony "trunk groups". If LDP is used for label
   distribution, the priority defined in [MPLS-CR-LDP] should be used.

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 10]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   If RSVP is used for label distribution, the priority defined in
   [RFC3209] should be used.
   
   It should be noted that the traditional definition of a "trunk group"
   does not include the notion of a "priority" associated with a trunk
   group. The priority is only associated with individual calls placed
   on that trunk group. It is possible that the routing logic could
   reserve a trunk group for higher priority traffic, but this is also
   not the normal application, since it wastes facilities during periods
   when very little priority traffic exists and it can not support the
   heavier load of high priority traffic when conditions cause such a
   high volume.
   
6.2  Authentication/Authorization
   
   This draft uses the following definitions from draft-ietf-aaa-
   transport-05:
   
   Authentication: The act of verifying a claimed identity, in the form
   of a pre-existing label from a mutually known name space, as the
   originator of a message (message authentication) or as the end-point
   of a channel (entity authentication).
   
   Authorization: The act of determining if a particular right, such as
   access to some resource, can be granted to the presenter of a
   particular credential.
   
6.2.1  Architecture
   
   In many other cases besides call setup for Assured Service it is also
   necessary to perform authentication and authorization. Appropriate
   security mechanisms have already been defined which may be used.
   
   Efficient support for authentication and authorization requires a SIP
   architecture in which each user has a dedicated proxy to support
   originating and terminating calls. It appears that discussions of
   other capabilities within SIP are coming to the same conclusion for
   provision of other services and capabilities. For examples, [SIP-
   PRIVACY] states that, in order for an originating device to achieve
   privacy concerning its IP address related information, "UACs ... must
   initiate calls through their trusted proxy". In addition, the
   terminating UAS also has to operate through a specific trusted proxy.
   This association between a user and a proxy would be established at
   the time of authentication.
   
6.2.2  Authentication Procedures
   
   It is essential that a framework for security for SIP be established

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 11]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   that allows a security association to be established between a user's
   terminal and their dedicated SIP proxy at the time of an initial
   registration. This initial registration, which includes
   authentication, may require an extensive number of messages and
   interactions with numerous network elements, including a Policy
   Server, and may require a rather large time as a password is
   verified. This registration and authentication would normally be done
   when a terminal is turned on, activated, or places the first call.
   
   For the purpose of Assured Service provision, as with other SIP-based
   services, it is expected that Authentication may be performed based
   on the entry of an ID and password or the use of terminal resident
   biometrics (e.g., iris scan) so that permission to use the services
   can be associated with an individual, not a device. Once registration
   is done, this permission is then associated with the device.
   
6.2.3  Authorization Procedures
   
   After the establishment of a trusted SIP proxy as a result of the
   authentication procedures, the authorization for the use of the
   Assured Service capabilities for each individual call establishment
   must consist of a simple exchange of a minimum number of messages
   between that user and that proxy. This should consist of the same
   message sequence as used for a non-Assured Service call in order to
   avoid any built-in extra overhead (and delay) for the Assured Service
   call.
   
   The security procedure (for all services, not just Assured Service)
   requires that security information be included in this INVITE which
   allows the proxy to validate the source of the message (the device,
   now that authentication is complete) and to determine the permission
   for that source to access the service being requested.
   
6.3  Preferential Treatment
   
   The preferential treatments would not be standardized unless they
   require signaling between network elements. Currently, most
   treatments envisioned are local matters within a proxy or router.
   Consideration of preferential treatments depends on the case:
   
   A. Per call:
   
   Preemption of existing calls, if done, would require coordination
   between network elements, and therefore protocol standards,
   especially if distinct actions are expected to reserve the preempted
   resources for setup of the higher precedence call.
   
   It is not expected that network initiated preemption of calls within

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 12]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   the IP environment will be necessary. Instead, sufficient
   preferential treatment can be provided by applying higher call
   admission control limits to higher precedence calls. An example of
   this procedure is shown in Annex B.B. Packet level:
   
   Current capabilities of DiffServ may provide the necessary
   preferential treatments regarding packet transfer, including
   indications of priority queuing and discard priority. 
   
   However, as shown in Annex A, the preferential treatment using
   DiffServ codepoints may require that explicit preferential treatments
   between different classes be defined, which does not appear to
   currently exist.
   
   C. MPLS/RSVP Paths:
   
   There should be no need for preemption of MPLS/RSVP established
   traffic trunks (trunk groups) as described in [RFC2702] and
   [RFC2205]. The required capability should be provided by mechanisms
   to reduce the traffic engineering limits placed on lower priority
   trunk groups (even by reducing to zero) to allow the capacity to be
   used for the establishment of higher priority calls.
   
6.4  Diversion
   
   Diversion should be based on procedures that are developed for a Call
   Forwarding on No Answer type service. However, it should not be
   dependent on a timing performed by the original called party. Again,
   this must be a function of either the terminating proxy.
   
6.5  Notification to Preempted Party
   
   Notification to the preempted party should follow whatever is done
   for notifications for any network-initiated release. Since it
   expected that actual call preemption will only be needed in the
   circuit mode environment, the gateway between it and the IP
   environment should deal with such preemption by application of the
   required notification (in-band) to the IP side.
   
6.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party
   
   Acknowledge by the preempted party (before connection of a new call)
   should follow whatever is done for normal call presentation, that is,
   it must be acknowledged before any audio is transferred in either
   direction.
   
6.7  Protection of Signaling Information
   

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 13]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   See Section 7.
   
   
7.   Security Considerations
   
7.1  Authentication/authorization of User Access
   
   Discussions within SIP are beginning to identify the need to
   authenticate/authorize all access to capabilities, since virtually
   any could be misused resulting in harm to the network or to other
   users. Because Assured Service is intended to provide an authorized
   user with better service than other users, including the potential of
   actually preempting resources, it is even more important to
   authenticate/authorize the user's access to the Assured Service
   capabilities.
   
   [SIP-2543bis] describes the use of a stateless challenged-based
   mechanism for authentication in which a proxy server or user agent
   may challenge the initiator of a request to provide assurance of
   their identity. For real-time needs such as placing telephone calls,
   especially those for which Assured Service capabilities are being
   applied, such a challenge-based system will likely be too slow, or
   would itself be hampered by the very network condition which requires
   Assured Service be applied.
   
7.2  Security of Signaling Information
   
   The need to protect signaling information from disclosure is
   independent from the provision of Assured Service. Military/
   government networks have long been built on the premise that such
   information needed to be protected. Bulk encryption of signaling
   links (as well as the user data channels) between secure switches
   provided much of this protection. In addition, the Signal Transfer
   Points of the SS#7 network could be secured against unauthorized
   access. It should be noted that commercial networks are now beginning
   to recognize the need for the same protection.
   
   In the IP environment, the signaling packets as well as the user data
   traverse many routers and could be accessed by unauthorized persons
   at any one of them. While the contents of the individual signaling
   messages could be hidden by encryption of the request and response
   for end-to-end protection of information, the header must be visible
   to intermediate routers. It is preferable to not require decryption/
   encryption at each router. The approach has been to encrypt the
   contents of the signaling message but not the headers which are
   needed by the routers. However, the headers themselves may contain
   sensitive information such as precedence level and called party
   identification.

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 14]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002

   
   [SIP-2543bis] describes the transport and network layer security
   methods which may be used to protect signaling traffic.
   
7.3  Security of Routing Data
   
   Of more concern than the information about an individual call is the
   information normally needed by Link State routing logic used by an
   originating device to select a route though an entire network. Such a
   routing function requires knowledge of the state (busy or not) of
   various portions of the network. When Assured Service based on
   precedence levels is added, this requires that the routing point also
   know the current loading of various precedence levels for each
   portion of the network. Especially in a large network, this is highly
   sensitive information and must not be revealed to unauthorized
   network elements.
   
   It should be noted that the constraint-based LSP setup proposed in
   [MPLS-CR-LDP] depends on the routing point knowing this information.
   
   
8.   IANA Considerations
   
   It is not expected that there will be any IANA involvement in support
   of Assured Service beyond what is described in [Polk2]. 
   
   
9.   References
   
   [T1.523] ANSI T1.523-2001 Telecommunications Glossary.
   
   [T1.619] ANSI T1.619-1992 (R1999) Multi-Level Precedence and
   Preemption (MLPP) Service, ISDN Supplementary Service Description.
   
   [T1.619a] ANSI T1.619a-1994 (R1999) Addendum to MLPP.
   
   [T1.631] ANSI T1.631-1993 (R1999) Telecommunications - Signalling
   System No. 7 (SS7) - High Probability of Completion (HPC) Network
   Capability.
   
   [E.106] ITU-T Recommendation E.106 (2000) International Emergency
   Preference Scheme (IEPS).
   
   [F.706] ITU-T Recommendation F.706 (draft - for approval in Feb 2002)
   International Emergency Multimedia Service
   
   [I.255.3] ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3 (1990), Multilevel precedence
   and preemption service (MLPP).


Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 15]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002

   
   [Q.735.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.735.3 (1993), Description for
   community of interest supplementary services using SS No. 7 -
   Multilevel precedence and preemption (MLPP).
   
   [Q.955.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.955.3 (1993), Description for
   community of interest supplementary services using DSS1 - Multilevel
   precedence and preemption (MLPP).
   
   [RFC2205] "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)", R. Braden, et al,
   Sept 1997
   
   [RFC2597] "Assured Forwarding PHB Group", J. Heinanen, et al, June
   1999.
   
   [RFC2598] "An Expedited Forwarding PHB", V. Jacobson, et al, June
   1999.
   
   [RFC2702] "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS", D.
   Awduche, et al, Sept 1999.
   
   [RFC2751] "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element", S. Herzog,
   January 2000.
   
   [RFC3209] RFC 3209, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels",
   December 2001.
   
   [MPLS-CR-LDP] draft-ietf-mpls-cr-ldp-06, "CR-LDP: Constraint-based
   LSP Setup using LDP", November 2001.
   
   [SIP-CALL-AUTH] draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-03, "SIP Extension for Media
   Authorization", November 2001.
   
   [SIP-PRIVACY] draft-ietf-sip-privacy-03, "SIP extensions for Caller
   Identity and Privacy", November 2001.
   
   [SIP-2543bis] draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-07, "SIP: Session Initiation
   Protocol" (revision), February 2002.
   
   [Ash] draft-ash-mpls-diffserv-te-alternative-02, "Alternative
   Technical Solution for MPLS DiffServ TE", Jerry Ash, Aug 2001.
   
   [Carlberg] draft-carlberg-ieps-framework-02, "Framework for
   Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony", Ken Carlberg, October 2001.
   
   [Folts] draft-folts-ieps-white-paper-01, "Emergency
   Telecommunications Service in Next-Generation Networks", Hal Folts,
   Feb 2002.


Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 16]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002

   
   [Polk1] draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-01, "Multi-Level Precedence and
   Preemption over IP", James Polk, November 2001.
   
   [Polk2] draft-polk-sip-resource-00, "SIP Communications Resource
   Priority Header", December 2001.
   
   
10.  Authors' Addresses
   
   Michael Pierce
   Artel
   1893 Preston White Drive
   Reston, VA 20191
   Phone: +1 410.817.4795
   Email: pierce1m@ncr.disa.mil
   
   Don Choi
   DISA
   5600 Columbia Pike
   Falls Church, VA 22041-2717
   Phone: +1 703.681.2312
   Email: choid@ncr.disa.mil
   
   
ANNEX A Example Mapping of Call Precedence Levels to DiffServ Codepoints
   
   The following possible mapping is shown only to illustrate the
   concept of using DiffServ codepoints to assist in the provision of
   preferential treatment to the individual packets which make up the
   information transfer (connection setup and voice transfer) of an
   Assured Service call. It is not expected that this Annex will be a
   part of the final version of this document.
   
A.1 General
   
   For each of the five precedence levels which may be signaled by the
   originator, a mapping should take place for each of the components
   involved in the call. This includes the call setup/disconnect
   signaling and transfer of the packets carrying the user's data
   (voice). This example is based on the presumption of the use of an
   audio coding algorithm which includes marking a portion of the
   individual packets which may be considered for discard in case of
   overload (for example, containing low-order encoding bits).
   
A.2 Packet Forwarding Treatment Using DiffServ
   
   This example is for the case of the use of DiffServ to provide the


Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 17]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   packet forwarding preferential treatment. Each packet containing a
   set-up message or user data (speech) is marked with the following
   DiffServ codepoint:
   
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
   |  Precedence  |Indication| Indication in user | Indication in user |
   |     Level    |in set-up | data transfer for  | data transfer for  |
   |              |messages  | packets not marked | packets marked for |
   |              |          | for discard by     | discard by codec   |
   |              |          | codec              |                    |
   |              |          |-----------------------------------------|
   |              |          | Class |    Drop    | Class |    Drop    |
   |              |          |       | precedence |       | precedence |
   |-------------------------------------------------------------------|
   |Routine       |   None   |  AF1  |   Medium   |  AF1  |    High    |
   |Priority      |    EF    |  AF1  |    Low     |  AF1  |   Medium   |
   |Immediate     |    EF    |  AF2  |    Low     |  AF2  |   Medium   |
   |Flash         |    EF    |  AF3  |    Low     |  AF3  |   Medium   |
   |Flash Override|    EF    |  AF4  |    Low     |  AF4  |   Medium   |
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
   
   Since there is currently no definition of differentiated handling
   between the various AF classes, it may be necessary instead to assign
   the values as shown in the following table:
   
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
   |  Precedence  |Indication| Indication in user | Indication in user |
   |     Level    |in set-up | data transfer for  | data transfer for  |
   |              |messages  | packets not marked | packets marked for |
   |              |          | for discard by     | discard by codec   |
   |              |          | codec              |                    |
   |              |          |-----------------------------------------|
   |              |          | Class |    Drop    | Class |    Drop    |
   |              |          |       | precedence |       | precedence |
   |-------------------------------------------------------------------|
   |Routine       |   None   |  AF1  |    High    |  AF1  |    High    |
   |Priority      |    EF    |  AF1  |   Medium   |  AF1  |    High    |
   |Immediate     |    EF    |  AF1  |   Medium   |  AF1  |   Medium   |
   |Flash         |    EF    |  AF1  |    Low     |  AF1  |   Medium   |
   |Flash Override|    EF    |  AF1  |    Low     |  AF1  |   Medium   |
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
   
A.3 Packet Forwarding Treatment without DiffServ
   
   When the network is not DiffServ capable, the only mapping available
   for packet level preferential treatment is the defined priority
   values within IPv4 (and their carry-over into IPv6). The same five
   call setup precedence levels addressed in this memo are supported by

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 18]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   RFC 791 and the mapping is direct.
   
ANNEX B Example Call Preferential Treatment Using Over Committing and
   Packet Discard
   
   This Annex is included to show an example of how preferential
   treatment can be provided for setup of high priority calls without
   preemption of lower priority calls. It is not expected that this
   Annex would be a part of the final version of this document, but may
   form the basis for another Informational draft.
   
   Preferential treatment can be provided by allowing higher precedence
   calls to be setup even when they result in the engineered traffic
   limit of a route (on an MPLS LSR, for example) to be exceeded. With
   the use of DiffServ AF assignments as shown in Annex A, the lower
   precedence calls will then experience packet discard.
   
   For example, the limits for call acceptance for new calls could be
   set as depicted in the following table. If the engineered capacity of
   a route is "x", new calls of each precedence level may be allowed
   based on these limits:
   
    --------------------------------------
   | Precedence Level | Capacity limit of |
   |                  |-------------------|
   |                  | =< self |  total  |
   |------------------|-------------------|
   | Routine          |   .9x   |  .9x    |
   | Priority         |   .9x   |  .9x    |
   | Immediate        |    x    |   x     |
   | Flash            |   1.2x  |  1.3x   |
   | Flash-override   |   1.3x  |  1.5x   |
   |                  |         |         |
    --------------------------------------
   
   For example, a new Flash call is allowed to be setup if the current
   traffic load for all traffic at or below "Flash" is less than 1.2x
   and if the total load for all levels is less than 1.3x.
   
   This procedure is based on a requirement that Flash override calls
   should never be blocked. In the circuit-switched environment this
   could only be guaranteed by having as many circuits as there might be
   Flash override calls. For IP-based service, there is no fixed number
   of "circuits". The "x" referred to above is only an engineering limit
   based on a guarantee for the provision of a certain QoS for normal
   traffic, i.e., Routine and Priority. This "x" may be thought of as
   the number of "circuits" for that normal traffic. It is preferable to
   allow the setup of additional higher precedence calls with reduced

Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 19]

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    21 Feb 2002


   QoS rather than blocking their setup. For example, while a facility
   may support 100 normal calls (Routine and Priority) at the guaranteed
   QoS, it might support 150 flash-override calls at a reduced QoS (due
   to packet loss).
   
   Since the packet preferential treatment described in Annex A could
   result in the discard of the packets for the lower precedence calls,
   the higher priority calls would be provided a sufficient QoS even
   though they may have caused the engineered capacity of the route to
   be exceeded. At the same time, the lower precedence calls would
   experience such excessive packet loss that the users will soon
   disconnect without the call actually being preempted. This
   "encouraged disconnect" may be thought of as a "graceful preemption".
   
   
   
Full Copyright Statement
   
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.
   
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published,
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY and THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE disclaim all warranties, express or implied, including but
   not limited to any warranty that the use of the information herein
   will not infringe any rights or any implied warranties of
   merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
   





Pierce                     Expires August 2002                 [Page 20]

