
          Network Working Group                         Greg Vaudreuil
          Internet Draft                        Octel Network Services
          Expires: May 1, 1995                        January 26, 1995


                               MIME/ESMTP Profile for
                                   Voice Messaging

                           <draft-umig-mime-voice-01.txt>



          Changes From the previous version

          1) A large number of textual clarifications were made, including
          discussion of X.440.

          2) The reference section was updated.

          3) Examples were fixed to reflect the current text.

          Status of this Memo

          This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
          documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
          Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also
          distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

          Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be
          updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.
          It is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material
          or to cite them other than as a "work in progress".

          1.Abstract

          A class of special-purpose computers has evolved to provide voice
          messaging services.  These machines generally interface to a
          telephone switch and provide call answering and voice messaging
          services.  Traditionally, messages sent to a non-local machine
          are transported using analog networking protocols based on DTMF
          signaling and analog voice playback.  As the demand for
          networking increases, there is a need for a standard high-quality
          digital protocol to connect these machines.  The following
          document is a profile of the Internet standard MIME and ESMTP
          protocols for use as a digital voice networking protocol.

          This profile is based on an earlier effort in the Audio Message
          Interchange Specification (AMIS) group to define a voice
          messaging protocol based on X.400 technology.  This protocol is
          intended to satisfy the user requirements statement from that
          earlier work with the industry standard ESMTP/MIME mail protocol
          infrastructures already used within corporate internets.  This
          profile will be called the voice profile in this document.


          Internet Draft       MIME Voice Profile     January 26, 1995


          2.Scope and Design Goals

          MIME is the Internet multipurpose, multimedia messaging standard.
          This document explicitly recognizes its capabilities and provides
          a mechanism for the exchange of various messaging technologies
          including voice and facsimile.

          It is not a goal to make interoperability possible between the
          earlier X.400-based AMIS-Digital and this profile using a
          standard X.400-to-MIME gateway.  While the message encodings and
          messages semantics are similar, the addressing and routing are
          not.  The X.400-based AMIS-Digital addressing format is
          sufficiently customized so that it cannot be mapped to the RFC
          822 mail format in the standard manner. The voice profile is
          necessarily incompatible because it is intended to use the
          standard TCP/IP mail addressing formats.

          Because the 1988 X.400 based X.440 does not restrict the range of
          addressing possible in X.400, translation to this protocol should
          be possible using the standard X.400 to MIME gateway.

          It is a goal of this effort to make as few  changes to the
          existing Internet mail protocols as possible while satisfying the
          user requirements for Voice Networking.  This goal is motivated
          by the desire to increase the accessibility to digital messaging
          by enabling the use of proven existing networking software for
          rapid development.

          This specification is intended for use on a TCP/IP network.
          While it is possible to use these protocols for simple point-to-
          point networking, the specification is robust enough to be used
          in an environment such as the global Internet with installed base
          gateways which do not understand MIME.  It is expected that a
          messaging system will be managed by a system administrator who
          can perform TCP/IP network configuration.  When using facsimile
          or multiple voice encodings, it is expected that the system
          administrator will maintain a list of the capabilities of the
          networked mail machines to reduce the sending of undeliverable
          messages due to lack of feature support.

          This specification is a profile of the relevant TCP/IP Internet
          protocols.  These technologies, as well as the specifications for
          the Internet mail protocols, are defined in the Request for
          Comment (RFC) document series.  That series documents the
          standards as well as the lore of the TCP/IP protocol suite.  This
          document should be read with the following RFC documents: RFC
          821, the Simple Mail Transport Protocol; RFC 822, the Standard
          for the format of ARPA Internet Messages; RFC 1521 and RFC 1522,
          the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions; RFC 1425 and RFC 1427,
          Extensions to the SMTP protocol (ESMTP); and RFC 882 and RFC 883,
          the Domain Name System.  Where additional functionality is
          needed, it will be defined in this document or in an appendix.



          Vaudreuil              Expires 5/1/95                      ]


          Internet Draft       MIME Voice Profile     January 26, 1995


          3.Protocol Restrictions

          This protocol does not limit the number of recipients per
          message.  Where possible, implementations should not restrict the
          number of recipients in a single message.

               Recognising that no implementation supports unlimited
               recipients, and that the number of supported recipients may
               be quite low, ESMTP should be extended to provide a
               mechanism for indicating the number of supported recipients.

          This protocol does not limit the maximum message length.
          Implementors should understand that some machines will be unable
          to accept excessively long messages.  A mechanism is defined in
          the RFC 1425 ESMTP extensions to declare the maximum message size
          supported.

               The message size indicatd in the ESMTP SIZE command is in
               bytes, not minutes.  The number of bytes varies by voice
               encoding format and must include the MIME wrapper overhead.
               Translation into minutes, can be performed by simple
               multiplication if the voice encoding is know from the system
               configuration file.

            Framework for the voice profile

          This document specifies a profile of the TCP/IP multimedia
          messaging protocols for use by special-purpose voice processing
          platforms.  These platforms are not general-purpose computers and
          often do not have facilities normally associated with an Internet
          Email-capable computer.

          The following are typical restrictions imposed by a voice
          messaging platform:

          1) Text messages are not normally received and often cannot be
             displayed or viewed in the normal fashion.  They can be
             processed only via advanced text-to-speech or text-to-fax
             features not currently present in these machines.

             Voice mail (VM) machines act as an integr
             Transfer Agent and a User Agent.  The VM is responsible for
             final delivery, and there is no forwarding of messages.  RFC
             822 header fields have limited use in the context of the
             simple messaging features currently deployed.

          3) VM message stores are generally not capable of preserving the
             full semantics of an Internet message.  As such, use of a VM
             for general message forwarding and gatewaying is not
             supported.  Storage of "Received" lines and "Message-ID" may
             be limited.

             Nothing in this document precludes use of a general purpose
             email gateway from providing these services.  However, severe

          Vaudreuil              Expires 5/1/95                     3]


          Internet Draft       MIME Voice Profile     January 26, 1995


             performance degradation may result if the email gateway does
             not support the advanced ESMTP options required by this
             document.

             Internet-style mailing lists are not generally supported.
             Distribution lists are implemented as local alias lists.

          5) There is generally no human operator.  Error reports must be
             machine-parsable so that helpful responses can be given to
             users whose only access mechanism is a telephone.

             The system user names are limited to 16 or fewer numeric
             characters.










































          Vaudreuil              Expires 5/1/95                      ]


          Internet Draft       MIME Voice Profile     January 26, 1995


          5.Message Format Profile

          The voice profile was written to be based on and be consistent
          with the TCP/IP Email Protocol Suite with newly standardized
          options for enhanced functionality and performance. This section
          is an overview of the necessary protocols and a profile of the
          applicable protocols as applied to the voice messaging
          environment.

          5.1. Message Addressing Formats

          RFC 822 and SMTP addressing uses the domain name system.  This
          naming system has two components: the local part, used for
          username or mailbox identification; and the host part, used for
          machine or node identification.  These two components are
          separated by the commercial "@" symbol.

          The local part of the address is an ASCII string uniquely
          identifying a mailbox on a destination system.  The local part is
          a printable string containing the mailbox number of the
          originator or a recipient.  Administration of this number space
          is expected to be conform to national or corporate private
          telephone numbering plans.

          The domain part of the address is a hierarchical global name for
          all machines.  For participation in the international Internet
          network or for integration within a corporate internet, each VM
          machine is required to have a unique domain name.  In the domain
          name system, a name is registered with the Internet Assigned
          Number Authority (IANA).  The IANA may delegate the management of
          a branch of the naming space to a company or service provider.

          For example, a compliant message may contain the address
          2145551212@mycompany.com. It should be noted that while the
          example mailbox address is based on the North American Numbering
          Plan, any other corporate numbering plan can be used.  The use of
          the domain naming system should be transparent to the user.  It
          is the responsibility of the VM to translate the dialed address
          to the fully-qualified domain name (FQDN).  The mapping of dialed
          address to VM destination is generally accomplished through
          implementation-specific means, usually a local table.

          Mapping of the FQDN to a specific network destination is
          generally performed by the Domain Name System.  For networks with
          a small number of machines, a locally-maintained host table
          database can be used as a simpler alternative.

          Special addresses are provided for compatibility with the
          conventions of the Internet mail system and to facilitate
          testing.  These addresses do not use numeric local addresses,
          both to conform to current Internet practice and to avoid
          conflict with existing numeric addressing plans.  Some special
          addresses are as follows:


          Vaudreuil              Expires 5/1/95                      ]


          Internet Draft       MIME Voice Profile     January 26, 1995


          Postmaster@domain

                      By convention, a special mailbox named "postmaster"
                      should exist on all systems.  This address is used
                      for diagnostics and should be checked regularly by
                      the system manager. This mailbox is particularly
                      likely to receive text messages, which is not normal
                      on a voice processing platform; the specific
                      handling of these messages is a individual
                      implementation choice.

          Loopback@domain

                      A special mailbox name named "loopback" should be
                      designated for loopback testing.  All messages sent
                      to this mailbox must be returned back to the sender
                      as a new message.  The originating address should be
                      "postmaster".

                      Because VMs do not use alpha-numeric addresses, this
                      address will not conflict with any internal
                      numbering plan. Internal to VM, a specific numeric
                      address for DTMF entry can be mapped to "loopback".

                      Note that without network level authentication, the
                      loopback address can be abused by routing messages
                      through a third-party VM to spoof another device or
                      to avoid toll charges.  It is recommended that the
                      loopback feature be disabled except when testing the
                      networking between machines.

          5.2. Message Header Fields

          Internet messages contain a header information block.  This
          header block contains information required to identify the
          sender, the list of recipients, the message send time, and other
          information intended for user presentation.  Except for
          specialized gateway and mailing list cases, headers do not
          indicate delivery options for the transport of messages.

          RFC 822 defines a set of standard message header fields.  This
          set is extended in several RFCs.

          Note that the specific order of header lines is not specified.
          The order cannot be expected to be preserved when sent through
          intermediate gateways.  The following header fields must be
          supported.




     Network Working Group                                        Greg Vaudreuil
     Internet Draft                                       Octel Network Services
     Expires: May 1, 1995                                       January 26, 1995


                               MIME/ESMTP Profile for
                                   Voice Messaging

                           <draft-umig-mime-voice-01.txt>



     Changes From the previous version

     1) A large number of textual clarifications were made, including discussion
     of X.440.

     2) The reference section was updated.

     3) Examples were fixed to reflect the current text.

     Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working documents
     of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its Working
     Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet Drafts.

     Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated,
     replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate
     to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     a "work in progress".

     1.Abstract

     A class of special-purpose computers has evolved to provide voice messaging
     services.  These machines generally interface to a telephone switch and
     provide call answering and voice messaging services.  Traditionally,
     messages sent to a non-local machine are transported using analog
     networking protocols based on DTMF signaling and analog voice playback.  As
     the demand for networking increases, there is a need for a standard high-
     quality digital protocol to connect these machines.  The following document
     is a profile of the Internet standard MIME and ESMTP protocols for use as a
     digital voice networking protocol.

     This profile is based on an earlier effort in the Audio Message Interchange
     Specification (AMIS) group to define a voice messaging protocol based on
     X.400 technology.  This protocol is intended to satisfy the user
     requirements statement from that earlier work with the industry standard
     ESMTP/MIME mail protocol infrastructures already used within corporate
     internets.  This profile will be called the voice profile in this document.

     2.Scope and Design Goals

     MIME is the Internet multipurpose, multimedia messaging standard.  This
     document explicitly recognizes its capabilities and provides a mechanism

     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     for the exchange of various messaging technologies including voice and
     facsimile.

     It is not a goal to make interoperability possible between the earlier
     X.400-based AMIS-Digital and this profile using a standard X.400-to-MIME
     gateway.  While the message encodings and messages semantics are similar,
     the addressing and routing are not.  The X.400-based AMIS-Digital
     addressing format is sufficiently customized so that it cannot be mapped to
     the RFC 822 mail format in the standard manner. The voice profile is
     necessarily incompatible because it is intended to use the standard TCP/IP
     mail addressing formats.

     Because the 1988 X.400 based X.440 does not restrict the range of
     addressing possible in X.400, translation to this protocol should be
     possible using the standard X.400 to MIME gateway.

     It is a goal of this effort to make as few  changes to the existing
     Internet mail protocols as possible while satisfying the user requirements
     for Voice Networking.  This goal is motivated by the desire to increase the
     accessibility to digital messaging by enabling the use of proven existing
     networking software for rapid development.

     This specification is intended for use on a TCP/IP network.  While it is
     possible to use these protocols for simple point-to-point networking, the
     specification is robust enough to be used in an environment such as the
     global Internet with installed base gateways which do not understand MIME.
     It is expected that a messaging system will be managed by a system
     administrator who can perform TCP/IP network configuration.  When using
     facsimile or multiple voice encodings, it is expected that the system
     administrator will maintain a list of the capabilities of the networked
     mail machines to reduce the sending of undeliverable messages due to lack
     of feature support.

     This specification is a profile of the relevant TCP/IP Internet protocols.
     These technologies, as well as the specifications for the Internet mail
     protocols, are defined in the Request for Comment (RFC) document series.
     That series documents the standards as well as the lore of the TCP/IP
     protocol suite.  This document should be read with the following RFC
     documents: RFC 821, the Simple Mail Transport Protocol; RFC 822, the
     Standard for the format of ARPA Internet Messages; RFC 1521 and RFC 1522,
     the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions; RFC 1425 and RFC 1427,
     Extensions to the SMTP protocol (ESMTP); and RFC 882 and RFC 883, the
     Domain Name System.  Where additional functionality is needed, it will be
     defined in this document or in an appendix.

     3.Protocol Restrictions

     This protocol does not limit the number of recipients per message.  Where
     possible, implementations should not restrict the number of recipients in a
     single message.

          Recognising that no implementation supports unlimited recipients, and
          that the number of supported recipients may be quite low, ESMTP should


     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


          be extended to provide a mechanism for indicating the number of
          supported recipients.

     This protocol does not limit the maximum message length.  Implementors
     should understand that some machines will be unable to accept excessively
     long messages.  A mechanism is defined in the RFC 1425 ESMTP extensions to
     declare the maximum message size supported.

          The message size indicatd in the ESMTP SIZE command is in bytes, not
          minutes.  The number of bytes varies by voice encoding format and must
          include the MIME wrapper overhead.  Translation into minutes, can be
          performed by simple multiplication if the voice encoding is know from
          the system configuration file.

       Framework for the voice profile

     This document specifies a profile of the TCP/IP multimedia messaging
     protocols for use by special-purpose voice processing platforms.  These
     platforms are not general-purpose computers and often do not have
     facilities normally associated with an Internet Email-capable computer.

     The following are typical restrictions imposed by a voice messaging
     platform:

        Text messages are not normally received and often cannot be displayed
        or viewed in the normal fashion.  They can be processed only via
        advanced text-to-speech or text-to-fax features not currently present
        in these machines.

     2) Voice mail (VM) machines act as an integrated Message Transfer Agent
        and a User Agent.  The VM is responsible for final delivery, and there
        is no forwarding of messages.  RFC 822 header fields have limited use
        in the context of the simple messaging features currently deployed.

     3) VM message stores are generally not capable of preserving the full
        semantics of an Internet message.  As such, use of a VM for general
        message forwarding and gatewaying is not supported.  Storage of
        "Received" lines and "Message-ID" may be limited.

        Nothing in this document precludes use of a general purpose email
        gateway from providing these services.  However, severe performance
        degradation may result if the email gateway does not support the
        advanced ESMTP options required by this document.

     4) Internet-style mailing lists are not generally supported.  Distribution
        lists are implemented as local alias lists.

        There is generally no human operator.  Error reports must be machine-
        parsable so that helpful responses can be given to users whose only
        access mechanism is a telephone.

        The system user names are limited to 16 or fewer numeric characters.



     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                               3]
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     5.Message Format Profile

     The voice profile was written to be based on and be consistent with the
     TCP/IP Email Protocol Suite with newly standardized options for enhanced
     functionality and performance. This section is an overview of the necessary
     protocols and a profile of the applicable protocols as applied to the voice
     messaging environment.

     5.1. Message Addressing Formats

     RFC 822 and SMTP addressing uses the domain name system.  This naming
     system has two components: the local part, used for username or mailbox
     identification; and the host part, used for machine or node identification.
     These two components are separated by the commercial "@" symbol.

     The local part of the address is an ASCII string uniquely identifying a
     mailbox on a destination system.  The local part is a printable string
     containing the mailbox number of the originator or a recipient.
     Administration of this number space is expected to be conform to national
     or corporate private telephone numbering plans.

     The domain part of the address is a hierarchical global name for all
     machines.  For participation in the international Internet network or for
     integration within a corporate internet, each VM machine is required to
     have a unique domain name.  In the domain name system, a name is registered
     with the Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA).  The IANA may delegate
     the management of a branch of the naming space to a company or service
     provider.

     For example, a compliant message may contain the address
     2145551212@mycompany.com. It should be noted that while the example mailbox
     address is based on the North American Numbering Plan, any other corporate
     numbering plan can be used.  The use of the domain naming system should be
     transparent to the user.  It is the responsibility of the VM to translate
     the dialed address to the fully-qualified domain name (FQDN).  The mapping
     of dialed address to VM destination is generally accomplished through
     implementation-specific means, usually a local table.

     Mapping of the FQDN to a specific network destination is generally
     performed by the Domain Name System.  For networks with a small number of
     machines, a locally-maintained host table database can be used as a simpler
     alternative.

     Special addresses are provided for compatibility with the conventions of
     the Internet mail system and to facilitate testing.  These addresses do not
     use numeric local addresses, both to conform to current Internet practice
     and to avoid conflict with existing numeric addressing plans.  Some special
     addresses are as follows:

     Postmaster@domain

                 By convention, a special mailbox named "postmaster" should
                 exist on all systems.  This address is used for diagnostics
                 and should be checked regularly by the system manager. This

     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
   Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                 mailbox is particularly likely to receive text messages, which
                 is not normal on a voice processing platform; the specific
                 handling of these messages is a individual implementation
                 choice.

     Loopback@domain

                 A special mailbox name named "loopback" should be designated
                 for loopback testing.  All messages sent to this mailbox must
                 be returned back to the sender as a new message.  The
                 originating address should be "postmaster".

                 Because VMs do not use alpha-numeric addresses, this address
                 will not conflict with any internal numbering plan. Internal
                 to VM, a specific numeric address for DTMF entry can be mapped
                 to "loopback".

                 Note that without network level authentication, the loopback
                 address can be abused by routing messages through a third-
                 party VM to spoof another device or to avoid toll charges.  It
                 is recommended that the loopback feature be disabled except
                 when testing the networking between machines.

     5.2. Message Header Fields

     Internet messages contain a header information block.  This header block
     contains information required to identify the sender, the list of
     recipients, the message send time, and other information intended for user
     presentation.  Except for specialized gateway and mailing list cases,
     headers do not  indicate delivery options for the transport of messages.

     RFC 822 defines a set of standard message header fields.  This set is
     extended in several RFCs.

     Note that the specific order of header lines is not specified.  The order
     cannot be expected to be preserved when sent through intermediate gateways.
     The following header fields must be supported.

     From

                 The originator's fully-qualified domain address (a mailbox
                 number followed by the fully-qualified domain name).  The user
                 listed in this field should be presented in the voice message
                 envelope as the originator of the message.

                 It is recommended that all messages contain the text personal
                 name of the sender in a quoted phrase if available.  From
                 [822]

                 Example:

                    From: "Joe S. User" <2145551212@mycompany.com>

     To

     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                 The recipient's fully-qualified domain address.  There may be
                 one or more To: fields in any message.  All recipients of a
                 message must be listed in To lines except when a recipient is
                 specifically intended to receive a blind carbon copy.  Note
                 that many VM systems have no facilities for storing or
                 reporting to the recipient the list of recipients.  These
                 systems will generally discard these headers when received.

                 It is recommended that all messages contain the text personal
                 name of the recipient in a quoted phrase if available.  From
                 [822]

     Cc

                 Additional recipients' fully-qualified domain address.  This
                 field has no meaning beyond "To:" in a VM and is not to be
                 generated by a conforming implementation. It is included for
                 processing by the receiver for compatibility with general
                 Internet mail agents that may not restrict the use of this
                 field.

                 If the VM supports the reporting of multiple recipients, all
                 names in the To: and Cc: fields should be reported. From [822]

     Date

                 The date, time, and time zone the message was composed by the
                 originator, or the time specified by the originator if the
                 message is scheduled for delayed delivery.  Conforming
                 implementations must be able to convert RFC 822 date and time
                 stamps into local time.  If the VM reports message-sent time,
                 the value in the Date field should be used, not the time the
                 message was received at the destination system. From [822]

                 Example:  Wed, 28 Jul 93 10:08:49 PDT

     Sender

                 The actual address of the originator if the message is sent by
                 an agent on behalf of the author indicated in the From: field.
                 This field is not to be generated by a conforming
                 implementation. It is included for processing by the receiver
                 for compatibility with general Internet mail software that may
                 generate this header.

                 The Sender field often contains the name of an Internet-style
                 mailing list administrator and is the destination address for
                 reporting errors if the ESMTP MAIL FROM address is not
                 available.  While it may not be possible to save this
                 information in some VM machines, discarding this information
                 or the SMTP MAIL FROM address will make it difficult to send
                 an error message to the proper destination. From [822]

     Message-id

     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                 A unique per-message identifier. Conforming systems must use
                 an identifier constructed by concatenating a unique 8-digit
                 serial message number and the sending VM's FQDN with the
                 commercial @ symbol.  This identifier will be used for
                 tracking, auditing, and returning delivery reports.  From
                 [822]

                 Example:

                    Message-id: <12345678@mycompany.com>

     Received

                 Special-purpose trace information added to the beginning of a
                 RFC 822 message by message transport agents (MTA).  This is
                 the only header permitted to be added by an MTA.  Information
                 in this header is useful for debugging when using an ASCII
                 message reader or a header parsing tool. A conforming system
                 must add Received headers when acting as a gateway and must
                 not remove them.  These headers may be ignored or deleted when
                 the message is received at the final destination. From [822]

     MIME Version

                 Indicates that the message is conformant to the MIME message
                 format specification.  This header must be present in any
                 conforming message.  Systems conformant to this profile will
                 include a comment with the words "(VOICE 1.0)". From [MIME]

                 Example:

                    MIME-Version: 1.0 (VOICE 1.0)
     Content-Type

                 The content-type header declares the type of content enclosed
                 in the message.  One of the allowable contents is multipart, a
                 mechanism for bundling several message components into a
                 single message.  The allowable contents are specified in the
                 next section of this document.  From [MIME]

     Content-Transfer-Encoding

                 Because Internet mail was initially specified to carry only 7-
                 bit US-ASCII text, it may be necessary to encode voice and fax
                 data into a representation suitable for that environment.  The
                 content-transfer-encoding header describes this transformation
                 if it is needed. From [MIME]

     Sensitivity
                 The requested privacy level. If this field exists, regardless
                 of the selected case-insensitive value "Personal" or
                 "Private". If no privacy is requested, this field is omitted.

     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                               7
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995

                 If a Sensitivity header is present in the message, a
                 conformant system is prohibited from forwarding this message.
                 If the receiving system does not support privacy and the
                 sensitivity is one of "Personal" or "Private", the message
                 must be returned to the sender with an appropriate error
                 message indicating that privacy could not be assured and that
                 the message was not delivered.

                 The specific privacy values do not need to be offered
                 individually to users but can be set on a system-wide basis.
                 From [X400]

     Importance

                 Indicates the requested priority to be given by the receiving
                 system.  The case-insensitive values "low", "normal" and
                 "high" are specified.  If no special importance is requested,
                 this header may be omitted and the value assumed to be
                 "normal".  This field can be used to order messages in a
                 recipient's mailbox and is equivalent to the AMIS-Digital
                 Priority indication. From [X400]

     5.3. Message Content Types

     MIME is a general-purpose message body format that is extensible to carry a
     wide range of body parts.  The basic protocol is described in [MIME]. MIME
     also provides for encoding binary data so that it can be transported over
     the 7-bit text-oriented SMTP protocol.  This transport encoding is
     independent of the audio encoding designed to generate a binary object.

     MIME defines two transport encoding mechanisms to transform binary data
     into a 7 bit representation, one designed for text-like data ("Quoted-
     Printable"), and one for arbitrary binary data ("Base-64").  While Base-64
     is dramatically more efficient for audio data, both will work.  Where
     binary transport is available, not transport encoding is needed, and the
     data can be labled as "Binary".

     An implementation in conformance with this profile is required to send
     audio data in binary form when binary message transport is available.  When
     binary transport is not available, implementations must encode the message
     as Base-64.  The detection and decoding of "Quoted-Printable", "7bit", and
     "8bit" must also be supported in order to meet MIME requirements and to
     preserve interoperability with the fullest range of possible devices.
     Bullet this list....

     The following content types are identified for use with this profile.  Note
     that each of these contents can be sent individually in a message or
     wrapped in a multipart message to send multi-segment messages.

     Message/RFC822 (REQUIRED)

                 MIME requires support of the Message/RFC822 message
                 encapsulation body part.  This body part is used in the
                 Internet to forward complete messages within a multipart/mixed

     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                                ]
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                 message.  Processing of this body part entails trivial
                 processing to unencapsulate/encapsulate the message.  It is
                 not to be sent by a system conformant to this profile but must
                 be accepted for conformance with basic MIME.  From [MIME]

     Text/Plain (REQUIRED)

                 MIME requires support of the basic text/plain content type.
                 This content type has no applicability within the voice
                 messaging environment and should not be sent.  Specific
                 handling depends on the platform, and interpretation of this
                 content-type is left as an implementation decision.  Options
                 include dropping the body part and sending a delivery report
                 indicating the lack of support, text-to-speech, and text-to-
                 fax support.  From [MIME]

     Multipart/Mixed (REQUIRED)

                 MIME provides the facilities for enclosing several body parts
                 in a single message. Multipart/Mixed may be used for sending
                 multi-segment voice messages, that is, to preserve across the
                 network the distinction between an annotation and a forwarded
                 message. Systems are permitted to collapse such a multi-
                 segment message into a single segment if multi-segment
                 messages are not supported on the receiving machine.  From
                 [MIME]

     Text/Signature (RECOMMENDED)

                 Text/Signature provides a mechanism for the sending of per-
                 user directory information including the spoken name and the
                 supported mailbox capabilities.  When used with a caching
                 mechanism, basic directory services with entries for commonly
                 used entries can be maintained.  This body part is intended to
                 be used to support spoken name confirmation.  The
                 Text/Signature can be included with a message using the
                 multipart/mixed constructor type.  From [SIG]

     Message/Notification (REQUIRED)

                 This new MIME body part is used for sending machine parsable
                 delivery status notifications. From [NOTIFY]

     Multipart/Report (REQUIRED)

                 The Multipart/Report is used for enclosing a
                 Message/Notification body part and any returned message
                 content.  This body type is a companion to
                 Message/Notification.  From [NOTIFY2]

     Audio/ADPCM (REQUIRED)

                 CCITT Recommendation G.721 describes the algorithm recommended
                 for conversion of a 64 KB/s A-law or u-law PCM channel to and

     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                 from a 32 KB/s channel.  The conversion is applied to the PCM
                 stream using an Adaptive Differential Pulse Code Modulation
                 (ADPCM) transcoding technique. This algorithm will be
                 registered with the IANA for MIME use under the name
                 Audio/ADPCM.

                 Support of Audio/ADPCM is required for conformance with this
                 profile.

     Proprietary Voice Formats (OPTIONAL)

                 Proprietary voice encoding formats are supported under this
                 profile provided a unique identifier is registered with the
                 IANA prior to use.

                 Note that use of proprietary encodings reduces
                 interoperability in the absence of explicit manual system
                 configuration.





































     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     6.   Message Transport Protocol

     Messages are transported between VM machines using the Internet Extended
     Simple Mail Transport Protocol (ESMTP).  All information required for
     proper delivery of the message is included in the ESMTP dialog.  This
     information, including the sender and recipient addresses, is commonly
     referred to as the message "envelope".  This information is equivalent to
     the message control block in many analog voice networking protocols.

     ESMTP is a general-purpose messaging protocol, designed both to send mail
     and to allow terminal console messaging.  Simple Mail Transport Protocol
     (SMTP) was originally created for the exchange of US-ASCII 7-bit text
     messages.  Binary and 8-bit text messages have traditionally been
     transported by encoding the messages into a 7-bit text-like form.  [ESMTP]
     was recently published and formalized an extension mechanism for SMTP, and
     subsequent RFCs have defined 8-bit text networking, binary networking, and
     extensions to permit the declaration of message size for the efficient
     transmission of large messages such as multi-minute voice mail.

     A command streaming extension for high performance message transmission has
     been defined.  [PIPE] This extension reduces the number of round-trip
     packet exchanges and makes it possible to validate all recipient addresses
     in one operation.  This extension is optional but recommended.

     The following sections list ESMTP commands, keywords, and parameters that
     are required and those that are optional.

     6.1. ESMTP Commands

     HELO (REQUIRED)

                 Base SMTP greeting and identification of sender.  This command
                 is not to be sent by conforming systems unless the more-
                 capable EHLO command is not accepted.  It is included for
                 compatibility with general SMTP implementations.  From [SMTP]

     MAIL FROM (REQUIRED)

                 Originating mailbox.  This address contains the mailbox to
                 which errors should be sent.  This address may not be the same
                 as the message sender listed in the message header fields if
                 the message was gatewayed or sent to an Internet-style mailing
                 list.  From [SMTP]

     RCPT TO (REQUIRED)

                 Recipient's mailbox.  This field contains only the addresses
                 to which the message should be delivered for this transaction.
                 In the event that multiple transport connections to multiple
                 destination machines are required for the same message, this
                 list may not match the list of recipients in the message
                 header.  From [SMTP]

     DATA (REQUIRED)

     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                        [Page 11]
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                 Initiates the transfer of message data.  This command is
                 required to be supported but should only be used in the event
                 the binary mode command BDAT is not supported.  From [SMTP]

     TURN (RECOMMENDED)

                 Requests a change-of-roles, that is, the client that opened
                 the connection offers to assume the role of server for any
                 mail the remote machine may wish to send.  This command is
                 useful to poll for messages.

                 (Note the security implications of using the turn command to
                 fetch mail queued for another destination.  This fetching is
                 possible because of the lack of authentication of the sending
                 VM by the protocol). From [SMTP]

     QUIT (REQUIRED)

                 Requests that the connection be closed.  If accepted, the
                 remote machine will reset and close the connection.  From
                 [SMTP]

     RSET (REQUIRED)

                 Resets the connection to its initial state.  From [SMTP]

     VRFY (OPTIONAL)

                 Requests verification that this node can reach the listed
                 recipient.  While this functionality is also included in the
                 RCPT TO command, VRFY allows the query without beginning a
                 mail transfer transaction.  This command is useful for
                 debugging and tracing problems.  From [SMTP]

                 (Note that the implementation of VRFY may simplify the
                 guessing of a recipient's mailbox or automated sweeps for
                 valid mailbox addresses, resulting in a possible reduction in
                 privacy.  Various implementation techniques may be used to
                 reduce the threat, such as limiting the number of queries per
                 session.)  From [SMTP]

     EHLO (REQUIRED)

                 Enhanced mail greeting that enables a server to announce
                 support for extended messaging options.  The extended
                 messaging modes are discussed in a later section of this
                 document.  From [ESMTP]

     BDAT (REQUIRED)

                  Initiates binary data transmission.




     Vaudreuil                        es 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


                  The BDAT command is an alternative to the earlier DATA
                  command.  The BDAT command does not require encoding voice
                  data into 7-bit line-limited formats.

                  All other commands must be recognized and an appropriate
                  error code returned if not supported.   From [BIN]

     6.2. ESMTP Keywords

     STREAMING (Optional)

                 The "STREAMING" keyword indicates ability of the receiving
                 SMTP to accept pipelined SMTP commands.  From [PIPE]

     SIZE (Required)

                 The "SIZE" keyword provides a mechanism by which the receiving
                 SMTP can indicate the maximum size message supported.  From
                 [SIZE]

     CHUNKING (Required)

                 The "CHUNKING" keyword indicates that the receiver will
                 support the high-performance transport mode.  Note that
                 CHUNKING can be used with any message format and does not
                 imply support for binary encoded messages.  From [BIN]

     BINARYMIME (Required)

                 The "BINARYMIME" keyword indicates that the receiver SMTP can
                 accept binary encoded MIME messages.  Note that CHUNKING mode
                 must be supported for this option, but CHUNKING does not mean
                 that binary messages can be supported.  From [BIN]

     NOTIFY (Required)

                 The "NOTIFY" keywork indicates that the receiver SMTP will
                 accept explicit delivery status notification requests. From
                 [DSN]

     6.3. ESMTP Parameters - MAIL FROM

     BINARYMIME  The current message is a binary encoded MIME messages.  From
                 [BIN]

     6.4. ESMTP Parameters - RCPT TO

     NOTIFY      The conditions under which a delivery report should be sent.
                 From [DSN]

     RET         Whether the content of the message should be returned. From
                 [DSN]



     Vaudreuil                    Expires 5/1/95
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     7.Management Protocols

     The Internet protocols provide a mechanism for the management of VM
     machines, from the management of the physical network through the
     management of the message queues.  SNMP should be supported on a compliant
     message machine.

     The digital interface to the VM and the TCP/IP protocols should be managed
     by the standard network Managed Information Bases (MIBs).  MIB II provides
     basic statistics and reporting of the TCP/IP protocol performance and
     statistics.  Media-specific MIBs are available for X.25, Ethernet, FDDI,
     Token Ring, Frame Relay, and other network technologies.  This MIB provides
     necessary information to diagnose faulty hardware, overloaded network
     conditions, and excessive traffic conditions from a remote management
     station.

     Management of the machine resources and message queue monitoring based on
     the host MIB and the Message and Directory MIB is recommended but not
     required for conformance with this profile.




































     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                        [Page 14]
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     8.References

     [MIME]    Borenstein, N., and N. Freed, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
               Extensions", RFC 1521, Bellcore, Innosoft, Sept 1993.

     [MSG822]  Crocker, D., "Standard for the Format of ARPA Internet Text
               Messages", STD 11, RFC 822, UDEL, August 1982.

     [X400]    Hardcastle-Kille, S., "Mapping between X.400(1988) / ISO 10021
               and RFC 822", RFC 1327, May 1992.

     [PIPE]    Freed, N., Klensin, J., "SMTP Service Extension for Command
               Pipelining" Internet Draft <draft-freed-streaming-0?.txt>

     [ESMTP]   Klensin, J., Freed, N., Rose, M., Stefferud, E., and D. Crocker,
               "SMTP Service Extensions" RFC 1425, United Nations University,
               Innosoft International, Inc., Dover Beach Consulting, Inc.,
               Network Management Associates, Inc., The Branch Office, February
               1993.

     [SIZE]    Klensin, J, Freed, N., Moore, K, "SMTP Service Extensions for
               Message Size Declaration" RFC 1427,  United Nations University,
               Innosoft International, Inc., Inc., February 1993. February 1993.

     [8BIT]    Klensin, J., Freed, N., Rose, M., Stefferud, E., D. Crocker,
               "SMTP Service Extension for 8bit-MIMEtransport" RFC 1426, United
               Nations University, Innosoft International, Inc., Dover Beach
               Consulting, Inc., Network Management Associates, Inc., The Branch
               Office, February 1993.

     [DNS1]    Mockapetris, P.,"Domain names - implementation and
               specification", RFC1035, Nov 1987.

     [DNS2]    Mockapetris, P.,"Domain names - concepts and facilities", RFC
               1034, Nov 1987.

     [SMTP]    Postel, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", STD 10, RFC 821,
               USC/Information Sciences Institute, August 1982.

     [SIG]     Vaudreuil, G., "Text/Signature", Internet Draft <draft-vaudreuil-
               signature-??.txt>

     [BIN]     Vaudreuil, G., "SMTP Service Extensions for Transmission of Large
               and Binary MIME Messages", Internet Draft <draft-vaudreuil-
               binary-??.txt>

     [NOTIFY]  Vaudreuil, G., Moore, K., "An Extensible Message Format for
               Delivery Status Notifications", Internet Draft <draft-ietf-
               notary-mime-delivery-0?-txt>

     [NOTIFY2] Vaudreuil, G., "Multipart/Report", Internet-Draft, <draft-ietf-
               notary-mime-report-0?.txt>



     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                      [Page 15]
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     [DSN]     Moore, K. "SMTP Service Extensions for Delivery Status
               Notifications", Internet Draft <draft-ietf-notary-smtp-drpt-
               ??.txt>.

     9.Security Consideration

     This document is a profile of existing Internet mail protcools.  As such,
     it does create any security issues not already existing in the profiled
     Internet mail protocols themselves.

     10.  Author's Address

     Gregory M. Vaudreuil
     Octel Communications Corporation
     Network Services Divison
     17080 Dallas Parkway
     Dallas, TX 75248-1905
     214-733-2722
     Greg.Vaudreuil@ONS.Octel.Com




































     Vaudreuil                   Expires 5/1/95                        [Page 16]
     Internet Draft            MIME Voice Profile               January 26, 1995


     11.  Appendix - Example Voice Message

     The following message is a full-featured, all-options-enabled message
     addressed to two recipients. The message includes the sender's spoken name
     and a short speech segment.  The message is marked as important and
     private.  Read receipts and positive delivery acknowledgment are requested.

     To: 2145551212@vm1.mycompany.com
     To: 2145551234@mv1.mycompany.com
     From: 2175552345@VM2.mycompany.com
     Date: Mon, 26 Aug 93 10:20:20 CST
     MIME-Version: 1.0  (Voice Profile Version 1)
     Content-type: Multipart/Mixed; Boundary = "MessageBoundary"
     Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
      Message-ID: VM1.mycompany.co-123456789
     Sensitivity: PrivateImportance: High

     --MessageBoundary
     Content-type: Text/Signature

     Name:         User, Joe, R. (Joe Random User)
     SpokenName:   lslfdslsertiflkTfpgkTportrpkTpfgTpoiTpssdasddasdasd
                  (This is the base-64 encoded spoken name)
                   o45itj09fiuvdkjgWlakgQ93ijkpokfpgokQ90geQ5tkjpokfgW
                   dlkgpokpeowrit09IpokporkgwI==
     Capabilities: Audio/Basic, Audio/ADPCM, Application/Signature,
                   Image/G3Fax

     --MessageBoundary
     Content-type: Audio/ADPCM
     Content-Transfer-Encoding: Base-64

     glslfdslsertiflkTfpgkTportrpkTpfgTpoiTpdadasssdasddasdasd
     (This is a sample of the base-64 message data) fgdhgdfgd
     jrgoij3o45itj09fiuvdkjgWlakgQ93ijkpokfpgokQ90gQ5tkjpokfgW
     dlkgpokpeowrit09==

     --MessageBoundary--


