
                                                              P. Pfautz
Internet Draft                                                     AT&T
Document: draft-pfautz-na-enum-00.txt                       August 2000
Category: Informational
Expires: February 15, 2001


  Administrative Requirements for Deployment of ENUM in North America


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document discusses a number of the administrative issues that
   must be resolved before effective deployment of ENUM[2,3] services
   in complex environments with number portability and multiple
   providers for using DNS for translation of E.164 (telephone)
   numbers. North America is examined critically because its
   environment may be more complex than most and because current
   deregulation trends may drive other countries/regions in similar
   directions. In particular the current mechanisms for number
   administration and number portability in North America will require
   establishment of a new administrative function for managing the
   domain name entries for ported numbers.

   An important conclusion of this analysis is that it is unlikely that
   production use of the ENUM mechanisms is feasible in North America
   (at least) until administrative agreements are reached and that


Pfautz          Informational - Expires February 2001                1

Administrative Requirements to Deploy ENUM in North America August 2000


   these agreements are normally outside the scope of IETF and within
   the scope of regulatory bodies dealing with telephony.



Overview

   While the basic protocols and principles for the ENUM service
   [2,3]are simple, some administrative operations associated with
   number portability (moving telephone numbers from one service
   provider to another) must be handled carefully for the service to
   work properly. In North America, this will require the introduction
   of some new administrative functions. It is likely that similar
   problems will arise in any other administrative domain with similar
   portability constraints.

1. ENUM Number Delegation and North America

   The ENUM specification [3, section 4] indicates that the IANA should
   delegate the E164.ARPA domain so that names within this zone are
   delegated to parties according to the ITU recommendation E.164. The
   names allocated are to be hierarchic in accordance with ITU
   Recommendation E.164, and the codes assigned in accordance with that
   Recommendation.

   Following this instruction, subdomains corresponding to Country
   Codes will be delegated to the corresponding national authorities;
   for example, the domain "4.4.e164.arpa" would be administered by the
   national authority for the United Kingdom, which has country code
   "44".

   In North America, several sovereign states share the country code
   "1". Administration of the numbering plan rests with an organization
   known as the North American Numbering Plan Administrator (NANPA)[5].

   Determining the authority for a number is made much more complicated
   by Service Provider Number Portability. As part of a mandate to
   provide for competition in the telephone service marketplace,
   customers may retain their telephone numbers, even when switching to
   another provider of local telephone service. That is, customers may
   port their telephone number from the provider to which it was
   originally assigned (as part of a Central Office code) to a
   different provider. For this reason, there is, within a country
   code, ultimately no hierarchical correspondence between the
   telephone number and the service provider or the administrative
   authority for a number.

   Although the NANPA is responsible for number assignments, a
   different entity, The Number Portability Administration Center
   (NPAC) provides the industry database of record for ported
   geographic telephone numbers.

 Pfautz         Informational - Expires February 2001                2

Administrative Requirements to Deploy ENUM in North America August 2000



   Access to NPAC data is not free and comes with a set of usage
   restrictions and interface requirements.

   Toll-Free (e.g., 800, 888) numbers are individually assigned to end
   users who may port service on the number from one provider to
   another. PSTN originating local service providers must query a copy
   of the industry toll-free database for each toll-free call to
   determine the proper carrier to which the call should be delivered
   for processing. The data in the Service Control Points (SCPs)
   queried by the PSTN are populated under tariff by the 800 SMS
   (Service Management System). The 800 SMS is owned by the Bell
   Operating Companies, but data center, software support, and help
   desk functions have been contracted out to other parties.



2. Previously proposed schemes for ENUM delegation

   Delegation of authority for domain names below the "1.E164.ARPA"
   level has been discussed widely. For example, there have been
   suggestions that such delegations might follow the delegation of
   blocks of numbers (Central Office codes) to service providers for
   assignments to customers. For example, a telephone service provider
   serving phone numbers of the form "650-555-xxxx" could be given
   administrative control of "5.5.5.0.5.6.1.E164.ARPA".  The service
   providers could then provide the service registrar[4] function or
   delegate it to some other party designated by the customer. This
   would have made for a fairly compact set of zones of authority at
   the 1.e164.arpa level.

   Unfortunately, number portability means that this scheme cannot be
   used simply. To further complicate matters, the US FCC has ordered
   the implementation of thousands block number pooling to allow
   carriers to share NPA-NXX codes, with blocks being allocated to
   carriers at the 7-digit or NPA-NXX-X level.

   Another proposal for dealing with portability had been to delegate
   authority for NPA-NXXs containing ported numbers to the number
   portability authority. This two-level process does not simplify
   matters when most numbers are or will be in portable NPA-NXXs.

   3. Implications for Delegation of Authority for Numbers

   Establishment of a practical ENUM service for numbers in the North
   American Numbering Plan will require some entity, whether new or
   existing, to be chartered to perform the administrative function of
   maintaining DNS records. There will also have to be an arrangement
   for this entity to recover its costs.

   The ENUM portability entity will need to maintain records for
   individual customer numbers or number blocks; because of number
 Pfautz         Informational - Expires February 2001                3

Administrative Requirements to Deploy ENUM in North America August 2000


   portability, it cannot simply delegate following the patterns of
   number block (NPA-NXX or NPA-NXX-X) delegation for number
   assignment.

   The entity will have to establish relationships and interfaces with
   NPAC and 800 SMS to obtain information on ported numbers.

   It is anticipated that the records maintained by this entity will be
   pointers to the service registrar for a particular number rather
   than containing the URLs required for actual services. The service
   registrar might be either the number user's current telephony
   provider (whether original or ported-to) or some other party
   designated by the number holder. The service registrar's DNS
   contains the actual NAPTR records that point to URLs for particular
   services.

   There will need to be some specification of the the operational
   procedures for carriers and number users to specify or change the
   record containing their service registrar.

   As with selection of local exchange and interexchange (long
   distance) carriers in the PSTN, these procedures will require
   adequate authentication or verification mechanisms to prevent
   unauthorized changes.

4. Example

   The following example illustrates how ENUM might be implemented for
   North American numbers:
   Say that the content of the e164.arpa zone includes the following:


      $ORIGIN e164.arpa.
      1 IN NS ns.nanp_enum.com.

   Where ns.nanp_enum.com is the name server maintained by the
   contractor that the regulatory authorities for the NANP have
   selected to provide DNS service for 1.e164.arpa domain

   The contractor provisions their DNS with records that point to the
   service registrar for each number or number block. The service
   registrar may default to the end customer's current service provider
   (as reflected in the NPAC if ported or 800 SMS if the number is a
   toll free number) or may be another entity designated by the
   customer.

   A user named Jenny Jones obtained the phone number +1-792-867-5309
   from Telco A (domain name telco-a.example) and ported it to Telco B
   (domain name telco-b.example) . She gets the service of running DNS
   from the Example Redirection Service (domain name ers.example). Her
   neighbor Tommy simply has plain telephony with Telco A for the
   number +1-792-867-5310. So ns.nanp_enum shows
 Pfautz         Informational - Expires February 2001                4

Administrative Requirements to Deploy ENUM in North America August 2000




      $ORIGIN 7.6.8.2.9.7.1.e164.arpa.
      9.0.3.5 IN NS ns.ers.example.
      0.1.3.5 IN NS ns.telco-a.example.

      Jenny not only has plain telephony from Telco B, but also a
      SIP service from the company ESS (Example SIP Service) which
      provides Jenny with the SIP URI "sip:jenny@ess.example".

      The DNS for the redirection service because of this contains the
      following:


      $ORIGIN 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.2.9.7.1.e164.arpa.
       IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "sip+E2U"  "!^.*$!sip:jenny@ess.example!"  .
       IN NAPTR 102 10 "u" "tel+E2U"  "!^.*$!tel:+1-792-867-5309!"


   If Tommy were to port his number to another Telco, he or his agent
   (e.g., the company to which he ported) would have to update the
   1.e164.arpa DNS service to show a new service registrar, whether the
   new telco or, as in Jenny's case, a third party.


8. References
   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3,
   BCP9, RFC 2026, October, 1996.
   [2] Brown, A. "Telephone Number Mapping", draft-enum-rqmts-01-txt.
   June 2000
   [3] Fahlstrom, P. "E.164 number and DNS." draft-ietf-enum-e164-dns-
   03-txt. August 2000.
   [4] Brown, A., & Vaudreuil, G. ENUM Service Specific Provisioning:
   Principles of Operation. Draft-ietf-enum-operation-00.txt. July 13,
   2000.
   [5] North American Numbering Plan Administration (NANPA)
   <http:\\www.nanpa.com>



9. Author's Addresses

   Penn Pfautz
   AT&T
   Room E4-3A01
   200 South Laurel Avenue
   Middletown, NJ 07748
   U.S.A.
   Phone: +1 732-420-4962
   Email: ppfautz@att.com


 Pfautz         Informational - Expires February 2001                5

Administrative Requirements to Deploy ENUM in North America August 2000



Full Copyright Statement

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

       The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
   be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

       This document and the information contained herein is provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


























 Pfautz         Informational - Expires February 2001                6
