



INTERNET-DRAFT                                           Alex Simonelis
Category: Informational                     Computer Science Department
                                                         Dawson College
                                                       Montreal, Canada
Expires: July 2004                                         January 2004




             A Concise Guide to the Major Internet Bodies

            <draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   Who steers the Internet? Despite its loose organization, certain
   protocols and parameters are essential for a computer to operate on
   the Internet. The bodies responsible for those protocols and
   parameters can be said to steer the Internet in a significant sense.
   This document is a summary of those bodies and their most important
   characteristics.

 







Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 1]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


1.  Introduction

   Who steers the Internet? "The Internet, a loosely-organized
   international collaboration of autonomous, interconnected networks,
   supports host-to-host communication through voluntary adherence to
   open protocols and procedures defined by Internet Standards." [1].
   While this definition is essentially correct, its emphasis might
   give the reader the impression that no one is at the helm of the
   Internet. That conclusion would be wrong. Certain protocols, and the
   parameters required for their usage, are essential in order to
   operate on the Internet. A number of bodies have become responsible
   for those protocol standards and parameters. It can be fairly said
   that those bodies steer the Internet in a significant sense. This
   document is a summary of those bodies and their most important
   characteristics.

   The bodies belong to three major nexuses. Links, both formal and
   informal, exist between the nexuses.
   
   Almost all Internet technological standards are developed and set by
   the group consisting of the Internet Society (ISOC) and the units
   operating under the auspices of ISOC: the Internet Architecture
   Board (IAB), the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), the
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Internet Research
   Steering Group (IRSG), the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and
   the RFC Editor. It is important to note that, while these units are
   responsible to ISOC, ISOC allows them a large degree of independence
   in their technical work.

   Internet domain names and IP addresses are the province of the
   Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) and its
   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).

   World Wide Web standards are developed by the World Wide Web
   Consortium (W3C).

   It should be noted that the direction of the Internet's physical
   network structure is not addressed in this document. That structure
   is essentially determined by a large number of mainly commercial
   network operators, ranging from small to intercontinental, that
   build and join their infrastructures in response to market forces,
   in order to provide them to subscribers on a paid basis. These
   networks that form the Internet are linked in a topology similar to
   that of a large, well-developed highway system. 





Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 2]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


2.  ISOC

   ORGANIZATION: In 1991, the large growth of the Internet, including
   its commercial sector, and the community's need for a formal
   organization to provide a legal home for the standards bodies of
   that time (IETF, etc.) led to the formation, under the auspices of
   the Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI), of the
   Internet Society. In January 1992, the Internet Society was
   chartered as a U.S. District of Columbia non-profit corporation.
   
   GOVERNANCE: ISOC is governed by its Board of Trustees.
   
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: ISOC welcomes individuals and organizations
   as members. Individuals in the Internet community have ample
   opportunity to participate in ISOC and its component bodies.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: ISOC's mission is "To assure the open development,
   evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people
   throughout the world." [2]. As one of its most important tasks, it
   "facilitates open development of standards, protocols,
   administration and the technical infrastructure of the Internet"
   [2], and so it is the organizational home for most of the groups
   that are responsible for developing Internet technical standards.
   
   FUNDING: ISOC is funded mainly from organization member fees.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: IAB, IESG, IETF, IRSG, IRTF, RFC Editor.

3.  IETF

   ORGANIZATION: The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) held its
   first meeting in 1986. It is a loosely self-organized, large, grass
   roots technical group consisting of network administrators,
   designers, researchers, vendors, users, etc. In its broader sense,
   IETF is used to refer to IETF, IAB, IESG, IRSG, IRTF and RFC Editor
   as a collective.
   
   GOVERNANCE: The IETF is not a formal body, and has no board of
   directors. It operates as an activity of ISOC and is responsible to
   it. For its technical work, it is divided into broad units called
   areas, each led by the Area Director(s) (ADs). ADs are proposed by
   the nominating committee (the Nomcom) of the IETF, and appointed by
   the IAB. The areas are divided into more specialized working groups
   (WGs), each with chair(s). WG chairs serve at the pleasure of the
   appropriate AD. IETF has a chair who is proposed by the nominating
   committee of the IETF, and then appointed by the other voting
   members of the IAB. The IETF chair is also the chair of IESG. WG and
   AD decisions are subject to appeal to the IESG.
  
Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 3]
  
  
  
  
  
draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004
  
  
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: There is no formal membership. Generally,
   attendance at IETF meetings and subscription to IETF mailing lists
   is open to all volunteers. Participants are expected to contribute
   as individuals, rather than as representatives of companies or
   organizations.

   MISSION/GOALS: The IETF concerns itself with the engineering and
   architecture of the Internet. It is the principal body that
   develops, tests and implements new Internet technological standards,
   including protocols. The IETF proposes standards to the IESG.
   
   FUNDING: The IETF, including its small Secretariat, is largely
   self-funded via IETF meeting attendance fees. A relatively small
   percentage of IETF's budget is contributed by ISOC.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ISOC, IAB, IESG, RFC Editor, ICANN, IANA, W3C.

4.  IESG

   ORGANIZATION: Formed in 1989, the Internet Engineering Steering
   Group (IESG) is the management group of the IETF.
   
   GOVERNANCE: The IESG operates as an activity of ISOC and is
   responsible to it. The IESG is led by the IETF/IESG chair. IESG
   decisions are subject to appeal to the IAB.
   
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: The members are the Area Directors of IETF,
   the chair of IETF/IESG and a small number of ex-officio and liaison
   members.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: The IESG vets and approves IETF standards, and
   generally manages the standards process according to the policies
   and procedures ratified by the ISOC Trustees. The IESG creates IETF
   working groups, etc.
   
   FUNDING: The IESG is largely self-funded. ISOC contributes.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ISOC, IAB, IETF, RFC Editor, IANA.

5.  IRTF

   ORGANIZATION: Formed in 1989, the Internet Research Task Force
   (IRTF) is a self-organized research group.
   
   GOVERNANCE: The IRTF is divided into research groups (RGs), each
   with chair(s). RG chairs may be removed by the IRTF chair, subject
   to appeal to the IAB. The IAB appoints the chair of the IRTF. The
   IRTF chair reports to the IAB.

Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 4]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: Since RGs are expected to be long-term
   groups, and to encourage the kind of working relationships such
   groups may need, membership in RGs may be open or closed, in
   contrast with IETF WGs, which are always open. Participants are
   expected to contribute as individuals, rather than as
   representatives of companies or organizations. 
   
   MISSION/GOALS: While the IETF focuses on engineering and standards,
   the IRTF focuses on research. The IRTF investigates Internet topics
   that are too uncertain or too advanced to be standardized at the
   moment. When IRTF produces a specification that is suitable for
   standardization, it is processed via IETF.
   
   FUNDING: The IRTF is largely self-funded. ISOC contributes.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ISOC, IAB, IRSG.

6.  IRSG

   ORGANIZATION: Formed in 1989, the Internet Research Steering Group
   (IRSG) is the management group of the IRTF.
   
   GOVERNANCE: The IRTF chair leads the IRSG. The IRTF chair reports to
   the IAB.
   
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: The IRSG consists of the chairs of the IRTF
   research groups, the chair of IRTF, and possibly at-large members
   from the research community.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: The IRTF chair manages the IRTF in consultation with
   the IRSG.
   
   FUNDING: The IRSG is largely self-funded. ISOC contributes.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ISOC, IAB, IRTF.

7.  IAB

   ORGANIZATION: In June of 1992, the Internet Society chartered the
   Internet Architecture Board (IAB) as one of its components. The
   ancestor of the IAB was the Internet Configuration Control Board
   (ICCB), a technical advisory group formed by Vint Cerf of DARPA in
   1979. The ICCB was replaced by the Internet Advisory Board (IAB) in
   1984, which became the Internet Activities Board in 1986, which was
   chartered as the Internet Architecture Board in June, 1992.
   



Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 5]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


   GOVERNANCE: ISOC has jurisdiction over the IAB but allows it a large
   degree of independence in its operations. With respect to
   technology, the IAB is considered to be a committee of the IETF.

   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: IAB voting members are proposed by the
   nominating committee of the IETF, and are then appointed by the ISOC
   Board of Trustees. The IETF chair, who is chair of IESG as well, is
   also a voting member. The voting members select one of themselves to
   serve as chair of IAB. Non-voting members, mainly from associated
   bodies, also exist. Members serve as individuals, and not as
   representatives of companies or organizations.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: ISOC mandates the IAB to oversee the architecture of
   the Internet, including its protocols and other standards. IESG
   decisions may be appealed to the IAB. IAB rulings are final, with
   the exception that claims that the IAB proceeded unreasonably may be
   appealed to the ISOC Board of Trustees. The appointment of an
   organization as RFC Editor is subject to IAB approval. The IAB
   claims, on behalf of the IETF, to appoint the organization which is
   to act as IANA (see sections 9 and 10 below). The IAB appoints the
   IETF Area Directors and the IETF chair on recommendation of the
   IETF, as well as the IRTF chair. The IAB advises ISOC's Board, and
   carries out technical external liaison on behalf of ISOC.
   
   FUNDING: The IAB is largely self-funded. ISOC contributes.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ISOC, IESG, IETF, IRSG, IRTF, RFC Editor, ICANN,
   IANA.

8.  RFC Editor

   ORGANIZATION: The RFC document series was initiated by UCLA's Steve
   Crocker in 1969, and maintained originally at the SRI Network
   Information Center, then at USC ISI. Jon Postel of USC ISI headed
   the RFC Editor for decades until his passing in 1998.The RFC Editor
   is currently a small department operated by USC ISI for ISOC.
   
   GOVERNANCE: ISOC appoints an organization as RFC Editor on the
   recommendation of IAB. The IAB vets the general policy followed by
   the RFC Editor.
   
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: ISOC appointees.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: The RFC Editor is the organization that edits,
   manages, publishes and maintains the authoritative archive of the
   Request For Comments (RFC) documents, which are the Internet's
   documents of record.
   

Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 6]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


   FUNDING: ISOC funds the RFC Editor.

   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ISOC, IAB, IESG, IETF, IANA.

9.  ICANN

   ORGANIZATION: In the late '90s, the U.S. government was completing
   implementation of its decision to privatize the Internet. The
   implementation called for the continued operational stability of the
   Internet, including its Domain Name System. In 1998, the Internet
   Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) was chartered as
   a California non-profit corporation for this purpose. It can be
   regarded as a technical coordination and regulation body.
   
   GOVERNANCE: ICANN is governed by its Board of Directors. The
   majority of Directors are selected by ICANN's nominating committee.
   A number of others are appointed by ICANN's supporting
   organizations. Directors are expected to serve as individuals, not
   as representatives. The U.S. Department of Commerce gives ICANN
   authorization to perform the IANA function via a renewable contract
   which contains a number of reporting requirements. For the more
   technical aspects of its operations, ICANN and its Board rely on the
   IETF and the IAB for information and guidance.
   
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: ICANN has neither individual nor
   organizational members in the ordinary sense. Its supporting
   organizations and advisory committees generally provide a great deal
   of feedback to the Board on the issues of the day, and ICANN regards
   them as its constituents. They span the globe and cover a broad
   range of interests: technical, commercial, governmental, academic
   and user-oriented. Individuals in the Internet community have some
   opportunity for participation in ICANN, mainly through its advisory
   committee structure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 7]
 
 
 
 
 
draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004
 
 
   MISSION/GOALS: ICANN's revised articles of incorporation state that
   "... the Corporation shall, except as limited by Article 5 hereof,
   pursue the charitable and public purposes of lessening the burdens
   of government and promoting the global public interest in the
   operational stability of the Internet by (i) coordinating the
   assignment of Internet technical parameters as needed to maintain
   universal connectivity on the Internet; (ii) performing and
   overseeing functions related to the coordination of the Internet
   Protocol ("IP") address space; (iii) performing and overseeing
   functions related to the coordination of the Internet domain name
   system ("DNS"), including the development of policies for
   determining the circumstances under which new top-level domains are
   added to the DNS root system; (iv) overseeing operation of the
   authoritative Internet DNS root server system; and (v) engaging in
   any other related lawful activity in furtherance of items (i)
   through (iv)." [3]. The articles further state that ICANN "shall
   operate for the benefit of the Internet community as a whole,
   carrying out its activities in conformity with relevant principles
   of international law and applicable international conventions and
   local law and, to the extent appropriate and consistent with these
   Articles and its Bylaws, through open and transparent processes that
   enable competition and open entry in Internet-related markets. To
   this effect, the Corporation shall cooperate as appropriate with
   relevant international organizations." Among ICANN's most demanding
   responsibilities are the creation of top-level domains and the
   (re-)delegation of domain registries.
   
   FUNDING: ICANN is funded mainly from domain name and IP address
   registries and registrars. Its budget includes funds for a number of
   staff, headed by a President/CEO and including an Ombudsman.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: IANA, U.S. Department of Commerce, IAB,
   IETF, W3C. 

10. IANA

   ORGANIZATION: The tasks that the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
   (IANA) performs began in the early '70s. Those and ensuing tasks
   were performed, and the organization was led, by Jon Postel for
   decades. Formally, IANA is said to be a service or set of functions.
   In practical terms, it is a subsidiary organization of ICANN. 
   
   GOVERNANCE: In March, 2003, the U.S. Department of Commerce awarded
   its most recent contract to ICANN to perform the IANA functions.
   ICANN operates IANA under the authority of the U.S. government. IANA
   works collegially with the IAB, IESG and IETF in carrying out its
   mission.


Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 8]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: ICANN appointees.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: IANA oversees IP address allocation, manages the DNS
   (this includes root server system oversight and top-level domain
   delegation), and coordinates protocol parameter assignment. All
   Internet domain names and IP addresses are allocated from IANA,
   either directly or, much more likely, indirectly through IANA's
   delegation of authority via a worldwide system of Internet
   registries and registrars.
   
   FUNDING: ICANN funds IANA.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: ICANN, IAB, IESG, IETF, RFC Editor.

11. W3C

   ORGANIZATION: The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) was founded by Tim
   Berners-Lee in October, 1994 at MIT in collaboration with the
   European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN).
   
   GOVERNANCE: The W3C is a group hosted by MIT in the U.S., the
   European Research Consortium in Informatics and Mathematics (ERCIM)
   in Europe, and Keio University in Japan (the Hosts). The W3C is
   responsible to the Hosts, who maintain a Steering Committee that
   sets general policy and strategy for W3C from time to time; the
   majority of the Steering Committee are either from, or appointed by,
   MIT. W3C calls its technical tasks "Activities", and groups them
   into broad units called domains. Activities are carried out by
   Working Group(s) (for technical work), Interest Group(s) (for
   general work) and Coordination Group(s) (for group coordination).
   Groups have a chair and consist of member representatives, Team
   representatives and invited experts. The Team is the Hosts'
   technical and staff corps that leads Activities and manages the W3C.
   The Team includes the Director, the Chief Operating Officer, the W3C
   Chair, W3C Fellows, and others. The Director: has responsibility and
   authority for overall direction of W3C, is the chief technical
   architect, chairs the Technical Architecture Group (TAG), appoints
   group chairs, hears appeals of working group decisions, is appointed
   by MIT and reports to the Director of MIT's Lab for Computer
   Sciences. The Chief Operating Officer is responsible for worldwide
   operations and general management of W3C. The W3C Chair, appointed
   by MIT, is responsible for member relations and external liaison.
   The Advisory Committee (AC) is the general assembly of the
   membership, with one representative from each member; it reviews
   proposed Activities and recommendations, and suggests future
   directions for the W3C.
   
   
   
Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                  [Page 9]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


   The Advisory Board, elected by the Advisory Committee, is the
   representative council of the membership; its chair is appointed by
   the Team; it is not a board of directors; it gives guidance to the
   Team on legal issues, strategy, administration, structures, process,
   etc., and can do so in between Advisory Committee meetings, which
   are infrequent.
   
   MEMBERSHIP/COMPOSITION: The W3C is structured, and membership is
   priced, to have organizations as members. Individuals in the
   Internet community have limited opportunity for participation in
   W3C, mainly via those W3C mailing lists that are public.
   
   MISSION/GOALS: "The mission of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
   is to lead the World Wide Web to its full potential by developing
   common protocols that promote its evolution and ensure its
   interoperability." [4]. The W3C develops, tests and implements new
   Web technological standards ("recommendations" in W3C parlance). The
   W3C is similar to the IETF in that it develops technological
   standards, but its focus is more tightly directed, at the Web and
   associated technologies.
   
   FUNDING: W3C is funded mainly from organization member fees, and
   some grants. Its budget includes funds for a number of staff and
   collaborative resources.
   
   ASSOCIATED BODIES: IETF, ICANN.

12. Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Dawson College. Thanks to Vint Cerf, whose repeated
   reviews improved this document notably, and to Bob Braden, Ian B.
   Jacobs and Tim Berners-Lee for their constructive reviews.

13. Security Considerations

   This document does not create any security issues for the Internet
   community.

14. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations raised in this document.

15. Normative References

   There are no normative references since this is an informational
   document.



Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                 [Page 10]





draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


16. Informative References

   [1] Internet Activities Board, "The Internet Standards Process" -
   RFC1310, RFC Editor, March 1992.

   [2] ISOC, URL "http://www.isoc.org/isoc/mission/", November 2003.

   [3] ICANN, URL "http://www.icann.org/general/articles.htm", November
   2003.

   [4] W3C, URL "http://www.w3c.org/Consortium/Process", November 2003.

17. Author's Address

   Alex Simonelis
   Computer Science Department
   Dawson College
   3040 Sherbrooke Street West
   Montreal, Quebec
   Canada
   H3Z 1A4

   Phone: +1 514 931 8731 extension 5058
   EMail: asimonelis@dawsoncollege.qc.ca

18. Copyright Notice and Disclaimer

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

 
 
 
Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                 [Page 11]
 
 
 
 
 
draft-simonelis-internet-bodies-guide-00.txt               January 2004


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.











































Simonelis                  Expires: July 2004                 [Page 12]

