


Network Working Group                                          R. Barnes
Internet-Draft                                          BBN Technologies
Intended status: Informational                                 June 2007
Expires: December 3, 2007


       Proxy Authentication of the Emergency Status of SIP Calls
                       draft-barnes-ecrit-auth-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 3, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   In order to prevent abuse of emergency calling resources for non-
   emergency purposes, operators of SIP proxies require a capability to
   distinguish emergency calls from non-emergency calls.  This document
   describes several mechanisms by which the entities participating in a
   call can include in SIP headers a verifiable assertion that the
   signaled call is an emergency call.





Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Authenticators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Location and Service URN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Asserter Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Direct assertion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Embedding Authenticators in SIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9






































Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


1.  Introduction

   In order to prevent abuse of emergency calling resources for non-
   emergency purposes, operators of SIP [RFC3261] proxies require a
   capability to distinguish emergency calls from non-emergency calls.
   For example, in many jurisdictions, operators of circuit-switched
   telephone networks are required to provide emergency calling free of
   charge, and such requirements will likely be applied also to packet-
   switched Voice Service Providers (VSPs).  If VSPs cannot reliably
   distinguish between emergency and non-emergency calls (and emergency
   calls must be free), then there is a risk that legitimate emergency
   calls will be charged, or that non-emergency calls will be able to
   masquerade as emergency calls to escape charging.

   In any emergency call, there are two entities that have authoritative
   knowledge that a call is in fact an emergency call, namely the
   calling party (who has an emergency) and the called party (the
   emergency services provider).  In some cases, certain SIP proxies may
   also have such knowledge.  Thus, what is required is a mechanism for
   these entities to assert to other proxies in the signaling path that
   the call is an emergency call, i.e., a mechanism for embedding
   information that authenticates the call as an emergency call into SIP
   header fields.  This mechanism must specify how such assertions are
   created by parties asserting an emergency call, and how they are
   verified by parties relying on the fact that a call is an emergency
   call.

   This document describes options for such a mechanism, in two parts:
   First, a set of data structures that allow verification (or
   "authenticators"), and second, a set of requirements for how these
   authenticators should be carried in SIP messages and header fields.
   Each authenticator presented here relies on a different model for
   verification, with a corresponding underlying trust model.  Likewise,
   each SIP embedding has different implications for which SIP messages
   must be available to a verifying proxy.

   The scope of this document is restricted to the authentication of
   SIP-signalled emergency calls, in which the authenticator is asserted
   (inserted into the SIP message flow) by the UAC, a UAS, or a proxy.
   The primary focus of this document is citizen-to-authority emergency
   calling; some solutions, however, apply to authority-to-authority or
   authority-to-citizen calling as well.


2.  Authenticators

   This document describes three types of authenticators, with three
   different underlying trust models.  The first is based on trust in



Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


   the LoST infrastructure, the second on trust in an authentication
   infrastructure for emergency services entities, and the third on
   trust in an authentication infrastructure for a set of authorized
   asserters.  Each of these authenticators also has implications for
   the choice of how it should be carried in SIP messages.

2.1.  Location and Service URN

   In this model, the authenticating information is a location object
   and a service URN.  The asserter inserts into a SIP message a
   location object and the service URN corresponding to the emergency
   service requested.  To verify a call, the verifier performs a LoST
   findService query to map the included location and service URN to a
   set of one or more URIs.  The call is authenticated if the URI in the
   message's To header field is the same as one of the URIs included in
   the LoST response.  (Note that the inserted location may be that of
   the caller/UAC or of the asserter, but need not be, so long as a LoST
   query returns the URI in the To header field.)

   This is the model assumed in current ECRIT documents: The emergency
   caller inserts his own location (via a Geolocation header) into his
   INVITE message, and the service URN is carried elsewhere in the
   INVITE.  Note, however, that it would also be possible for the UAS
   (presumably an emergency service provider) could also insert a
   location within its service boundary along with the same URN included
   in the INVITE (or, likewise, a proxy could do the same).

   This system assumes that the verifier trusts the LoST infrastructure:
   A call is considered an emergency call whenever the To address is
   listed as an emergency service provider in LoST [LoST].

   An important restriction to the applicability of this solution is
   that it requires the asserter possess a location value that can serve
   as part of an authenticator.  For instance, if the authenticator is
   to be carried an INVITE message, the UAC must have access to its own
   location (with some degree of precision).  Since there are situations
   where UACs may not have access to their own location (in access
   networks prevent this), this solution must be embedded in SIP in such
   a way that it can be inserted by a UAC, a UAS, or a proxy.  In
   addition, if the Geolocation header is used to convey the location
   used here, then the SIP embedding must take into account the usage
   restrictions in [location-conveyance].

2.2.  Asserter Identity

   In this model, the authenticating information is a verifiable
   attestation of the asserter's identity.  The asserter (a UAC or UAS)
   inserts into a SIP message an Identity header that attests to its



Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


   identity (as defined in RFC 4474 [RFC4474]).  To verify a call, the
   verifier performs the verification operation described in RFC 4474.
   The call is authenticated if the authenticated identity identifies
   the asserter as an emergency services entity.

   When applied to citizen-to-authority emergency calling, the asserter
   will likely be the called party, namely an Emergency Services
   Response Point (ESRP) or Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP).  By
   presenting a cryptographically-verified identity, the asserter
   provides proof that it is an emergency services entity, and it is
   assumed that calls received by such entities are emergency calls.

   This system assumes that the verifier trusts the cryptographic
   authentication system underlying the construction of the Identity
   header.  That is, the verifier must trust the certificate issuer at
   the root of the certificate chain used to generate the Identity
   header.  Thus, in order for this solution to be globally deployed,
   emergency services entities will need to be issued credentials.
   While this can be done locally to a large extent (e.g. on a nation/
   state level), verification of asserted identities will be optimized
   if all credentials are ultimately within the trust domains of a few
   root certificate issuers.

   The use of the SIP Identity header for this purpose could pose a
   series of problems.  In particular, since the Identity header is
   intended to authenticate the identity of the UAC, other mechanisms
   would have to be defined to allow for a UAS or a proxy to act as an
   asserter (e.g., [connected-identity]).

2.3.  Direct assertion

   In this model, the authenticating information is a signed object that
   directly attest that the call is an emergency call.  The asserter
   constructs the content of the object based on information in the SIP
   header fields, signs it, and inserts it into a SIP message.  To
   verify a call, the verifier validates the signature on the object,
   verifies that the contents correspond to the SIP message that
   contains it.  The call is authenticated if the asserter is authorized
   to attest to the emergency status of calls.

   For instance, the asserter might construct a data structure that
   contains the values of the From, To, Call-ID, and Date fields in a
   SIP message.  An asserter would construct such a data structure and
   sign it; the verifier would validate the signature and compare the
   header values in the data structure to those in the SIP message.

   This system assumes that the verifier trusts a set of credentialed
   entities to make assertions about the emergency status of calls (and



Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


   also that he trust the cryptographic authentication infrastructure
   underlying the corresponding credentials).  If each emergency
   services entity is authorized to make such assertions (and these are
   the only authorized entities), then this solution is equivalent in
   complexity to the "asserter identity" solution above.  However, if
   there are centralized entities, such as SIP proxies that serve many
   PSAPs, that are authorized to vouch for emergency calls, then the
   burden of creating credentials for asserters (relative to the
   "asserter identity" solution).


3.  Embedding Authenticators in SIP

   Authenticators are carried between asserters and verifiers by SIP
   messages, so a mechanism for authenticating emergency calls will need
   to define a way for authenticators to be embedded into SIP messages.
   For example, in the "location + URN" system, the UAC could insert an
   authenticator by including a Geolocation header in an INVITE message,
   the UAS by including one its 200 (OK) message, and a proxy by
   including one in either message.  Or, following the model of
   [connected-identity], either the UAC or the UAS could send an
   authenticator in a separate UPDATE transaction after the intial
   INVITE transaction has completed.

   Rather than specifying a particular embedding, this document
   describes a set of requirements or desiderata that should be
   satisfied by such an embedding:

   R1: The authentication solution must specify procedures that a SIP
   element must follow in order to assert that a call is an emergency
   call, including which SIP messages and header fields are used when
   the authenticator is inserted by a UAC, a UAS, or a proxy (possibly
   different for each of these three cases).

   R2: The authentication solution must specify procedures that a SIP
   proxy must follow in order to verify that a call is an emergency
   call, including which SIP messages and header fields must be
   inspected to extract an authenticator, and how the authenticator is
   verified.

   R3: The authentication solution should require as few additional SIP
   messages as possible, beyond the INVITE transaction that initiates
   the call.  In addition to minimizing bandwidth requirements, reducing
   additional messaging will simplify the message flows required to set
   up an emergency call.

   R4: Since the authentication of a call as an emergency call concerns
   the call itself, and not a particular SIP message, the authentication



Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


   solution should allow for authenticators to be persisted from one SIP
   message to another within the same dialog.  This will allow stateless
   elements, or elements that are only intermittently involved in
   signaling, to nonetheless recognize the call as an emergency call.

   R5: If an authenticator is inserted into a SIP message by a proxy, it
   will only be visible to proxies "downstream" (in the sense of "nearer
   the destination") from the asserting proxy in the path of the
   message.  The authentication solution should allow for authenticators
   to be passed from an asserting proxy to a verifying proxy that is
   either "upstream" or "downstream" from the asserting proxy (in the
   sense of "nearer the UAC" or "nearer the UAS" for a given
   transaction).  The persistence mechanism suggested in R4 is a partial
   solution to this problem: If an authenticator is embedded in a
   request and persisted into a response, then it will be available to
   all proxies along the signaling path between the UAC and the UAS
   (twice to "downstream" proxies, once to "upstream" proxies).


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document outlines mechanisms for providing authentication of the
   emergency status of SIP calls, according to a specified set of trust
   models.  Security concerns related to the mechanisms discussed are
   presented in their respective sections.


6.  Normative References

   [LoST]     Hardie, et al., T., "LoST: A Location-to-Service
              Translation Protocol", Mar. 2007.

              [draft-ietf-ecrit-lost-05]

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, et al., J., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol",
              Jun. 2002.

              RFC 3261

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for



Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", Aug. 2006.

              RFC 4474

   [connected-identity]
              Ellwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", Feb. 2007.

              [draft-ietf-sip-connected-identity-05]

   [location-conveyance]
              Polk, J. and B. Rosen, "Session Initiation Protocol
              Location Conveyance", Feb. 2007.

              [draft-ietf-sip-location-conveyance-07]


Author's Address

   Richard Barnes
   BBN Technologies
   9861 Broken Land Pkwy, Suite 400
   Columbia, MD  21046
   US

   Phone: +1 410 290 6169
   Email: rbarnes@bbn.com
   URI:   http://www.bbn.com/






















Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Emergency Call Authentication            June 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Barnes                  Expires December 3, 2007                [Page 9]


