

Network Working Group                                       A. B. Coates
Internet-Draft                                           No organization
Expires: April 17, 2001                                 October 17, 2000


       URN Namespace for Literate Programming: Anthony B. Coates
                     draft-coates-urn-namespace-01.txt   

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2001.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a URN namespace for use in identifying XML
   namespaces for use with applications created by the author, Anthony
   B. Coates.  In particular, the author develops applications for
   literate programming.

1. Introduction

   XML namespaces require a URI to identify them.  While URLs have
   commonly been used for this purpose, the recent controversy over the
   use of relative URLs for namespaces has highlighted the deficiency
   in using locators (which are generally assumed to name an actual
   resource) for disambiguating XML namespaces.  This has moved the
   author to request a URN namespace with the ID "abc" (the author's


Coates                   Expires April 17, 2001                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        URN Namespace for A.B.Coates          October 2000


   initials).

   For professional reasons, the author finds himself changing
   continent every few years, and hence uses e-mail and Web redirection
   services whose domain names are not under his control, and hence are
   subject to change without notice.  The assignment of a persistent
   URN would remove any inherent dependence on URLs outside of the
   author's control.

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID: 

       "abc" requested.

   Registration Information: 

       Registration Version Number: 2
       Registration Date: 2000-10-17

   Declared registrant of the namespace: 

       Anthony B. Coates
       abcoates@TheOffice.net

   Declaration of structure: 

       URNs in this namespace must all start with "urn:abc:YYYY:" where
         YYYY is the four digit year in which the URN was assigned. 
         Otherwise, the structure is opaque. The URNs assigned by the
         author will have internal structure, but beyond the year of
         assignment, the structure is not expected to be manifestly
         obvious to an outside observer.
       The inclusion of the year of assignment as a compulsory part of
         the URN structure is to assure the persistence of the URNs
         even if the ownership of the "abc" namespace is passed on to
         someone else at some time in the future (perhaps on the
         author's death).
       URNs assigned in previous years cannot be clobbered by URNs
         assigned in the current year so long as the nominated
         structure is adhered to.

   Relevant ancillary documentation: 

       None

   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 


Coates                   Expires April 17, 2001                 [Page 2]


       The versioned and distinct nature of the resources themselves
         makes duplication unlikely, as does the mandatory inclusion of
         the year of assignment in the URNs, but in the interest of
         providing concrete assurances, the owner agrees to maintain a
         table of assigned URNs and to absolutely avoid duplication by
         consulting that table before each new URN is published.

   Identifier persistence considerations: 

       For the most part, the persistence of the URNs in this namespace
         is guaranteed by the mandatory inclusion of the year of
         assignment in each URN.  Otherwise, to the best of the
         namespace owner's ability, the usability of URNs will last as
         long as the resources they identify are reasonably useful.

   Process of identifier assignment: 

       Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that
         are specifically designated by the owner.

   Process of identifier resolution: 

       The owner will distribute catalogs (e.g., OASIS Open TR9401
         Catalogs) that map the subset of URNs considered useful to
         resource identifiers (e.g., URLs).
       The owner will authorise resolution services as necessary.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 

       URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical
         (case-sensitive comparison).

   Conformance with URN Syntax: 

       No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism: 

       None specified. The owner will publish the table of assigned
         URNs online.

   Scope: 

       Global


3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real, but indicate
   the anticipated format of the author's URNs.



Coates                   Expires April 17, 2001                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        URN Namespace for A.B.Coates          October 2000


      urn:abc:2000:litprog:xmLP:beta:2000-09-06:tangle
      urn:abc:2001:litprog:xmLP:2.1:2001-09-06:weave
      urn:abc:2000:litprog:source:text:plain:Java:1.3
      urn:abc:2000:litprog:source:text:xml:XSLT:1.0:2000-08-01

4. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.

References

   [1]  Walsh, N., "A URN Namespace for Norman Walsh", July 2000.

   [2]  Knuth, D. E., "Literate Programming", CSLI Lecture Notes 27,
        1992.

   [3]  Goldfarb, C. F., "ISO (International Organization for
        Standardization) ISO 8879:1986(E)  Information Processing --
        Text and Office Systems -- Standard Generalized Markup Language
        (SGML)", 1986.

   [4]  W3C, XML WG, "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0", February
        1998, <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml>.

   [5]  W3C, Namespaces WG, "Namespaces in XML", January 1999,
        <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml-names>.

   [6]  OASIS, Entity Mgmt. TC, "Entity Management: OASIS Technical
        Resolution 9401:1997 (Amendment 2 to TR 9401)", January 1994,
        <http://www.oasis-open.org/html/a401.htm>.

   [7]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [8]  Mealling, M. and R. Daniel, "URI Resolution Services Necessary
        for URN Resolution", RFC 2483, January 1999.


Author's Address

   Anthony B. Coates
   No organization
   92 Middlesex St
   London  E1 7EZ
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 20 7377 6211
   EMail: abcoates@TheOffice.net
   URI:   http://www.theoffice.net/abcoates/


Coates                   Expires April 17, 2001                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        URN Namespace for A.B.Coates          October 2000


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Coates                   Expires April 17, 2001                 [Page 5]

