



INTAREA                                                 C. Sarathchandra
Internet-Draft                                              M. Kheirkhah
Intended status: Informational                             M. Ghassemian
Expires: December 27, 2021                     InterDigital Europe, Ltd.
                                                            Jun 25, 2021


                 Tactile Internet Service Requirements
                draft-sarathchandra-tactile-internet-00

Abstract

   The Tactile Internet refers to a new communication and networking
   paradigm, which can provide low-latency, reliable and secure
   transmission for real-time information such as control, touch, and
   sensing/actuation in emerging tactile internet applications like
   teleoperation, immersive virtual reality,and haptics communications.
   The main goal of this document is: 1) to briefly introduce tactile
   internet background and typical applications; 2) to identify
   potential service requirements that can be addressed at the IETF or
   researched at the IRTF.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 27, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Abbreviations List  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     4.1.  Industry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.2.  Healthcare  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.3.  Entertainment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.4.  Training  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  TI Service Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Haptic Media Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Ultra-Low Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.3.  Ultra-High Reliability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.4.  Coordination and Synchronization  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.5.  Network-Application interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.6.  Multi-Modal Parallel Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Tactile Internet (TI) was defined as a new wave of innovation after
   the successful Internet of Things (IoT) [ITU-T2014].  In fact,
   Tactile Internet (TI) can be regarded as a new ICT paradigm with
   extreme emphasises and service requirements on multiple performance
   metrics such as latency, availability, reliability, and security.TI
   finds its application in many emerging application scenarios,
   including, but not limited to, Industry, Robotics and Telepresence,
   eXtended Reality (e.g., Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality and Mixed
   Reality), Healthcare, Gaming, and Teleoperation.

   These extreme service requirements from TI applications pose new
   challenges to both communication and computing.  Although existing
   networking architecture and protocols can support some of these
   service requirements partially (e.g., 5G URLLC [URLLC-3GPP]), a still



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   pending question is whether and how a holistic and systematic
   approach should be developed in order to efficiently support TI
   applications.  Moreover, IEEE 1918.1 standards working group
   [IEEE19181] on TI is formed to investigate aspects related to TI
   applications, architecture and haptic encoding.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

3.  Abbreviations List

   o  TI - Tactile Internet

   o  TD - Tactile Devices

   o  URLLC - Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications

   o  AR - Augmented Reality

   o  VR - Virtual Reality

   o  PPE - Personal Protective Equipment

   o  ISOBMFF - ISO Base Media File Format

   o  QoE - Quality of Experience

   o  QoS - Quality of Service

   o  AES - Advanced Encryption Standard

   o  WEP - Wired Equivalent Privacy

   o  WPA - Wi-Fi Protected Access

4.  Use Cases

   This section aims to introduce the reader to distinct, although not
   exhaustive, TI applications which are widely being discussed in the
   TI research community.








Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


4.1.  Industry

   Automation, smart factories and remote operation are some of key
   industry use cases that are enabled by TI [IndustryTI].  Moreover,
   repair and maintenance in remote areas, in high-risk scenarios
   requiring high precision requires multi-modal
   [TactileMultimodal-3GPP] and low latency communication provided by
   TI.  For example, in such scenarios, human operators can control
   machinery (e.g., robots) remotely and perform complex operations
   [IndustryRobot], where either it is too dangerous for humans to be
   present, or it's not possible for the experts to be physically
   present at the environment where the operations are conducted.  The
   controlled machinery may be equipped with various sensors for
   providing information about the environment to the operator, while it
   may also be equipped with required actuators for performing
   corresponding tasks as instructed by the constructor over the TI.  TI
   may also enable the transmission of critical information (e.g.,
   alerts) to human users (e.g., through connected PPE as AR and haptic
   data) who perform operations in high-risk environments.  Alerts may
   be automatically generated based on information gathered from
   sensors, or sent by human users, over the TI.

4.2.  Healthcare

   Key health applications of TI include, tele-surgery [Independent],
   tele-mentoring, tele-rehabilitation and tele-diagnosis [TIAijaz2019].
   Specifically, minimising the invasive nature of surgery has been a
   focus of the heath technology industry and has currently been widely
   used due to the small tissue damage and fast recovery it
   incurs.Today, surgeons use surgical robots for performing highly
   precise operations.  Providing tactile feedback is specifically
   critical for performing operations which require high precision
   manipulation.  Although, it is not always possible to get specialist
   surgeons on site for performing operations on patients, TI enables
   surgeons to perform such critical operations remotely, where it
   requires only the machinery (high precision robots) to be co-located
   alongside the patient.

4.3.  Entertainment

   The advancements in Augmented Reality (AR) & Virtual Reality (VR)
   technology as well as the increased number of applications developed
   for user entertainment (e.g., VR gaming, VR tourism, VR art) have
   significantly increased the interest for further improving the
   immersive experiences those application provide.  VR applications
   enable human users, or a collection of human users to interact with a
   virtual environment where the provided immersive experience is
   similar to that of a real physical interaction.  Haptic feedback is a



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   key element in such interactions, allowing the user to experience the
   sense of touch along with audio and visual(e.g., users perceiving the
   effect of each other's actions in collaborative scenarios).

4.4.  Training

   Training: TI enables learning experiences where tactile feedback
   plays a crucial role.  This may substantially improve both the
   learning as well as the teaching experiences in remote learning
   scenarios.  The teacher will be able to experience (see, hear, feel)
   actions performed by the learner and correct any errors as if they
   are in a real physical (face-to-face) learning environment.  Such
   applications include, remote military and sports training
   [na2020simulation] which requires problem solving by collaborating
   with remote team members, while incorporating feedback provided by
   the remote trainer in real-time.  Furthermore, Internet of Skills
   [InternetofSkills]application aims at training people in remote and
   diverse locations to improve their skills and capabilities.  It
   combines advances in motor training and Tactile Internet with Human-
   in-the-loop to achieve the goal of transferring high quality skills
   to populations that otherwise do not have access to such training.
   Moreover, the goal of Surgical Assistance and training
   [SurgicalTraining] application is to develop a system that provides
   assistance to an expert surgeon during a surgery or to provide
   surgery training to students.  Such a system is envisaged to be
   continuously learning and acquiring expert knowledge.  To do this,
   the system interprets sensor data as it observes an expert surgeon
   performing their procedure.

5.  TI Service Requirements

   As a result of the research and developments in TI, this section
   presents service requirements to be addressed by the networking
   community.

5.1.  Haptic Media Type

   Unlike audio and video, there has not been any haptic media types in
   standards, until a very recent development in standards to register
   haptics as a top-level media type.  A proposal to introduce haptics
   as a first-order media type in ISO Base Media File Format (ISOBMFF)
   was accepted by MPEG Systems File Format sub-group.  This
   standardization process is expected to conclude in October 2021,
   making haptics a part of the ISO/IEC 14496-12 (ISOBMFF) standard.
   Providing this recent development, the authors
   [I-D.muthusamy-dispatch-haptics] make a case for haptics to be added
   to the list of top-level media types recognised by the IETF.  The
   authors further argue that 'application' top-level type not suitable



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   for haptics as, like audio/video haptics is related to a separate
   sensory system.  Moreover, 'application' is historically used for
   application code, and haptics is not code but a property of a media
   stream (like audio and video).  Therefore, we believe that the
   adoption of a top-level haptics media type in IETF is an important
   step towards further development of haptic communication.

5.2.  Ultra-Low Latency

   Most Haptic applications demands stringent latency requirements from
   the underlying communication.  Specifically, ultra-low latency, 1ms
   for haptic interaction [ITU-T2014], is demanded for providing timely
   delivery of messages between communicating devices by TI
   applications.  The timely delivery of control messages is crucial for
   critical TI applications such as TI remote surgery.  Moreover, timely
   delivery of messages also assists in playback of multi modal
   [TactileMultimodal-3GPP] streams (audio, video, haptic) in a
   synchronous manner, providing a consistent experience that is devoid
   of cybersickness.

5.3.  Ultra-High Reliability

   Ultra-high reliability is required by several TI applications.  For
   example, it is not acceptable for communication reliability to be
   hindered during critical TI applications such as alert transmission
   for connected PPE (described Section Section 4.1).  Thus, it is
   crucial that ultra-reliable communication is a key enabler of TI
   applications.

5.4.  Coordination and Synchronization

   The haptic applications often consist of multiple streams, e.g.,
   audio, video, haptic, each co-stream with varying service
   requirements (bitrates, level of reliability).  Moreover, depending
   on the use case and the deployment scenario, streams of an
   application may be distributed among multiple tactile/terminal
   devices, e.g., video stream to display, audio stream to sound system,
   haptic stream to haptic suit.  However, all such streams must be
   played back to the user in a synchronous manner when providing multi-
   sensory immersive experiences (e.g., for avoiding Cybersickness
   [Promwongsa]).  Therefore, mechanisms for the coordination and
   synchronization of multiple flows, for both the same destination, and
   for multiple destinations must be introduced.

   A technical report published by ITU-T Focus Group on Technologies for
   Network 2030 [ITU-NET2030] provides a gap analysis for supporting
   Haptic and Tactile Communications in network 2030.  Network 2030
   services are defined as new network-layer services in the data plane,



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   while haptic and tactile Network Services has been identified as one
   of crucial services for the support of Network 2030.  Moreover, in
   addition to ultra-low latency, ultra-low packet loss and ultra-high
   bandwidth requirements, mechanisms enabling coordination and
   synchronization among co-flows has been highlighted as key service
   requirements.  Specifically, the authors highlight the lack of
   carrying of information related to co-flow dependency and the
   mechanisms for actively performing coordination by IP multicast set
   of protocols.  Due to the lack of information related to inter-
   dependency among co-flows the data arrives at different receivers
   without synchronization.  Most TI applications involve interactive
   bi-directional (in some cases real-time) communication.  The authors
   highlight that adapting to dynamic changes inside the network is
   crucial and thus, having both state and co-dependency of flows
   carried with the packet instead of maintaining them in the routers.

5.5.  Network-Application interaction

   Emerging TI applications are highly diverse in terms of their service
   requirements and constraints.  For example, a TI application may
   comprise multiple streams (e.g., due to multi-modal
   [TactileMultimodal-3GPP] nature ), each of which may be required to
   be treated differently by the network based on their service
   requirements; some streams may need high bandwidth and ultra-low
   latency while some others may require ultra-high reliability.  The
   conventional interaction model between applications (end-hosts) and
   networks is insufficient to deliver the traffic of these emerging TI
   applications.  In other words, applications should not consider the
   network as a black-box anymore and in turn they should not entirely
   rely on the end-to-end measurements for adapting their behaviour as
   the underlying network condition changes rapidly, mainly because the
   end-to-end measurements are implicit and thus coarse-grained.

   To this end, a new collaborative paradigm between applications and
   networks needs to be realized.  This way, applications and networks
   can express their desired service requirements to one another,
   permitting applications to adapt themselves to network constraints
   and the networks to orchestrate their resource distribution according
   to the applications' requirements.  This is particularly essential
   for TI applications which have highly diverse and often conflicting
   service requirements.

5.6.  Multi-Modal Parallel Transmission

   Applications in TI typically follow a multi-modal communication
   [TactileMultimodal-3GPP] pattern in which the end-to-end
   communication between tactile devices (TDs) includes several modes of
   communication at the same time (e.g., video, audio and haptic).  This



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   results in generation of multiple streams in parallel which
   ultimately need to be presented to an end user in harmony.
   Otherwise, the quality of experience (QoE) of the user may not be
   satisfactory due to lack of precise synchronization across these
   parallel streams.  For example, one stream may get delayed while
   others are delivered on time.  Apart from the synchronization
   challenges (see also Section Section 5.4 for more detailed
   discussion), the instability of the underlying network condition of a
   stream may also impact the performance of the other parallel streams
   of the same TI application.  These mechanisms can significantly
   benefit when there is an explicit feedback mechanism between TI
   applications and networks (see Section Section 5.5 for more details).

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no IANA actions.

7.  Security Considerations

   Security and trust as well as communication latency are key
   challenges for delivering tele-surgery.  Conventional internet
   security protocols (namely, AES, WEP, WPA) are used to make the data
   transfer prone to attack.

   Security and reliability of the haptic data locally/remotely are key
   to Tactile Internet use-cases such as telesurgery use-case.  Further
   work is required on security/privacy aware haptic data/feedback
   encoding techniques to improve the reliability and security of the TI
   use-cases.  Furthermore, continuous monitoring demands low-power and
   reliable operation to avoid any interruption in data collection from
   power restricted devices and therefore the service delivery
   [monaICC2020].

8.  Conclusion

   This draft presents the emerging area of Tactile Internet, its key
   use cases and service requirements.  The introduction of haptic
   communication, a new mode of communication, not only improves
   existing immersive experiences (e.g., AR/VR) while also facilitates
   new emerging Tactile immersive experiences (e.g., tele-surgery).
   Moreover, the resulting communication over the Tactile Internet
   demands for stringent service requirements on the underlying
   communication networks, e.g., ultra-high reliability, ultra-low
   latency transmission, security consideration and synchronization of
   multi-modal data (including haptic).  Therefore, We believe IETF is a
   key forum for addressing some of the potential challenges described,
   for realizing the envisioned Tactile Internet, and for standardizing
   relevant aspects such as protocols.



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


9.  Acknowledgments

   The authors want to thank Renan Krishna for their very useful reviews
   comments to the document.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [Holland]  Holland, O. and el. al., "The IEEE 1918.1 "Tactile
              Internet" Standards Working Group and its Standards",
              Proceedings of IEEE , 2019,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8605315>.

   [I-D.muthusamy-dispatch-haptics]
              Muthusamy, Y. K. and C. Ullrich, "The 'haptics' Top-level
              Media Type", draft-muthusamy-dispatch-haptics-01 (work in
              progress), November 2020.

   [IEEE19181]
              ITU Network 2030 Technical Report, "Network 2030 - Gap
              analysis of Network 2030 new services, capabilities and
              use cases", 2020,
              <https://www.itu.int/pub/T-FG-NET2030-2020-1>.

   [Independent]
              Independent News Article, "SURGEON PERFORMS WORLD'S FIRST
              REMOTE OPERATION USING '5G SURGERY' ON ANIMAL IN CHINA",
              2019, <https://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-
              and-tech/news/5g-surgery-china-robotic-operation-
              a8732861.html>.

   [IndustryRobot]
              ABmann, U. and et. al., "Human-robot cohabitation in
              industry", In  Tactile Internet, Academic Press pp. 41-73,
              2021.

   [IndustryTI]
              Aijaz, A. and et. al., "The Tactile Internet for
              Industries: A Review", In  Proceedings of the IEEE, 2019.




Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   [InternetofSkills]
              Oppici, L. and et. al., "Internet of Skills", In  Tactile
              Internet, Academic Press pp. 75-99, 2021.

   [ITU-NET2030]
              ITU Network 2030 Technical Report, "Network 2030 - Gap
              analysis of Network 2030 new services, capabilities and
              use cases", 2020,
              <https://www.itu.int/pub/T-FG-NET2030-2020-1>.

   [ITU-T2014]
              ITU-T Technology Watch Report, "The Tactile Internet",
              2014, <https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-t/oth/23/01/
              T23010000230001PDFE.pdf>.

   [monaICC2020]
              Ghassemian, M. and et. al., "Secure Non-Public Health
              Enterprise Networks", In  2020 IEEE International
              Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops),
              2020.

   [na2020simulation]
              Na, W. and et. al., "Simulation and measurement:
              Feasibility study of Tactile Internet applications for
              mmWave virtual reality", In  ETRI Journal 42.2 (2020):
              163-174, 2020.

   [Promwongsa]
              Promwongsa, N. and el. al., "A Comprehensive Survey of the
              Tactile Internet: State-of-the-Art and Research
              Directions", IEEE Communications Surveys and
              Tutorials IEEE, 2021,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8542940>.

   [SurgicalTraining]
              Spiedel, S. and et. al., "Surgical Assistance and
              Training", In  Tactile Internet, Academic Press pp. 23-39,
              2021.

   [TactileMultimodal-3GPP]
              3GPP TR 22.847, "Study on supporting tactile and multi-
              modality communication services", 2021,
              <https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Specifications/
              SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId=3848>.

   [TIAijaz2019]
              Aijaz, A. and et. al., "The Tactile Internet for
              Industries: A Review", In  Proceedings of the IEEE, 2019.



Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Tactile Internet Service Requirements         Jun 2021


   [URLLC-3GPP]
              3GPP TR 23.725, "Study on enhancement of Ultra-Reliable
              Low-Latency Communication (URLLC) support in the 5G Core
              network (5GC)", 2019,
              <https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Specifications/
              SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId=3453>.

Authors' Addresses

   Chathura Sarathchandra
   InterDigital Europe, Ltd.
   64 Great Eastern Street, 1st Floor
   London  EC2A 3QR
   United Kingdom

   Email: chathura.sarathchandra@interdigital.com


   Morteza Kheirkhah
   InterDigital Europe, Ltd.
   64 Great Eastern Street, 1st Floor
   London  EC2A 3QR
   United Kingdom

   Email: morteza.kheirkhah@interdigital.com


   Mona Ghassemian
   InterDigital Europe, Ltd.
   64 Great Eastern Street, 1st Floor
   London  EC2A 3QR
   United Kingdom

   Email: mona.ghassemian@interdigital.com

















Sarathchandra, et al.   Expires December 27, 2021              [Page 11]
