


Network Working Group                                          W. Haddad
Internet-Draft                                               S. Krishnan
Expires: December 21, 2006                             Ericsson Research
                                                               F. Dupont
                                                                   CELAR
                                                           June 19, 2006


               Mobility Signaling Delegation in OptiSEND
                  draft-haddad-mipshop-mobisig-del-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This memo describes a mechanism, which delegates the exchange of
   mobility signaling messages between the mobile node and the
   correspondent node(s) to the network infrastructure.  Goals outlining
   the proposed delegation are to further reduce the IP handoff latency
   and to relieve the mobile node from exchanging a considerable amount
   of signaling messages with the CN(s) while retaining full control on



Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


   the critical ones.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Suggested Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  New Options and Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13



































Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


1.  Introduction

   Optimized Mobile IPv6 (OMIPv6) protocol (described in [OMIPv6])
   provides a mechanism, which allows significant reduction in the
   amount of signaling messages generated by the Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6)
   protocol ([MIPv6]), a shorter handoff latency and a better overall
   security.  However, a care-of address (CoA) test exchange between the
   mobile node (MN) and each correspondent node (CN) remains a
   compulsory step prior to exchanging critical mobility signaling
   messages, namely binding update(s) and acknowledgment(s) messages
   between them.  The CoA reachability test involves two mobility
   signaling messages (CoTI/CoT) and is unaffected by the optimization
   introduced by OMIPv6 protocol.

   This memo describes a mechanism, which delegates the exchange of
   mobility signaling messages between the MN and the CN(s) to the
   network infrastructure, as part of the ongoing work to design an
   optimization to the IPv6 secure neighbor discovery (described in
   [SEND]) protocol.  Goals outlining the proposed delegation are to
   further reduce the IP handoff latency and to relieve the MN from
   exchanging a considerable amount of signaling messages with each CN
   while retaining full control on the BU/BA messages.





























Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [TERM].














































Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


3.  Motivation

   OMIPv6 protocol achieves three different goals: it alleviates the
   load of mobility signaling messages, improves the overall security
   and reduces the IP handoff latency.

   The latency reduction caused by OMIPv6 protocol is mainly due to
   eliminating the MN's home IPv6 address reachability test, which
   requires signaling messages exchange through the MN's Home Agent.
   Another set of factors (excluding the link layer), e.g., network
   detection, network prefix discovery and address configuration are
   still among main contributors to the handoff latency.  These factors
   remain totally unaffected by using OMIPv6.

   In addition, OMIPv6 still require a CoA reachability test with each
   CN prior to updating them with its new CoA (nCoA), i.e., exchanging
   BU/BA messages.  Consequently, such exchange guarantees a residual
   latency and additional mobility signaling messages.

   Furthermore, it is important to mention that a fast growing class of
   mobile devices tend to have very limited battery power.  Thus the
   available energy must be meticulously controlled and consumed, i.e.,
   not to be wasted on exchanging non-critical signaling messages.  Such
   statement becomes more challenging when the MN is talking to
   different CNs at the same time (which may probably be a very common
   case) while moving fast.
   In fact, it has been shown that the wireless transmission of one bit
   can require over 1000 times more energy than a single 32-bit
   computation [EALDC].  Consequently, a fast moving MN communicating
   with multiple CNs will have to dedicate a significant amount of its
   available energy to exchange only mobility signaling messages with
   the CNs.

   OMIPv6 provides a credit-based mechanism (described in [CBA]), which
   aims to reduce further the latency caused by the care-of address test
   exchange.  However, such mechanism has two drawbacks: the CN may not
   have this feature, in which case the latency problem remains unsolved
   and it consumes battery power in both scenarios.
   Note that the suggested protocol does not prevent both endpoints from
   using the CBA mechanism on top of the suggested protocol.

   On the other side, the Optimized Secure Neighbor Discovery (OptiSEND)
   protocol (described in [OptiSEND]) is an ongoing work, which aims to
   better adapt the requirements for securing the IPv6 neighbor
   discovery to low computation and battery power devices (e.g., mobile
   devices and sensors).  OptiSEND enables fixed/mobile nodes to avoid
   using expensive RSA signatures to secure neighbor discovery messages
   exchange, by providing a mechanism to quickly share a long lifetime



Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


   symmetric key with the AR(s).  On the infrastructure side, OptiSEND
   enables ARs to use one-way hash chains to authenticate the Router
   Advertisement (RtAdv) messages sent to the fixed/mobile node(s)
   attached to the same link.















































Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


4.  Suggested Solution

   Our proposal delegates the task of performing CoA reachability
   test(s) to the network infrastructure, which in turn enables to
   eliminate the residual latency due to the CoA rechability test,
   ensures that the messages exchanged are authenticated and optimize
   the battery power consumption by relieving the MN from performing CoA
   reachability test(s).  In fact, our protocol adopts another approach
   to perform reachability tests, which consists on testing the
   reachability of the new MN's 64-bit subnet prefix only instead of
   testing the reachability of the whole nCoA, and relies on two new
   messages to perform such test.

   For these purposes, the MN must securely send to the access network
   infrastructure necessary information called mobility package to
   enable performing the CoA reachability test(s) on its behalf and also
   to forward the mobility package to potential new ARs.  To achieve
   this goal, a new message called router mobility solicitation
   (RtMobSol) is used by the MN to send its mobility package to its
   current AR(s).  The RtMobSol message MUST carry the CNs'IPv6
   addresses and the MN's IPv6 home address (HoA) and MUST be
   authenticated with the shared key obtained from OptiSEND.
   Upon receiving a valid RtMobSol message, the selected AR replies with
   a unicast and authenticated router mobility acknowledgment (RtMobAck)
   message.  The content of the RtMobSol message SHOULD be forwarded to
   neighboring ARs and should be stored together with data obtained from
   running OptiSEND protocol.
   The RtMobSol message is also used by the MN to add or delete entries
   from a mobility package stored in the AR cache memory.  For example,
   when the MN establishes a session with a new CN, it SHOULD send a
   RtMobSol message to its current AR and SHOULD set a new bit (called
   Address "A" bit) to request the AR to forward the new CN's IPv6
   address to potential new AR(s).  The MN MAY also set another bit
   (called Suppress "S" bit) to request the AR(s) to remove an existing
   CN's IPv6 address from its list.

   In order to eliminate the residual latency due to performing the CoA
   reachability test, the nAR SHOULD perform the test immediately after
   receiving a first hint (e.g., on layer 2) indicating an attachment of
   the MN (e.g., when using [FRD]) and SHOULD forward the message(s)
   sent by the CN(s) to the MN after it attaches to the nAR.  For this
   purpose, the nAR SHOULD use a source address, which includes the
   prefix advertised by the nAR on the link and MUST authenticate the
   message with Kms. We call such message Prefix Test Init (PreTI).  In
   addition, the PreTI message MUST carry the MN's HoA to allow the CN
   to fetch the corresponding Kms from its correspondent BCE in order to
   validate the message authentication.
   Upon receiving a valid PreTI message, the CN computes a prefix keygen



Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


   (prekey) token from the prefix used in the IPv6 source address and
   the long lifetime shared secret (i.e., kbmperm) generated from using
   OMIPv6 protocol.  After computing the token, the CN SHOULD send back
   an acknowledgment message called Prefix Test (PreT), which will carry
   the prekey token to the same IPv6 source address carried in the PreTI
   message.  The PreT message MUST also carry the MN's HoA and MUST be
   authenticated with Kms.

   The Prekey token MUST be computed by the CN in the following way:

   Prekey Token = First (64, SHA1(SA_Prefix | nonce | SHA1(Kbmperm))

   Where SA_Prefix is the 64-bit prefix carried by the IPv6 source
   address sent in the PreTI message and Kbmperm is the long lifetime
   shared secret generated by the CN when running OMIPv6 protocol.

   As mentioned above, the prefix reachability test SHOULD be
   authenticated.  In order to do so, the hash of the symmetric key
   generated from running OptiSEND protocol SHOULD be used.  In the
   following, we call such key mobility signaling key (Kms) and we
   suppose that the MN sends Kms to each CN in the first BU message.
   However, Kms MUST be sent encrypted to each CN.  For this purpose,
   the MN SHOULD use the Kbm generated during the first (and only)
   return routability test performed in OMIPv6 (i.e., until the
   expiration of the shared secret) to encrypt Kms. Finally, Kms will be
   carried in a new option called signaling delegation (SID).

   Upon receiving a BU message carrying a SID option, the CN SHOULD
   decrypt the Kms and store it in the MN's BCE.  All subsequent
   reachability test messages SHOULD be sent by the MN's current AR on
   behalf of the MN and SHOULD be authenticated with Kms.




















Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


5.  New Options and Messages

   TBD
















































Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   This draft proposes a scheme to delegate mobility signalling from the
   mobile node to the network infrastructure.  Since the network
   infrastructure nodes are well known and trustworthy, it makes
   firewalling easier at the administrative boundaries.  Also since the
   network infrastructure nodes are likely to be more powerful than
   mobile nodes, this scheme will allow us to use higher strength crypto
   to protect the signaling.  This draft does not introduce any new
   security holes into existing route optimization solutions.









































Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [MIPv6]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
            IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [SEND]   Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfield, B., Zill, B., and P.
            Nikander, "Secure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971,
            March 2005.

   [TERM]   Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate
            Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, BCP , March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [CBA]      Vogt, C. and J. Arkko, "Credit-Based Authorization for
              Concurrent Reachability Verification", Internet
              Draft, draft-vogt-mobopts-simple-cba-00.txt,
              February 2006.

   [EALDC]    Barr, K. and K. Asanovic, "Energy Aware Lossless Data
              Compression", ACM Proceedings of MobiSys, May 2003.

   [FRD]      Choi, J., Shin, D., and W. Haddad, "Fast Router Discovery
              with L2 Support", Internet
              Draft, draft-ietf-dna-frd-00.txt, October 2005.

   [OMIPv6]   Vogt, C., Arkko, J., and W. Haddad, "Applying CGA and CBA
              to Mobile IPv6", Internet
              Draft, draft-arkko-mipshop-cga-cba-03.txt, March 2006.

   [OptiSEND]
              Haddad, W., Krishnan, S., and J. Choi, "Secure Neighbor
              Discovery (SEND) Optimization and Adapation for Mobility:
              The  OptiSEND Protocol", Internet
              Draft, draft-haddad-mipshop-optisend-01.txt, March 2006.














Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Wassim Haddad
   Ericsson Research
   Torshamnsgatan 23
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden

   Email: Wassim.Haddad@ericsson.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson Research
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900
   Email: Suresk.Krishnan@ericsson.com


   Francis Dupont
   CELAR

   Email: Francis.Dupont@point6.net


























Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Haddad, et al.          Expires December 21, 2006              [Page 13]

