Network Working Group                                       J. Haluska 
Internet Draft                                            R. Berkowitz 
Expires: January 2008                                         P. Roder     
                                                             W. Downum 
                                           Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
                                                              R. Ahern 
                                     AT&T Customer Information Services 
                                                            P. Lum Lung 
                                     Qwest Communications International 
                                                          N. Costantino 
                                             Soleo Communications, Inc. 
                                                           C. Blackwell 
                                                           J. Mellinger 
                                                                Verizon 
                                                               D. Scott 
                                                             Volt Delta 
                                                           July 5, 2007 
                                                                        
 
                                       
   Considerations for Information Services and Operator Services Using 
                                   SIP  


            draft-haluska-sipping-directory-assistance-03.txt 


    

Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

     

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2008. 

Abstract 

   Information Services are services whereby information is provided 
   in response to user requests, and may include involvement of a 
   human or automated agent. A popular existing Information Service is 
   Directory Assistance (DA). Moving ahead, Information Services 
   providers envision exciting multimedia services that support 
   simultaneous voice and data interactions with full operator backup 
   at any time during the call. Information Services providers are 
   planning to migrate to SIP based platforms, which will enable such 
   advanced services, while continuing to support traditional DA 
   services. Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which 
   often involve providing human or automated assistance to a caller, 
   and often require the specialized capabilities traditionally 
   provided by an operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory 
   factors in some jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator 
   Services continue to be provided going forward. This document aims 
   to identify how Operator and Information Services can be 
   implemented using existing or currently proposed SIP mechanisms, 
   and to provide a set of Best Current Practices to facilitate 
   interoperability. 

    

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction..................................................3 
   2. Terminology...................................................4 
   3. High Level Requirements.......................................8 
   4. Information Services.........................................12 
   5. Operator Services............................................15 
      5.1. Inter Provider Capabilities.............................18 
      5.2. Inter OISP Capabilities.................................18 
      5.3. Intra Provider Capabilities.............................19 
      5.4. Capabilities Required for Specific Services.............20 
   6. OISP Internal Architecture...................................21 
   7. General Approach.............................................23 
   8. Signaling Mechanisms.........................................25 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      8.1. Calling Party's Identity................................25 
      8.2. Provider Identification.................................26 
         8.2.1. Home Provider......................................27 
         8.2.2. Intermediate Provider..............................28 
      8.3. Originating Station Type................................30 
      8.4. Trunk Group Identifier..................................31 
      8.5. Dialed Digits...........................................32 
      8.6. Retargeting to Identify the Desired Service.............33 
      8.7. Charge Number...........................................33 
      8.8. Passing Whisper.........................................33 
      8.9. Calling Equipment Capabilities and Characteristics......37 
      8.10. Media Server Returning Data to the Application Server..38 
      8.11. Service Discovery......................................38 
   9. Example Call Flow - Directory Assistance.....................39 
   10. Example Call Flow - Operator Services.......................48 
   11. VoIP Information Services - Summary and Next Steps..........55 
   12. Security Considerations.....................................56 
   13. IANA Considerations.........................................56 
   14. References..................................................57 
      14.1. Normative References...................................57 
      14.2. Informative References.................................57 
   Author's Addresses..............................................59 
    

    
1. Introduction 

   Information Services are services whereby information is provided 
   in response to user requests. This may include involvement of a 
   human or automated agent. Information Services may include call 
   completion to a requested telephone number and other extensions 
   provided on behalf of the owner of the information, such as 
   assistance with purchases. The users normally access the 
   Information Services by dialing a Directory Assistance (DA) dialing 
   sequence and verbally requesting an operator or automated system 
   for the information. The users may also request information through 
   other access methods, such as chat (IM), email, Web (HTTP) or SMS 
   initiated requests. The Information may be delivered to the user 
   via any mode, such as verbal announcements, chat (IM), email, Web 
   (HTTP), MMS, or SMS.   

   A popular existing Information Service is Directory Assistance 
   (DA).  DA is a well known service in today's PSTN, and is generally 
   identified with "411" or "NPA-555-1212" type services in North 
   America.  Today's DA services provide a user with telephone number 
   associated with a name and locality provided by the user, can 
   complete the call for the user, and can send SMS with the listing 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   to the user's wireless phone. Other Information Services provide 
   the user with a wide range of information, such as movie listings 
   and the weather. 

   Moving ahead, Information Services providers envision exciting 
   multimedia services that support simultaneous voice and data 
   interactions with full operator backup at any time during the call.  
   For instance, a directions Information Service may announce and 
   display directions to the requested listing, with the option for 
   the caller to request transfer to an operator with the latest call 
   context information. 

   Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which often involve 
   providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often 
   require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an 
   operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory factors in some 
   jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator Services 
   continue to be provided going forward.  Some examples of such 
   services include collect calls, third party billed calls, and busy 
   line verification.  

   Operator and Information Services providers are planning to migrate 
   to SIP based platforms, which will enable such advanced services, 
   while continuing to support traditional DA services.  

   Implementing Operator and Information Services with SIP will 
   require the exchange of certain information, and possibly the use 
   of specialized capabilities which are not normally required for 
   other types of calls. This document aims to identify such 
   information, and stimulate discussion about how this information 
   could be exchanged. Existing mechanisms will be used where 
   appropriate, and currently existing proposals will be favored over 
   new extensions. It is intended to provide a Best Current Practices 
   document to facilitate interoperability. 

    

    

    

2. Terminology 

   This section defines terms that will be used to discuss Information 
   and Operator Services.  


 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Application Server (AS) - An Application Server is a server 
   providing value added services. It may influence and impact SIP 
   sessions on behalf of the services supported by the service 
   provider's network.  

   Back End Automation - Back End Automation refers to automation of 
   the function that provides listing information to the caller. This 
   includes playing a verbal announcement with the listing 
   information, and may also include prompting the user for call 
   completion service.  

   Branding - Branding is a service where customized announcements are 
   provided to the caller to identify the service provider. For 
   example, if the service is provided to a Home Provider's 
   subscribers by a third party provider, branded service might 
   include a message thanking them for using that Home Provider. Thus 
   the user experience is that the service is provided by their Home 
   Provider rather than some third party. Branding can be influenced 
   by a number of factors, including but not limited to the identity 
   of the caller's Home Provider, or of other providers involved in 
   the call.  

   Call Completion - Call Completion is a service where a call is 
   initiated by the provider on behalf of the user. For example, in 
   the DA service, once the DA provider has identified the requested 
   listing, it may offer to complete the call for the caller, usually 
   for some additional fee. This relieves the user from having to 
   remember the number and then dial it. 

   DA Provider -The DA provider is the provider of DA services to end 
   users. Since DA services are a subset of IS services, a DA provider 
   is also an IS provider, and the definition of IS provider holds 
   true for DA provider, except that the scope of services is limited 
   to DA services. 

   Front End Automation - Front End Automation refers to automation of 
   the initial customer contact, whereby a branded announcement may be 
   played, a prompt is played to the user, and the user's spoken 
   request is recorded. Speech recognition and querying for the 
   listing information are performed as part of front end automation. 

   Home Provider - The service provider who is responsible for 
   providing voice services to the calling customer. This is the 
   service provider that has the business relationship with the 
   calling customer. The identity of the home provider influences call 
   processing treatment, such as branding and operator queue 
   selection. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   HSS - Home Subscriber Server. The Home Subscriber Server is an IMS 
   network element similar to a Home Location Register. It is a 
   database containing information about the subscriber, user 
   equipment, filter criteria for call processing triggers, etc.  

   Information Services (IS) Provider - The IS provider is the 
   provider of Information Services to end users. The Information 
   Services provider provides retail services directly to end users, 
   and provides wholesale services to other service providers.  

   Intermediate Provider - In the context of this document, an 
   Intermediate Provider is a provider which has agreements with home 
   providers to handle OIS requests, and with OISPs which actually 
   provide the requested services. Note that some home providers will 
   have direct relationships with OISPs, rather than using an 
   Intermediate Provider. Intermediate Providers are the targets of 
   SIP requests from home providers since they are involved when a 
   home provider does not have a direct relationship with an OISP. 
   Intermediate Providers perform retargeting of received SIP requests 
   toward the OISP. 

   Layer 3 connectivity - This refers to IP connectivity, for example 
   as provided by an Internet Service Provider or Managed IP service 
   provider. If one entity has Layer 3 connectivity to another entity, 
   then it can route packets to that entity. This does not imply 
   anything about any physical path between the entities. Nor does it 
   imply any application layer connectivity between the entities. 

   Media Server - A Media Server is a general-purpose platform for 
   executing real-time media processing tasks. Examples of typical 
   functions performed by media servers include playing announcements, 
   collecting speech and/or DTMF digits, and performing conferencing 
   functions. 

   Operator and Information Services Provider (OISP) - In this 
   document, this term refers to an Information Services Provider, 
   Directory Assistance Provider, or Operator Services Provider, 
   depending on the context. This term is used for brevity. We are 
   also defining this to be an adjective, thus "OISP services" is a 
   convenient, intuitive way to say "Operator and Information 
   Services".Operator Services - Traditional PSTN services which often 
   involve providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and 
   often require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided 
   by an operator services switch. Some examples of such services 
   include collect calls, third party billed calls, and busy line 
   verification.  

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

     

   Retail OIS service - A retail OIS service is one which is provided 
   to a user by the user's Home Provider.   

   SIP Layer connectivity - When one entity has SIP level connectivity 
   to another entity, this implies that the second entity will accept, 
   process, and route SIP requests from the first entity. This would 
   usually involve business agreements as well. 

   Time Division Multiplexed (TDM) Local Exchange Carriers (LECs) - 
   ATDM LEC provides local exchange service to end users utilizing 
   TDM-based switching systems. 

   Transit Provider - In the context of this document, a transit 
   provider simply "moves calls", and has no concept of OIS services. 
   It may perform SIP rerouting of the request, but does not perform 
   SIP retargeting. Such a provider is used when a provider cannot 
   directly route calls to another provider. For example, an 
   Intermediate Provider might use a Transit Provider if for some 
   reason (e.g. error condition) it cannot route a call directly to an 
   OISP. 

   Transport Services Provider (TSP) - The TSP provides access at 
   Layer 3 or below to other providers. The most obvious case of TSP 
   is that of an internet service provider or managed IP services 
   provider. VSPs, and IS or DA providers may or may not share the 
   same TSP for access to each other. Further, each of these providers 
   may have multiple TSPs. In this case, the decision as to which is 
   used is determined by the policy of the entity sending the traffic; 
   the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is often used. It is entirely 
   possible that the traffic from each entity towards the other takes 
   separate paths; i.e. it should not be assumed that the incoming and 
   outgoing paths are symmetric. 

   Voice Services Provider (VSP) - An entity that provides transport 
   of SIP signaling to its customers. It may also provide media 
   streams to its customers. Such a service provider may additionally 
   be interconnected with other service providers; that is, it may 
   "peer" with other service providers. A VSP may also interconnect 
   with the PSTN. 

   Whisper - During front end automation, the OIS-MS will record and 
   may time compress the caller's perhaps meandering speech into what 
   is known as the "whisper". This is intended to be played into a 
   human operator's ear, should the call be referred to an operator, 
   to avoid the operator from having to prompt the caller again. The 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   whisper is obtained during the front end automation, and saved as 
   an audio file. 

   Wholesale OIS service -A wholesale OIS service is one which is 
   provided to a user by a Service Provider other than the user's Home 
   Provider. 

   Zero Minus ("0-") Dialing - Invocation of Operator Services by 
   dialing "0" with no further digits. 

   Zero Plus ("0+") Dialing - Invocation of Operator Services by 
   dialing "0" followed by a phone number. 

 

    

3. High Level Requirements 

    

   In addition to all-IP scenarios, it must be possible to support 
   interworking with existing PSTN and wireless based providers, via 
   both SS7 and MF interconnections. 

   It must be possible to support accounting. This includes both 
   online and offline accounting. It must be possible to perform 
   accounting for all actions associated with a particular call, and 
   further to be able to correlate actions across multiple provider 
   elements and across providers.  

   It must be possible to support multiple Operator and Information 
   Services Providers (OISPs) per originating provider. The choice as 
   to which OISP to be used could be on a per subscriber basis, or on 
   other criteria. 

   It must be possible to support multiple OISP providers per call. 
   For example, one provider might be used for front end automation, 
   and another used for operator assistance. 

   It must be possible to provide an automated announcement to the 
   user, and prompt the user for the type of query and query 
   information. 

   It must be possible to pass a "whisper" to the operator 
   workstation. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   It must be possible to connect the user to a human operator. 

   It must be possible to provide an automated announcement of the 
   requested information. 

   It must be possible to prompt the user for call completion. 

   It must be possible to perform call completion. 

    

   It must be possible to support the case where OIS services are 
   provided by the caller's Home Provider. This scenario is known in 
   the OIS industry as the Retail scenario. In this case, the caller's 
   Home Provider is also an OISP, and provides OIS service to its own 
   subscribers. This is illustrated in the following figure: 

   +--------+    +--------------------+ 
   | Caller |----| Home      +------+ | 
   |        |    | Provider  | OISP | | 
   |        |    |           +------+ | 
   +--------+    +--------------------+ 
    
               Figure 1 Services Provider by Home Provider 

    

    

   It must be possible to support the case where OIS services are 
   provided by a direct third party provider. In this scenario, the 
   OISP is a third party service provider, and there is direct SIP 
   layer connectivity as well as business relationships between the 
   calling user's provider and the OISP. This is illustrated in the 
   following figure: 

   +--------+    +----------+   +------+ 
   | Caller |----| Home     |---| OISP | 
   |        |    | Provider |   |      | 
   +--------+    +----------+   +------| 
 

       Figure 2 Services Provider by a Direct Third Party Provider 

    


 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   It must be possible to support the case where services are provided 
   by an indirect third party provider. In this scenario, the OISP is 
   a third party provider, but the caller's Home Provider does not 
   have direct SIP connectivity to the OISP. Further, it's possible 
   that it has no business relationship with the OISP. The caller's 
   provider routes the call to a provider with whom it does have a 
   relationship, referred to in this document as an "intermediate 
   provider", and this intermediate provider in turn routes either to 
   the OISP, with which it has a relationship, or there could be 
   multiple intermediate providers. This is illustrated in the 
   following figure: 

   +--------+    +--------+   +---------+   +------+    
   | Caller |    |Home    |   | Inter-  |   | OISP | 
   |        |----|Provider|---| mediate |---|      | 
   |        |    |        |   | Provider|   |      | 
   |        |    |  (A)   |   |   (B)   |   |  (C) | 
   +--------+    +--------+   +---------+   +------+ 
    
      Figure 3 Services Provided by an Indirect Third Party Provider 

    

   It must be possible to support the case where transit providers are 
   included between any other providers involved in the call. The 
   transit provider only "moves calls" between other providers, and is 
   involved in no other way with OIS services. This is illustrated in 
   the following figure: 

   +--------+    +--------+   +--------+   +---------+   +------+    
   | Caller |    |Home    |   |Transit |   | Inter-  |   | OISP | 
   |        |----|Provider|---|Provider|---| mediate |---|      | 
   |        |    |        |   |        |   | Provider|   |      | 
   |        |    |  (A)   |   |  (B)   |   |   (C)   |   |  (D) | 
   +--------+    +--------+   +--------+   +---------+   +------+ 
    
                Figure 4 Involvement of a Transit Provider 

    

    

    

   The following are potential future requirements. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Operation via the general internet, not specific to any particular 
   SDO's architecture, and not depending on any protocol extensions 
   specific to those architectures, should be supported. 

   In addition to the basic DA functionality, the architecture will 
   need to support additional technical capabilities. These 
   capabilities are currently under investigation. The following are 
   some business needs which drive these capabilities. 

   It must be possible to support multiple Information Services 
   providers per originating provider. For instance, a Home Provider 
   must be able to select an appropriate Information Services provider 
   from among several Information Services providers based on criteria 
   including but not limited to the identity of the calling 
   subscriber.  It must also be possible to support multiple 
   Information Services providers per call. For example, once the 
   initial request has been satisfied, the user may make another 
   Information Services request without hanging up, and it must be 
   possible in this case to select the appropriate Information 
   Services provider for the next request. In such cases the 
   Information Services provider may be involved in selecting a 
   different Information Services provider.  

   It must be possible to support non voice initiated Information 
   Services requests. Possible examples include chat (IM), email, Web 
   (HTTP) or SMS initiated requests. In the case that the subscriber 
   makes a purchase via some online auction service, that subscriber 
   can via IM or email request the assistance of an operator. 

   It must be possible to support both Information Services as well as 
   Operator Services. Examples of Operator services include Operator 
   Intercept, Busy Line Verification, Call Restrictions, etc. 

   It must be possible to support Purchase services and Concierge 
   services. Such services facilitate the Information Services 
   operator providing assistance to the caller after the listing has 
   been announced and perhaps call completion performed. The call is 
   routed to an Information Services operator who interacts with the 
   customer, offering to help make a purchase. Concierge service is 
   similar; the Information Services operator offers to make e.g. 
   restaurant reservations for the caller.  

   It must be possible to provide an application interface to other 
   types of systems. An example could be a web based API, so that once 
   some online search engine has located some business listing, the 
   services of the Information Services provider could be invoked by 
   the user from the web page. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   It must be possible to support IPTV interactive services. As 
   multiple services such as IM and telephony are integrated with 
   IPTV, it must be possible to initiate Information Services requests 
   in this context as well. 

    

4. Information Services 

   Information Services (IS) are services whereby information is 
   provided in response to user requests. This may include involvement 
   of a human or automated agent. Usually, the user accesses the 
   Information Service by placing a voice call to the automated 
   Information Service and verbally requests the information, such as 
   phone number, movie listings, weather, etc. Frequently, a live 
   operator is attached to recognize the user's verbal request. 
   Sometimes, the user can utilize other access methods, such as SMS, 
   IM, or HTTP-initiated requests. These additional methods are not 
   currently covered in this document. 

   Information Services are often provided on a wholesale basis to 
   Home Providers, and include features such as branded announcements.   

   Directory Assistance (DA) is a specific type of Information Service 
   whereby end users request a telephone number for an entity.  
    

   The following represents a list of representative steps taken 
   during the course of a typical DA request and identifies a set of 
   required high level capabilities. 

   1. Initial recognition of an OIS call. At some point, the call 
   needs to be identified as an OIS call, and appropriate routing or 
   other logic must be invoked in order to fulfill the request. This 
   could be based on any number of criteria, including but not limited 
   to analysis of the "address information" - e.g. the digits or 
   Request-URI emitted by the caller's UA. This could occur at any 
   number of places - e.g. in the caller's UA, in a proxy in the home 
   provider, or in some downstream element. 

   2. Identification of the requested service. There are many possible 
   OIS services, and the number of these is only expected to increase 
   as providers respond to customer needs. At some point during call 
   processing it is necessary to identify exactly which service is 
   desired. For example "directory assistance with call completion" is 
   a service where after the listing information is provided to the 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   caller, the option is provided for the call to be placed 
   automatically, so the customer need not hang up, remember the 
   digits, and dial the number. Another example is "directory 
   assistance only", where call completion is not offered. There are 
   multiple factors which could affect the service which is to be 
   offered, and the logic deciding this could be located anywhere 
   along the path to the OIS provider. Some of the information 
   required to make such decisions could include: 

     o The digits dialed by the caller.  

     o The Request-URI emitted by the caller's UA. 

     o The identity of the calling party, for instance the calling 
        party number.  

     o The charge number associated with the caller's account. 

     o The identity of the calling party's home provider. 

     o The identity of the provider which directly hands off the call 
        to the OISP.  

     o The identity of other provider which the request might traverse 

     o The Originating Station Type, in case the call was originated 
        in the PSTN. 

     o Trunk group information, in case the call was originated in the 
        PSTN. 

     o Capabilities and characteristics of the caller's user 
        equipment. 

    

   3. Routing of the OIS call. The call must be routed towards an 
   entity which can provide the requested service. Each entity or 
   network handling the call routes it based on the logic located in 
   that provider, and the information currently available. For 
   instance, the home provider may know very little about OIS 
   services, having farmed that service out to another provider. 
   Consequently it might simply route all such calls towards the OIS 
   provider, which decides which service is to be offered. 

   4. Authentication. When one provider passes a call to another 
   provider, there is a need for the providers involved to be sure of 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   each other's identity. This might be through explicit security 
   mechanisms such as mutual TLS or security gateways using IPSec 
   tunnel mode, it might be through reliance on a closed set of 
   trusted interconnected providers, or some other policy set by the 
   providers involved. 

   5. Receipt of the OIS call. The OIS provider needs to be able to 
   receive such calls. 

   6. Querying upstream providers for information. The OISP, or an 
   intermediate provider may require information from an upstream 
   provider. For instance, the capabilities and characteristics of the 
   caller's equipment may be needed in order to influence call 
   processing. 

   7. Selection of automated voice platform. When it has been 
   determined that the call must be routed to an automated voice 
   platform, there are a number of factors to be taken into account to 
   determine an appropriate, available platform for the call. It must 
   be possible to determine an appropriate, available automated voice 
   platform to which the call should be routed. 

   8. Connection of caller to automated voice platform. The OISP must 
   be able to connect the caller to an appropriate automated voice 
   platform. 

   9. Provision of branded announcements. The OISP must be capable of 
   providing custom announcements to the caller based on a number of 
   criteria. For example, it might greet the caller, thanking them for 
   using their Home Provider's service. Though the service is actually 
   provided by the OISP, business arrangements would dictate such 
   branded announcements. 

   10. Query the caller. The OISP must be capable of playing a voice 
   request to the customer asking them for the listing. For example 
   "Name and city, please." 

   11. Recording a spoken request. The OISP must be capable of 
   recording the caller's spoken request. This both for speech 
   recognition, and also for playing back the "whisper" to a human 
   operator should one be required, to prevent having to ask the 
   customer to repeat the request. 

   12. Speech recognition. The OISP must be able to pass the caller's 
   spoken request to speech recognition system, suitable for querying 
   a listing database. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   13. Listing database query. The OISP must be capable of querying 
   one or more listings databases using the request. 

   14. Decide to use human operator if listing query fails. If the 
   listing query fails, or the speech recognition fails, the OISP must 
   be able to decide to send the call to a human operator. 

   15. Selection of appropriate operator. When it has been determined 
   that the call must be routed to a human operator, there are a 
   number of factors to be taken into account to determine the 
   appropriate operator for the call. It must be possible to determine 
   an available, appropriate human operator to which the call should 
   be routed. 

   16. Routing of call to operator workstation. Once the appropriate 
   operator has been identified, the call must be routed to that 
   operator's workstation. 

   17. Whisper. Once the operator answers the call, the previously 
   recorded request should be played to the operator as a "whisper", 
   prior to connecting the caller to the operator. 

   18. Connection of caller to operator. Once the operator has heard 
   the whisper, the caller can be connected to the human operator. The 
   operator queries the caller for the request, and initiates a query 
   to the listing database.  

   19. Playing listing information. Once the listing information is 
   returned from the database, the caller must be connected to a media 
   resource which speaks the listing information to the caller. 

   20. Prompting for call completion. If the identified service 
   includes call completion, the caller should be prompted for this 
   service, for example by pressing some DTMF key. 

   21. Call completion. If the caller requests call completion, the 
   call should be automatically initiated for the caller. 

    

5. Operator Services 

   Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which often involve 
   providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often 
   require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an 
   operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory factors in some 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator Services 
   continue to be provided going forward.  
    

   This document assumes an architecture with SIP based OISPs, SIP 
   based home providers, and SIP based end users. Since it is 
   necessary to maintain backward compatibility with traditional TDM 
   based providers and end users, these are also considered. It may 
   not be necessary, desirable, or technically feasible to support 
   every existing Operator Service using SIP, or to support both SIP 
   and TDM based end users for all Operator Services. This is the 
   subject of ongoing investigation, and the current iteration of this 
   document assumes that both SIP and TDM based home providers and end 
   users are in scope for these services, unless specifically 
   indicated to the contrary. A future revision may update this 
   assumption based on the findings of the investigation. 

   With respect to Operator Services, this iteration of this document 
   intends to provide an introduction to and descriptions of some of 
   these services, as well as provide some high level requirements. It 
   is intended that the subsequent iteration will build upon this, 
   providing more detailed requirements, suggested SIP mechanisms, and 
   more call flows. 

   Operator Services are typically provided by the requesting party's 
   OISP. In some cases, such as Busy Line Verification, the target or 
   called party's OISP may be involved as well. 

   Next, several traditional Operator Services will be described. As 
   indicated above, the current iteration of this document is silent 
   regarding which of these may or may not be candidates for 
   implementation with SIP, or towards SIP end users. Note that unless 
   specifically indicated, most of these services are traditionally 
   provided by the caller's OISP. 

   Operator Assistance. This allows the caller to perform either "zero 
   minus" or "zero plus" dialing to be connected to a human or 
   automated system for assistance with the call.  

   Collect calls. This allows the caller to request that the called 
   party accept the charges for the call. Typically an OISP utilizes a 
   human operator or automated system to provide this service.  

   Rate Quotes. This allows the caller to request a quote for the cost 
   or rate for specific calls.  

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Third party billed calls. This allows the caller to request that a 
   third party (different than the calling or called party) be contacted 
   and requested to accept charges for the call (although in some 
   limited cases, contacting the third party is not necessary).  

   Busy Line Verification and Interrupt. This allows a caller to have 
   the OISP determine whether a target line is in use, and if so, to 
   "barge in" to the conversation and request whether the target party 
   is willing to accept a call from the caller. This service is 
   initially handled by the caller's OISP, which then contacts the 
   target party's OISP, which is able to perform the verification and 
   interrupt on the target party. 

   Coin Calls. Operator services systems must be able to control TDM-
   based network controlled coin stations (payphones). This includes 
   monitoring of coin deposit tones (to verify payment) sent from the 
   coin station, as well as sending supervision (control) signals to 
   the coin station. Network controlled coin stations are connected to 
   TDM based end offices via specialized phone lines which support the 
   required signaling. These end offices, in turn, connect to TDM 
   based OISPs using specialized trunks capable of conveying the coin 
   signaling. The OISP monitors and controls the coin station via 
   these trunks. "Smart" coin stations perform coin detection locally 
   and do not require network control, and are not discussed here. 
   This service is provided by the OISP associated with the coin 
   station. 

   Emergency Calls. Sometimes a caller dials "0" instead of the 
   standard emergency dialstring, resulting in placement of an 
   emergency call to the OISP. The OISP must properly route such a 
   call toward the PSAP. This service is provided by the caller's 
   OISP. 

   Calling Card Billing Service. This enables a calling party to bill 
   a call to a calling card number.  

   Commercial Credit Card Billing Service. This enables a calling 
   party to bill a call to a commercial credit card. 

   Directory Assistance (DA). In some contexts, DA is considered as an 
   Operator Service. Within the context of this document, we consider 
   DA as an Information Service, which is related to but distinct from 
   Operator Services. 

    


 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   The following sections describe an initial set of basic high level 
   capabilities required for supporting Operator Services. The 
   capabilities for Information Services generally apply for Operator 
   Services as well. This work is currently under study, and a 
   complete set of required capabilities is expected to be identified 
   in the near future. Similarly to the required capabilities for 
   Information Services, the use of existing SIP mechanisms will be 
   investigated for providing these capabilities. 

    

5.1. Inter Provider Capabilities 

   Ability to accept requests from other providers. This is the 
   ability to accept incoming OIS requests from other providers, 
   including home providers, intermediate providers, and transit 
   providers.  

   Ability to terminate calls to other providers. This applies to call 
   completion services, as well as other services such as third party 
   billing. 

    

5.2. Inter OISP Capabilities 

   These are capabilities between OISPs.  

   Inward connection. This is a call from one OISP to another, e.g. so 
   that the originating OISP may request services from the terminating 
   OISP. One example of this is Busy Line Verification, where the 
   caller calls their own OISP, and this OISP places an "inward" call 
   to the target party's OISP, which would have the capability to 
   perform the verification of the target party. 

   Transfer between OISPs. In this case, one OISP transfers the call 
   to another OISP, to be handled by that OISP. 

   Moving connection from one OISP to another. An example of this case 
   is where one OISP farms out a specific service to another OISP. The 
   first OISP performs initial handling of the call, to determine the 
   desired service. The call is sent to a different OISP with which 
   the first has a relationship. The first OISP remains in the 
   signaling path, and when the provided service is complete, the 
   first OISP determines what if any additional processing may be 
   necessary. This is similar to a third party call control type 
   arrangement. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    

5.3. Intra OISP Capabilities 

   Note that some of the following capabilities may be required for 
   inter OISP scenarios as well; this is the subject of ongoing 
   analysis and is not covered in the current iteration of this 
   document. 

   Placing a caller on hold, possibly with announcements. This is used 
   in many services, including Information Services.  

   Exchanging information between Application Server and Operator 
   Workstations/Automated Platforms. This capability is required 
   whenever an operator workstation or automated platform is used. 
   Because an Operator Workstation interacts with a human user, it is 
   expected that additional information, beyond that which an 
   automated system would exchange with an application server, will be 
   required. Further, several modes of application server control are 
   currently under investigation. The first is where the workstation 
   or automated platform is more or less autonomous, and is capable of 
   initiating calls and directly impacting call processing. The other 
   is more of a master-slave relationship, where the AS is in complete 
   control. The master-slave model requires that more information be 
   exchanged with the AS than does the autonomous model. 

   Queuing and call distribution. Resources including human operators 
   and automated platforms need to be tracked and managed, and the 
   appropriate resource of the appropriate type needs to be selected 
   on a per invocation basis. What is needed is that for a particular 
   call, that a set of criteria be provided and the best match 
   resource be selected. This is the job of the ACD server. Some means 
   is needed to communicate the selection criteria for human operators 
   and automated platforms to the ACD server. 

   Operator Registration and Location. Human operators may not be 
   interchangeable, and have specific attributes such as skillsets 
   which can be used to identify the best human operator to service a 
   particular call. Operators log in at workstations at the beginning 
   of a shift, and log out during breaks and at the end of a shift. It 
   is important to associate each available operator with the 
   workstation at which they are logged in, so that requests can be 
   sent to the appropriate human operator. This is needed because the 
   selection process described above identifies a particular human 
   operator; it is then necessary to identify the workstation at which 
   that operator can be reached. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Bridging and removal of operator or automated system. Many operator 
   services require that either a human operator or automated system 
   be "bridged" onto a call, and to be removed at some point. 

    

5.4. Capabilities Required for Specific Services. 
    

   Connection Hold and Ringback. This capability involves having the 
   OISP "hold" the connection, such that the originating caller 
   remains connected, even if they attempt to hang up. This is mainly 
   used in relation to emergency services. Ringback is the ability for 
   the OISP to call back the calling party after they have hung up. 
   This too is often used in conjunction with emergency calls. 

   Coin Station Control. This is the ability of the OISP to determine 
   the coinage deposited into a TDM based network controlled coin 
   station (as opposed to an "intelligent" coin station which performs 
   such functions locally). This involves interpretation of the coin 
   control signals sent via specialized trunks from the end office to 
   which the TDM based coin station is connected via a specialized 
   phone line. Additionally, the need to signal toward the coin 
   station needs to be supported as well, for example to instruct the 
   station to return coins to the caller. This capability is intended 
   to interact with the specialized coin trunk. 

   Network Service Recall. After a call resulting from Operator 
   Services is completed, the caller may signal the desire to return 
   back to the OISP, without placing another call. In the traditional 
   PSTN, this is typically accomplished by the user signaling a hook 
   flash or other distinctive stimulus. 

   Verification and Interrupt. This is used in the Busy Line 
   Verification and Interrupt service, and allows the OISP to 
   determine if the target number is in use, to listen to a scrambled 
   representation of the conversation, and to interrupt the target 
   party's conversation to ask if they would accept a call from the 
   caller.  

   Transfer of emergency services call to selective router. Sometimes 
   a caller places an emergency call using a dial string which invokes 
   operator assistance (such as "0" in North America), rather than an 
   emergency call dial string. In such cases, the OISP must be able to 
   pass the emergency call to the appropriate PSAP. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

     

6. OISP Internal Architecture 

   This section describes an initial view of the elements internal to 
   the OISP architecture.  

   The following types of elements may be present within the OISP 
   infrastructure: 

   Automatic Call Distributor (ACD) server - The ACD provides queuing 
   and call distribution functions for human operators. Specifically, 
   it is the component that tracks the availability of the human 
   operators and selects an available operator utilizing complex 
   algorithms based on operator skills, type of call, type of request, 
   calling party information, etc. Similar functionality is required 
   with respect to automated platforms. The ACD server is modeled as 
   an Application Server. There is currently work in the MEDIACTL 
   working group regarding Media Resource Brokers (MRBs) which may be 
   relevant to this. 

   Customer Profile Database - The Customer Profile Database is a per 
   subscriber database maintained by an OISP about its customers. Some 
   of this information might be statically provisioned, other 
   information such as customer preferences or session information 
   might be populated dynamically as a result of customer 
   interactions. 

   Messaging Gateways - Messaging Gateways provide access and data via 
   E-mail, SMS, MMS, WAP. 

   Operator and Information Services Application Server (OIS-AS) - The 
   OIS-AS contains AS functions specifically for directory assistance 
   and information services as well as other Operator Services. This 
   may coordinate multiple call legs, connecting the caller in 
   sequence to one or more OIS-MS and/or operator workstations 
   according to the logic contained within. The OIS-AS may need to 
   communicate with elements of other providers, for instance to query 
   information about the capabilities and characteristics of the 
   caller's equipment, or to access another provider's operator 
   resources.  

   Operator and Information Services Media Server (OIS-MS) - The OIS-
   MS provides the media resources for playing announcements, 
   performing voice recognition, performing listing database queries, 
   generating whisper from the user's verbal request, etc.  

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Operator Workstations - Operator Workstations provide an interface 
   to the human operator. They may receive the customer's recorded 
   request (e.g. name and city of requested listing), information from 
   listing or other databases, and also terminate a multimedia session 
   with the customer.  Operator workstations are specialized SIP 
   endpoints, and may be modeled in various ways, such as UAs or media 
   servers.  

   PSTN Gateways - OISPsneed to interface with the PSTN. Thus, 
   gateways are needed to interface between the OISP and both 
   signaling and bearer. The bearer is handled by trunk gateways, 
   which interface RTP streams on the OISP side to TDM trunks on the 
   PSTN side. The signaling may be handled by signaling gateways which 
   interface SS7 on the PSTN side and SIP on the OISP side. Currently 
   in North America, inband signaling on MF trunks is common for 
   interfacing to OISPs, and trunk gateways need to be able to 
   interpret and report as well as generate the appropriate MF 
   signaling.  


   Service Databases - Service Databases store service specific 
   information (e.g. listing information such as name, address, and 
   phone number, etc.) These may be located in the OISP's network 
   and/or in other networks, and more than one may be used. 

   SIP Proxy - One or more SIP proxies may be present in the OISP 
   network, to facilitate SIP communications with other providers as 
   well as to perform call processing functions between OISP 
   components. 

   The following figure shows a simplified view of an OISP internal 
   architecture. The lines show logical connectivity; elements 
   communicate via the proxy. A single OIS-AS is shown, along with up 
   to "k" OIS-MS and up to "m" Operator Work Stations, and an ACD 
   server. 

    









 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
    
   +-------+    +--------+   +---------+   +---------+ 
   | Proxy |----| OIS-AS |-+-| OIS-MS1 |...| OIS-MSk | 
   +-------+    +--+-----+ | +---------+   +---------+ 
                   | 
                   |       | +---------+   +---------+ 
                   |       +-| OWS1    |...| OWSk    | 
                +--+--+    | +---------+   +---------+ 
                | ACD |    | 
                +-----+    | +--+---+ 
                           +-|PSTNGW|  
                             +------+ 
    
          Figure 5 Simplified view of OISP Internal Architecture 

    

    

7. General Approach 

   This section describes one possible way to implement DA using SIP. 
   Other ways may be possible. 

   The general approach involves having the OIS-AS host most of the 
   processing logic, and to control the call in general. The OIS-AS 
   implements a third party call control (3PCC) functionality. It 
   terminates the signaling dialog from the caller, and originates 
   dialogs towards other components as necessary. There may be 
   multiple sequential sessions set up during the course of a DA call.  

   For example, the OIS-AS would initiate a new dialog towards a MS 
   for front-end automation. When it gets the 200 OK from the MS with 
   SDP, it passes that SDP back toward the caller. When the front end 
   automation has completed, the OIS-MS sends a BYE containing message 
   bodies conveying the success of the operation (i.e., was it able to 
   obtain the listing) as well as any data related to the operation. 
   In case of success, the body might carry the listing information, 
   or a URI pointing to it. In case of failure, it might carry a URI 
   pointing to the whisper file. 

   In case of failure, the OIS-AS would determine that the call needs 
   to be routed to a human operator. The OIS-AS first needs to 
   identify a suitable operator to handle this request. The ACD server 
   has this responsibility, and could be implemented as a redirect 
   server facing the OIS-AS, redirecting towards the best suited 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   available operator. Facing the operator workstations, the ACD 
   server could be implemented as a presence server, maintaining 
   availability of each operator, as well as the associated 
   information for each (e.g. languages, skill level, cost, etc). 

   The OIS-AS would then send an INVITE toward the identified operator 
   workstation. This INVITE includes the caller's SDP as well as a URI 
   pointing to the whisper file. The workstation could play the 
   whisper to the operator as the call is answered. The operator 
   workstation's SDP would be passed back to the caller via a re-
   INVITE or UPDATE request.   

   If the operator is successful in locating the desired listing, the 
   workstation would send a BYE containing message bodies with an 
   indication of success, and either the listing information of a 
   pointer to the same. 

   The OIS-AS would then initiate a call leg towards an OIS-MS for 
   back end automation. The INVITE would include the same body with 
   the listing information that was sent by the operator workstation. 
   The OIS-MS returns its SDP, which the OIS-AS would propagate back 
   over the originating leg via a re-INVITE or UPDATE request. The 
   back end automation process includes audibly playing out the 
   listing information, and possibly offering call completion service. 
   The OIS-MS sends a BYE with a message body indicating whether call 
   completion is desired. 

   If call completion is desired, the OIS-AS sends a REFER back over 
   the originating call leg to the caller, and clears the call. 

   These examples describe simple voice scenarios. Other media types 
   may be possible. For example, it may be desirable to send the 
   listing information via text message to the caller's terminal, or 
   to show a video clip. Such features require knowledge of the 
   calling terminal's capabilities and characteristics. The mechanism 
   described in RFC 3840 Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the 
   Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)can be used for this. The 
   capabilities might have been signaled in the initial INVITE 
   request. Otherwise, the OIS-AS can query for capabilities using an 
   OPTIONS request. Additionally, some non SIP mechanism might be 
   used, such as querying a database (e.g. IMS HSS) in the caller's 
   network. 

   References to a whisper file can be passed using the mechanism 
   described in RFC 4483 A Mechanism For Content Indirection in the 
   Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Other information signaled via message bodies includes the success 
   or failure status of operations (such as identifying the requested 
   listing), or other data (such as the listing information).  

   Context information may be maintained on a per call basis. It could 
   include such information as the caller's preferred language, etc. A 
   URI pointing to the context information could be passed between 
   elements in the OISP infrastructure. 

    

    

8. Signaling Mechanisms 

   This section discusses the signaling mechanisms required to provide 
   OIS services. 

8.1. Calling Party's Identity 

In many cases, downstream providers may need to know the calling 
party's identity. This might be needed to influence call processing, 
or for accounting purposes. Also, the calling party's identity in the 
form of a SIP URI might be needed so that the identity of the home 
provider can be determined. 

The calling party's equipment populates the From header in SIP 
messages. This is not trusted. There are several methods for providing 
"network-asserted identities", which under the appropriate conditions 
can be trusted. 

The SIP Identity mechanism defined in [SIP-IDENT] provides a 
standardized, architecture agnostic SIP mechanism for 
cryptographically assuring the user's identity.  

The P-Asserted-Identity header [PAI] is a private extension which can 
be used to carry a network asserted identity of the caller between 
trusted providers.  

Note that some networks may allow their users to hide their identity. 
In the current North American PSTN, for such cases the caller id 
information is often transported through the network, marked with a 
privacy indication such that it will not be presented to the called 
party.   

Bilateral agreements between VOIP providers determine whether 
providers are within the same "trust domain" as defined in [RFC3324], 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

and what information, including network-asserted identities, may be 
exchanged between providers. Depending on such agreements, it is 
possible that the caller identity information is obscured or 
completely absent. As indicated in [PAI], "Masking identity 
information at the originating user agent will prevent certain 
services, e.g., call trace, from working in the Public Switched 
Telephone Network (PSTN) or being performed at intermediaries not 
privy to the authenticated identity of the user."   

When an OISP is outside any trust domain with the caller's home 
provider, or is not otherwise privy based on bilateral agreements to 
network asserted identity information from the calling network when 
the caller has requested privacy, it is unable to implement any call 
processing logic based on such information.  

If the OISP desires to reject anonymous calls, a mechanism is proposed 
in "Rejecting Anonymous Requests in the Session Initiation Protocol 
(SIP) - draft-ietf-sip-acr-code-03", which defines a specific response 
code for this. 

The following shows an example of an INVITE message contain a P-
Asserted-Identity header.  

 

   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.com:5060 ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "732758123" <sip:73237581234@provider-a.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
   [SDP not shown] 
    

    

8.2. Provider Identification 

   As discussed, in some deployment scenarios, the OISP makes use of 
   the identities of other providers involved in the call. This 
   section discusses how those identities can be conveyed using SIP. 

 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 26] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

8.2.1. Home Provider 

In many cases, the OISP needs to identify the caller's Home Provider. 
This may be needed for branding purposes as well as to potentially 
influence treatment in other ways. 

The basic mechanism for determining the home provider is to derive it 
from the right hand side (RHS) of the network asserted identity.  

In SIP, identities are expressed as URIs. These can be SIP (or SIPS) 
URIs, or "tel" URIs.  

[1] defines the SIP URI, which is used for identifying SIP resources. 
The RHS can be expressed as a DNS domain name or as an IPv4 or IPv6 
address. The hostname format is most suitable for providing an 
identity to reach the calling party. For instance the mechanisms 
defined in [RFC3263] for locating SIP servers depends on the use of 
domain names for the various types of DNS lookups such as NAPTR, SRV, 
and A. 

If a provider decides to provide network asserted identities expressed 
as SIP URIs using IP addresses instead of hostnames, it forfeits the 
use of such standardized mechanisms for reaching its users. It also 
becomes difficult to derive the home provider identity from the 
network asserted identity. 

RFC3966 defines the "tel" URI, which is used for describing resources 
identified by phone numbers. The "tel" URI format does not include a 
hostname. Thus, if the network asserted identity includes only a "tel" 
URI, no direct information about the home provider is provided.   

The SIP Identity mechanism is intended for use with SIP URIs. The PAI 
mechanism can use either a SIP URI, a "tel" URI, or both. 

This document depends on the home provider providing a network 
asserted identity containing a hostname. This includes the SIP 
identity where the SIP URI contains a hostname, or a PAI header 
containing at least a SIP URI with a hostname.  

Very simply, the RHS of the hostname in the SIP URI is extracted and 
used as the basis to influence call processing. In cases where the 
caller's identity is not available, as discussed in the  "Calling 
Party's Identity" section, then the home provider's identity is 
consequently also not available, and call processing logic based on 
such information (such as branding) cannot take place. 

 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 27] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

 

 

 

8.2.2. Intermediate Provider 

In some cases, the OISP may need to know the identity of  an 
intermediate provider which the call has traversed. Recall that for 
our purposes, we define "intermediate provider" as having a business 
relationship with both the home provider (to handle OIS requests) and 
with an OISP (which will actually provide the requested service.) This 
may be needed to influence treatment. 

The use of the SIP History-Info mechanism defined in RFC 4244, An 
Extension to SIP for Request History Information, can be used for 
this. As the call moves from one provider to the next and is 
retargeted, corresponding entries are added to the SIP History-Info 
header. If the domain name format is used for the retargeted entities, 
then the History-Info header now includes a list of traversed SIP 
domains or providers, which can be consulted by the OISP. 

According to RFC 4244, entries should be added to the History-Info 
header whenever the Request-URI is modified. Cases may exist where the 
call is sent to another provider but the URI is not modified. In such 
cases, the provider is not captured by the History-Info header. 

The following figure illustrates the use of the History-Info header 
for this purpose. 

 















 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 28] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    Caller        Provider-A     Provider-B     Provider-C 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(1) INVITE tel:+411          |              | 
      |------------->|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(2) INVITE sip:da@prov-b.net | 
      |              |------------->|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(3) INVITE sip:da@prov-c.net 
      |              |              |------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
    
   Figure 6 Use of History-Info header to identity traversed providers 

    
 

1. The user dials "411", and the resulting INVITE to its home proxy is 
for "tel: +411". No History-Info header is included yet. 

   INVITE tel:+411 SIP/2.0 
   (other message content omitted) 
 

 

2. The home proxy retargets this to "sip:da@prov-b.net", and adds a 
History-Info header which includes the targeted-from URI: 

   INVITE sip:DA@prov-b.net SIP/2.0 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1 
   (other message content omitted) 
 

3. Proxy-B retargets this to "SIP: da@prov-c.net", and appends another 
entry to the History-Info header: 

   INVITE sip:DA@prov-b.net SIP/2.0 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1, <sip:da@prov-b.net>; index=2 
   (other message content omitted) 
 

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 29] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

When this request arrives a Proxy-C in Provider C (OISP), it conveys 
the following: 

     oThe Request-URI (SIP: da@prov-c.net) indicates this as a DA call 

     oThe History-Info header conveys the history of the request: 

     oIt started as a tel URI for digits "411" 

     oIt was then targeted to provider B 

     oIt is now targeted to provider C 

Please note that if a transit provider were encountered, the transit 
provider would simply route the request toward Provider C, and would 
not perform retargeting. It would not modify the Request-URI nor the 
SIP History-Info header contents.  

 

8.3. Originating Station Type 

In the current PSTN in North America, OIS providers have the ability 
to tailor treatment based on the type of originating station. For 
instance, calls from prison phones are restricted from accessing DA 
services. Example values include POTS, coin, hospital, prison/inmate, 
cellular, etc. In the PSTN in North America, this information is 
signaled for SS7 calls using the Originating Line Information (OLI) 
information element, and in MF calls using the ANI II digits. To 
support interworking with the PSTN, it must be possible to convey the 
Originating Station Type value.  

It is also desirable to characterize certain types of originating SIP 
based callers using these same values, e.g. prison, police, etc.  

Ways to represent this information in SIP need to be explored. There 
are currently two proposals being considered in the IETF which might 
potentially satisfy this requirement.  

     oThe Calling Party's Category tel URI Parameter - draft-mahy-
        iptel-cpc-06.txt (work in progress) [IPTEL-CPC] 

This defines a new parameter "cpc" which is applied to the SIP or tel 
URI of the calling user. It allows for values such as "ordinary", 
"prison", "police", "test", "operator", "payphone", "unknown", 
"hospital", "cellular", "cellular-roaming". An example from the 
internet draft: 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 30] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   INVITE sip:bob@biloxi.example.com SIP/2.0 
   To: "Bob" <sip:bob@biloxi.example.com> 
   From: <tel:+17005554141;cpc=payphone>;tag=1928301774 
 

     oConveying Calling Party Category (CPC) and Originating Line 
        Information (OLI) using the Security Assertion Markup Language 
        (SAML) - draft-schubert-sipping-saml-cphc-02.txt [CPC-SAML] 

While [IPTEL-CPC] is simple to implement, [CPC-SAML] provides a 
cryptographically verifiable assertion. Both are currently works in 
progress, and any document with normative dependencies to such works 
cannot be published until the works in progress are published. 
Further, there is an open question as to whether [IPTEL-CPC] can carry 
OLI information as well as CPC or ANI II information.  

 

8.4. Trunk Group Identifier 

The incoming trunk group number provides information which could be 
used to influence call processing, thus this information is needed. 
Trunks are point to point circuits and as such, their remote 
termination point is unambiguously known. As such, knowledge of the 
incoming trunk group conveys the identity of the provider offering the 
call.  

For PSTN interworking, the incoming trunk group identifier is a key 
piece of information and must be known. Thus, at a PSTN to IP 
interworking point, the trunk group information must be kept and 
signaled forward. This holds for OISP's accepting incoming calls from 
the PSTN as well as upstream providers accepting calls from the PSTN. 

RFC 4904, "Representing trunk groups in tel/sip Uniform Resource 
Identifiers (URIs)" defines a way to signal incoming and/or outgoing 
trunk group information as a parameter in SIP URIs and tel URIs.  

To represent incoming trunk groups, the trunk group parameter is 
included in the Contact header of the SIP message. The "trunk-context" 
parameter should also be included, to ensure that the trunk group is 
unambiguously identified, since trunk group numbers are not globally 
unique. 

The following example shows an INVITE containing a trunk group 
identification in the Contact header: 

 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 31] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.com:5060 ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: < sip:7327581234@provider-b.com;tgrp=101; trunk-
   context=provider-b.com@proxy-b.provider-b.com;user=phone> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "7327581234" <sip:73237581234@provider-a.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
 

 

8.5. Dialed Digits 

Currently in the North American PSTN, the OIS provider may take into 
account the digits dialed by the user. In that scenario the dialed 
digits are frequently forwarded to the OIS provider.  

Using SIP, the dialed digits would typically be sent by the user's 
equipment in the form of a tel URI or SIP URI in the Request-URI of a 
SIP INVITE. It is possible that retargeting could take place, in which 
case the dialed digits would be lost.  

The SIP History-Info mechanism defined in RFC 4244 provides a 
mechanism for solving exactly this type of problem. It defines a new 
optional SIP header, History-Info, to provide a standard mechanism for 
capturing the request history information. Whenever a node which 
supports this mechanism modifies the Request-URI of a request, it 
captures this in the History-Info header.  

The following example shows an INVITE containing a History-Info 
header, which conveys the original dialed digits, after having been 
retargeted. 

   INVITE sip:DA@prov-b.net SIP/2.0 
   (other message content omitted) 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1, <sip:da@prov-b.net>; index=2 
 

Please see the section titled "Arbitrary Involved Provider" for an 
example of a flow where the History-Info mechanism delivers the dialed 
digits to the OISP when retargeting has occurred. 

 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 32] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

8.6. Retargeting to Identify the Desired Service 

It is necessary to identify the service being requested. Such services 
might include directory assistance with or without call completion. 
The logic to determine this might reside in one or more points in the 
network. Additionally, the identification of the service might be 
refined as the request traverses potentially multiple networks, 
depending on the availability of additional information.  

It is proposed here to retarget the Request-URI of the SIP request to 
specify the desired service. While the initial Request-URI might 
specify "SIP:411@provider-a.net", a downstream element might invoke 
service logic and determine that this call should be sent to OISP C's 
network for directory assistance with call completion, and change the 
Request-URI to "SIP:da-with-call-completion@oisp-c.net".  

A similar approach is taken for identifying resources in [NETANN]. 

[CSI], a work in progress, discusses explicit service identifiers for 
using in IMS based networks. 

 

8.7. Charge Number 

   There is a need to convey a charge number, which may differ from 
   the calling party's identity. The charge number usually identifies 
   the customer or account with which the caller is associated, e.g. 
   the main number for a business which has many individual calling 
   numbers. This might be needed for accounting, but it also could 
   influence call processing, especially when a particular type of 
   service applies for any caller associated with a particular charge 
   number.  

   There is currently no IETF standardized mechanism to convey the 
   Charge Number in SIP. This is currently under investigation. The 
   need to convey equivalent information for SIP based callers is also 
   under investigation. 

    

 

8.8. Passing Whisper 

   During front end automation, the OIS-MS will record and may time 
   compress the caller's perhaps meandering speech into what is known 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 33] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   as the "whisper". This is intended to be played into a human 
   operator's ear, should the call be referred to an operator, to 
   avoid the operator from having to prompt the caller again. The 
   whisper is obtained during the front end automation, and saved to 
   an audio file. 

   If the call needs to be transferred to a human operator, the 
   whisper will need to be played to the operator at the same time or 
   slightly prior to connecting the caller to the operator. Thus, the 
   operator workstation needs to be able to access the whisper file. 

   When the OIS-MS performs front end automation, it generates the 
   whisper and saves it as an audio file. The location, storage type, 
   and format are out of the scope of this document. What is needed is 
   a way for the OIS-MS to convey the whisper information to the OIS-
   AS, so it could potentially be used for later processing, such as 
   passing to a human operator. 

   Due to size constraints, it may not be feasible or desirable to 
   pass the actual audio file containing the whisper. This document 
   will discuss the most general case of passing a pointer, in the 
   form of a URI, to the audio content. What follows is a description 
   of one possible way to implement this. The work of the recently 
   formed IETF MEDIACTRL working group may provide alternatives. 

   Since the whisper is an output of the front end automation process, 
   it makes sense to return this upon completion of that process. The 
   most reasonable time to do this is when the OIS-MS sends the BYE. 

   Any SIP request, including BYE, can contain a message body. RFC 
   4483 A Mechanism for Content Indirection in Session Initiation 
   Protocol (SIP) Messages defines an extension to the URL MIME 
   External-Body Access-Type to satisfy the content indirection 
   requirements for SIP. These extensions are aimed at allowing any 
   MIME part in a SIP message to be referred to indirectly via a URI. 

   This is illustrated in the following figure. Note that the proxy 
   has been omitted for clarity, as have some messages not crucial to 
   illustrating the use of this mechanism. All SIP signaling traverses 
   the proxy. 







 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 34] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
            AS             MS          Operator 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(1) INVITE    |              | 
             |------------->|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(2) 200 OK    |              | 
             |<-------------|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |MS prompts user, collects whisper 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(3) BYE, body w. status, whisper URI 
             |<-------------|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(4) 200 OK    |              | 
             |------------->|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(5) INVITE w. whisper URI    | 
             |---------------------------->| 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(6) 200 OK SDP|              | 
             |<----------------------------| 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
    
            Figure 7 Call flow illustrating passing of whisper 

    

    

   1. INVITE AS->MS 
   INVITE sip:da@ms-1.oisp-c.net SIP/2.0 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 35] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   2. 200 OK MS->AS 
   SIP/2.0 200 OK 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

   3. BYE MS->AS 
   BYE sip:as-1@as-1.oisp-c.net SIP/2.0 
   [non relevant portions of message omitted] 
   Content-Type: message/external-body; access-type="URL"; 
       URL="http://ms1.oisp-c.net/whisper/20070206092700-0001.wav" 
       expiration="Tues, 06 Feb 2007 09:30:00 GMT"; 
   <CRLF> 
   Content-Type: audio/x-wav 
   Content-Disposition: render 
   <CRLF> 

    

   4. 200 OK AS->MS 
   SIP/2.0 200 OK 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

   5. INVITE AS->Operator Workstation 
   INVITE sip:operator@operator-123.oisp-c.net SIP/2.0 
   [non relevant portions of message omitted] 
   Content-Type: message/external-body; access-type="URL"; 
       URL="http://ms1.oisp-c.net/whisper/20070206092700-0001.wav" 
       expiration="Tues, 06 Feb 2007 09:30:00 GMT"; 
   <CRLF> 
   Content-Type: audio/x-wav 
   Content-Disposition: render 
   <CRLF> 
    

   6. 200 OK Operator->AS 
   SIP/2.0 200 OK 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

   Note that this same mechanism also supports the case where front 
   end automation is performed by one provider, and another provider 
   provides the operator assistance. In this type of scenario, 
   provisions need to made such that the second provider can access 
   the resources referenced by the URI.  

    
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 36] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

8.9. Calling Equipment Capabilities and Characteristics 

    

   It may be necessary for the OIS provider to learn the capabilities 
   and characteristics of the caller's equipment. This would be useful 
   when the OIS provider wishes to provide content to the caller other 
   than that which was used on the call to the OISP. For example, the 
   OIS provider might wish to send listing information via text 
   message, or play a video clip about a particular venue about which 
   he has requested information.  

   RFC 3840 Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the Session 
   Initiation Protocol (SIP), defines mechanisms by which a UA can 
   convey its capabilities and characteristics to other user agents 
   and to the registrar for its domain. This information is conveyed 
   as parameters of the Contact header field.  

   This information might be included in the incoming INVITE to the 
   OISP, if the caller's UA supports this mechanism and is configured 
   to do so. Otherwise, the OISP could query the caller's UA by 
   sending a SIP OPTIONS request, and the UA, if it supports this 
   mechanism, would include its capability feature tags in the 
   response to the OISP. 

   The following is an example of an INVITE containing capability 
   feature tags, as it arrives at the OISP. In this case, the UA 
   supports audio, video, and text. Other included tags provide 
   additional information. 

    

   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.com:5060 ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;audio;video;text 
        ;actor="principle";automata;mobility="fixed" 
        ;methods="INVITE,BYE,OPTIONS,ACK,CANCEL" 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "7327581234" <sip:73237581234@provider-a.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: tel:+7327581234 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
   [SDP not shown] 
    
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 37] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   If the OISP wishes to query the UA, it can send an OPTIONS request 
   to the UA, and the UA, if it supports this mechanism, would include 
   the feature capability tags in the Contact header, as show above, 
   in the 200 OK response. 

    

    

8.10. Media Server Returning Data to the Application Server 

   The OIS-AS needs to know the outcome of the operations performed by 
   the OIS-MS, e.g. success/failure of front end automation, etc. Some 
   mechanism is needed to convey this information. This could be 
   conveyed using non SIP mechanisms.  

   Any SIP message, including BYE, can carry message bodies. The 
   simplest way for a OIS-MS to return data to an OIS-AS is to 
   encapsulate the data in a MIME body. This requires agreement 
   between both sides on the format and semantics of these bodies. 

   Another approach is to use the content indirection mechanism to 
   point to the data, however this may be rather cumbersome if only a 
   small amount of data is to be returned. 

   Some OIS service may make use of VoiceXML, whereby the OIS-AS 
   invokes VoiceXML scripts on the OIS-MS, and the OIS-MS returns data 
   to the OIS-AS. SIP Interface to VoiceXML Media Services - draft-
   burke-vxml-02.txt (work in progress) describes a SIP interface to 
   VoiceXML media services, which is commonly employed between 
   application servers and media servers offering VoiceXML processing 
   capabilities. This may be found useful for OIS services. 

   The topic of application server control of media services is 
   currently under study, and is the subject of the IETF MEDIACTRL 
   working group's efforts. 

   This information can also be conveyed using non SIP mechanisms. 
   Describing such mechanisms is out of the scope of this document. 

 

8.11. Service Discovery 

   An OISP might desire that its service be discoverable on the 
   internet, instead of or in addition to static provisioning into 
   provider networks. The Service URN concept discussed in the work in 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 38] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   progress "A Uniform Resource Name (URN) for Services - draft-ietf-
   ecrit-service-urn-05" can be used to facilitate this. This allows 
   for discovery of the service in a context dependent manner, where 
   context could include for example the user's location. Thus a user 
   agent could send a SIP request to "urn: service: info", and this 
   very generic URI could be resolved to a point to a specific network 
   element belonging to a specific provider. If some other context 
   information such as the user's location is available, this could be 
   used to refine the resolution to e.g. an element best suited for 
   that particular location.  

    

9. Example Call Flow - Directory Assistance 

   The following call flow provides examples of how a DA service could 
   be implemented using the mechanisms described in this document. It 
   is intended to illustrate the intended use of the proposed 
   signaling mechanism. Some messages not crucial to this may be 
   omitted for clarity.  

    

























 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 39] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Caller    Proxy A   Proxy B   Proxy C   OIS-AS    OIS-MS1 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(1) INVITE tel:411 |         |         |         | 
      |-------->|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(2) INVITE sip:da@prov-b.com |         | 
      |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(3) INVITE sip:da@prov-c.com | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(4) INVITE sip:da-cc@prov-c.com 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |(5) INVITE prompt & 
   collect 
      |         |         |         |         |-------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |(6) 200 OK w.SDP 
      |         |         |         |         |<--------| 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(7) 200 OK w.SDP   | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(8) 200 OK w.sdp   |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(9) 200 OK w.sdp   |         |         | 
      |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(10) 200 OK w.sdp  |         |         |         | 
      |<--------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
    

                      Figure 8 DA Call flow, part 1 

    

    

   For brevity, only relevant SIP headers will be shown. The following 
   test refers to Figure 8. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 40] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   The user, homed in provider A, initiates a request for an OIS 
   service, for instance by dialing "411". The user's UA sends a SIP 
   INVITE. It might contain a "tel" URI. 

   1. INVITE UE -> Home Proxy 
    
   INVITE tel:+411 SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    

    

   The home provider knows nothing of OISP services, for instance it 
   might be a rather small scale provider. It is essentially set up to 
   forward all calls of this type to Provider B. It translates the 
   Request-URI to a SIP URI and sends the call on to provider B. 
   Because of this retargeting, it adds a History-Info header to 
   capture the dialed digits.  

    

   The caller's identity is verified in a manner consistent with this 
   provider's policies, and the proxy adds two P-Asserted-Identity 
   headers: one with a SIP URI, and another with a "tel" URI. 

















 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 41] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
    
   2. INVITE proxy-a -> proxy-b 
    
   INVITE sip:411@provider-b.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "732758123" <sip:73237581234@provider-a.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: tel:+7327581234 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    
    
    
   Proxy-b in provider-b's network receives the request. This is a 
   larger network, and it has business relationships with several OIS 
   providers, as well as with several providers which serve 
   subscribers. This provider has logic which requires it to query the 
   Home Provider's network to find some information related to the 
   caller. This is not likely to be a SIP related function, and is 
   thus out of scope for this document. The logic executes, taking the 
   result of this query into account. It is determined that the call 
   is for directory assistance, and that the call should be routed to 
   provider C for handling.  

    

   So, proxy-b retargets the Request-URI to reflect this, and routes 
   the call to provider C (the OISP). It adds another entry to the 
   History-Info header to capture this retargeting. 












 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 42] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
   3. INVITE proxy-b -> proxy-c 
    
   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.com:5060 ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.com:5060 ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "732758123" <sip:73237581234@provider-a.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: tel:+7327581234 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1, <sip:da@provider-a.com>; 
   index=2 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    
    
    
   Proxy-c in provider C's network receives the request. The source of 
   the request is authenticated via mechanisms not described here. It 
   needs to know how to bill this call, and thus needs to know which 
   provider it came from. It looks at the topmost Via header, and sees 
   that the call came from provider B.  

   It examines the History-Info header, and is able to identity the 
   dialed digits. It can also determine from the SIP URI which domains 
   have been traversed, as long as each has retargeted and appended an 
   entry in the header. 

   The proxy determines that the call needs to go the OIS-AS for 
   handling, so it retargets if necessary and forwards the INVITE. 

   The OIS-AS performs 3PCC. It determines that the call needs a 
   branded announcement based on the identity of the home provider, 
   which it derives from the P-Asserted-Identity header. It initiates 
   a new call leg toward OIS-MS1 for front end automation. Per RFC 
   4240, the "dialog" portion of the Request-URI indicates the "prompt 
   & collect" service. The URI identifies the VoiceXML script to be 
   executed. The SDP is the caller's SDP. 

    




 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 43] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
   5. INVITE OIS-AS -> MS1 
    
   INVITE sip:dialog@ois-as.prov-c.com; \ 
          voicexml=http://vxmlserver.example.net/cgi-bin/script.vxml \ 
   SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP ois-as.prov-c.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:ois-as@ois-as.prov-c.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: sip:dialog@ois-as.prov-c.com; \ 
          voicexml=http://vxmlserver.example.net/cgi-bin/script.vxml 
   Contact: <sip:ois-as@ois-as.prov-c.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    
    

   The OIS-MS responds with a 200 OK, with its own SDP. The OIS-AS now 
   sends a 200 OK response back toward the caller, with the MS's SDP. 
   Note that the OIS-AS could first have sent non final response back 
   toward the user. 

    
























 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 44] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
    
   Caller    OIS-AS    OIS-MS1     ACD       OWS 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |(11) RTP session   |         |         | 
      |...................|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(12) INFO w.URI, body        | 
      |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(13) INVITE        |         | 
      |         |------------------>|         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(14) 3xx |         |         | 
      |         |<------------------|         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(15) INVITE        |         | 
      |         |---------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(16) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |<----------------------------| 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(17) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(18) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |(19) re INVITE     |         |         | 
      |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |(20) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |(21) RTP session   |         |         | 
      |.......................................| 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(22) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |<----------------------------| 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |(23) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |---------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 45] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

                      Figure 9 DA Call flow, part 2 

    

   The following text refers to Figure 9.  

   The user is now connected (11) to the MS, which plays a branded 
   announcement, and prompts for the listing information. When the 
   user speaks his request, the MS processes the audio to obtain a 
   "whisper" file, or condensed version of the request. In this 
   example, the MS is unable to successfully perform the query, so it 
   sends an indication of this to the AS. In this example, the 
   indication is sent using an as yet unspecified protocol message 
   carried in a message body in a SIP INFO message, which also carries 
   a URI which points to the whisper file. Other mechanisms, including 
   non SIP mechanisms, could also be used to this end (this is the 
   subject of further study). The AS allows the caller to remain 
   connected to the MS while it sets up a call to an operator 
   workstation (OWS), allowing for the possibility to play custom 
   announcements to the caller. 

   The OIS-AS decides based on the failure indication that it needs to 
   route the call to a human operator. It sends an INVITE (13) to the 
   ACD server. This INVITE carries information about the required 
   characteristics, such as language and skill set, of the operator 
   which should be selected for this call. The means by which this 
   information is carried has yet to be defined. One possible way an 
   ACD could be implemented is as a presence server, such that it 
   keeps track of the availability of all the operators. The Media 
   Resource Broker being discussed in the IETF MEDIACTRL working group 
   also represents an approach to ACD. 

   In this example, the ACD server is implemented as a redirect server 
   - it sends a 3XX response (14) which identifies the operator the 
   OIS-AS should contact. Alternately, the ACD server could have 
   proxied the request to the operator. 

   The OIS-AS now sends an INVITE (15) containing the URI to the 
   whisper, as well as the caller's SDP, to the indicated operator 
   workstation. The operator workstation sends a 200 OK (16) with its 
   SDP, which the OIS-AS sends toward the caller in a re-INVITE (19). 
   Only when the workstation has sent a final response to the INVITE, 
   the AS sends a BYE (17) to the MS. 

   The caller is now connected to the operator (21), and the operator 
   helps the caller with the listing. The operator workstation 
   launches a query, and a response is received. The operator signals 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 46] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   a BYE (22) toward the OIS-AS, which may contain the listing 
   information in a message body, a pointer (URI) to the listing 
   information, or it may pass this information to the OIS-AS using 
   some other, non SIP mechanism.  

    

    

    

    
    
          Caller    OIS-AS    OIS-MS2 
             |         |         | 
             |         |         | 
             |         |         | 
             |         |(24) INVITE 
             |         |-------->| 
             |         |         | 
             |         |(25) 200 OK 
             |         |<--------| 
             |         |         | 
             |(26) re INVITE     | 
             |<--------|         | 
             |         |         | 
             |(27) 200 OK        | 
             |-------->|         | 
             |         |         | 
             |(28) RTP session   | 
             |...................| 
             |         |         | 
             |         |(29) BYE w.body 
             |         |<--------| 
             |         |         | 
             |(30) REFER         | 
             |<--------|         | 
             |         |         | 
             |         |         | 
             |         |         | 
                      Figure 10DA Call flow, part 3 






 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 47] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
    
   The following text refers to Figure 10. 
    
   The OIS-AS sends an INVITE (24) to another OIS-MS, MS2, for back 
   end automation. When it receives MS2's SDP in the 200 OK (25), it 
   sends a re INVITE (26) toward the user to update the SDP. At this 
   point an audio session is in place between the caller and the back 
   end automation MS (28). The MS plays the listing information, and 
   offers call completion service. The caller accepts, so OIS-MS2 
   sends a BYE (29) with a message body containing the result of the 
   call completion offer. Since call completion was requested, the 
   OIS-AS sends a REFER (30) to the caller, to cause it to place a 
   call to the listed party. The OIS-AS may or may not care about 
   subsequent NOTIFYs from the caller, and drops out of the call. 
    
    
    
10. Example Call Flow - Operator Services 

   The following call flow provides examples of how a specific 
   operator service, Operator Assisted Collect Call, could be 
   implemented using the mechanisms described in this document. The 
   purpose is to illustrate one way to implement this service using 
   the proposed signaling mechanisms. In practice, this particular 
   service could be implemented in an automated fashion without human 
   intervention.  




















 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 48] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

    
   Caller     Proxy       AS        WS      Called      MS        ACD 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Caller dials 0+ or 0- ]    |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(1) INVITE         |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(2) 100 Trying     |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS determines operator is needed, performs 3PCC ]        | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(3) INVITE         |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------------------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(4) 3xx redirect to WS where selected 
   operator registered 
      |         |         |<--------------------------------------| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(5) INVITE         |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(6) 200 OK         |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(7) ACK  |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(8) 200 OK         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(9) ACK  |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Caller is now connected to operator ]|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(10) RTP |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |.............................|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator determines calling's request and places on hold]| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 49] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(11) re-INVITE (HOLD)        |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(12) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(13) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS logic determines announcements should be played instead ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(14) INVITE (play announcements)       | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(15) 200 OK (SDP-MS)         |         | 
      |         |         |<----------------------------|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(16) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(17) reINVITE (SDP-MS)       |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(18) 200 OK (SDP-calling)    |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(19) ACK |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(20) RTP (MS plays announcements to calling)     |         | 
      |.................................................|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator calls called party ]        |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(21) INVITE        |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(22) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(23) ACK |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(24) RTP |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 50] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      |         |         |         |.........|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Called agrees to accept charges ]    |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator takes Calling off hold ]    |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(25) re-INVITE (un-HOLD)     |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS logic directs Calling from MS back to WS ]  |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(26) re-INVITE (SDP-ws)      |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(27) 200 OK        |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(28) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(29) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(30) ACK |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(31) RTP |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |.............................|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS releases MS ] |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(32) BYE |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(33) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<----------------------------|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Calling and Called both have RTP session with WS ]       | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ WS bridges conversations together internally ] |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 51] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      |[ After brief interlude WS transfers Calling directly to Called 
   ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ then drops out ] |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(34) REFER (to called)       |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(35) 202 Accepted  |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(36) NOTIFY (trying)         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(37) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Replaces header causes Called to replace old call with new ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(38) INVITE (replaces: WS )  |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(39) 200 OK (SDP-called)     |         | 
      |         |         |<------------------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(40) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(41) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(42) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ The following interactions synch up SDP - optimization 
   possible ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(43) re-INVITE (SDP-called)  |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(44) 200 OK (SDP-calling)    |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 52] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      |(45) ACK |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(46) re-INVITE (SDP-calling) |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(47) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<------------------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(48) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(49) RTP |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |.......................................|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Calling and Called are now talking directly ]  |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(50) NOTIFY (Call completed) |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(51) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator now drops out ]   |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(52) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(53) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS remains in signaling path until call ends ] |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(54) BYE |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(55) BYE |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(56) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<------------------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(57) 200 OK        |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 53] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
     
    
    Figure 11   Operator Service Call flow (Operator Assisted Collect 
                                  Call) 

    

   The caller initiates the call by dialing 0+ or 0-.  

   The call is routed to the AS. The AS examines the calling party 
   number and calling party's home provider, which are derived from 
   the P-Asserted-Identity header. The charge number is also needed, 
   in case the caller's service is determined by agreements with 
   another party, such as the caller's employer. The employer may have 
   a large number of calling identities representing its employees, 
   which are covered under its agreement with the OISP. Rather than 
   provision every possible calling number/identity with the OISP (and 
   this may be constantly changing), the ability to pass a charge 
   number would allow the OISP to determine whether this charge number 
   has any associated treatment on a per charge number basis. 

   In any case, in our example, the AS examines the request and 
   determines that the call is for an operator assisted collect call. 
   Typically a MS could be initially connected to prompt the user for 
   the type of call. This step is omitted in this example. 

   The AS performs third party call control (3PCC). It sends a 18x 
   response towards the caller. It needs to initiate a call leg to an 
   operator workstation. It populates the selection criteria in an 
   INVITE message (the exact mechanism for this is under study) which 
   it sends to the ACD server in (3). The ACD server identifies the 
   best match available operator and returns the contact information 
   for the workstation where that operator is currently registered in 
   a 3xx redirection response.  

   In (5) the AS sets up a call to the workstation identified by the 
   ACD server, and using 3PCC connects the caller to the WS, resulting 
   in an RTP session in (10). 

   The operator determines the caller's requested number, and sends an 
   INVITE toward the AS to put the caller on hold. The logic in the AS 
   determines that instead the caller should be connected to custom 
   announcements, and in (14) through (20) creates a session between 
   the caller and a MS. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 54] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Meanwhile, in (21) the WS places a call to the called party, and 
   asks whether the called party would accept the charges for a 
   collect call. In this example, the called party agrees to the 
   request.  

   In (25), the operator takes the caller off hold (recall that it 
   believes it has placed the caller on hold). The AS, in (26) through 
   (33), performs 3PCC, and removes the caller from the MS which is 
   playing custom announcements, and reconnects the caller back to the 
   WS. The WS uses its own internal bridging functionality to 
   conference the operator, calling, and called parties.  

   After a brief interlude, the operator initiates a transfer of the 
   calling and called parties directly together using a REFER in (34) 
   through (37). The AS, performing 3PCC, utilizes the SIP Replaces 
   mechanism beginning in (38) to complete the transfer. When the 
   transfer is complete, the operator drops out completely. Note that 
   the AS, performing 3PCC, remains in the signaling path until the 
   call is torn down in (54) through (57). 

    
    
11. VoIP Information Services - Summary and Next Steps 

A list of information which needs to be conveyed has been developed, 
and candidate proposals identified for each of these.  

The desired next steps include soliciting feedback from the IETF 
community on the choices and intended usages of the proposed 
mechanisms.  

An initial set of required capabilities for Operator Services has been 
identified. The next revision of this document is expected to contain 
a complete set of required capabilities. Once such a set is 
identified, existing SIP mechanisms will be examined for supporting 
these capabilities.  

Future revisions of this document will need to include security 
considerations as well as IANA considerations. Example messages and 
message flows will be more complete. The References section will also 
need to be complete. 

 




 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 55] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

12. Security Considerations 

This revision of this document does not yet address security 
considerations. A subsequent revision will do so, and will likely 
include the following among items it considers: 

Usage of headers such as P-Asserted-Identity which are intended to use 
between trusted providers. 

Potentially revealing information about subscribers or service 
provider infrastructure via signaling messages. 

Security of signaling and bearer. 

Implications of inter provider signaling. 

 

13. IANA Considerations 

This revision of this document does not yet address IANA 
considerations. It is not anticipated that this document will define 
any new protocol extensions or other values requiring action of IANA. 

 

    




















 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 56] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

14. References 

    

14.1. Normative References 

   [1]   Rosenberg, et al, J., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 
         3261, June 2002. 

   [TRKGRP] Gurbani, Jennings, "Representing trunk groups in tel/sip 
             Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)", draft-ietf-iptel-
             trunk-group-08.txt, October 2006. (work in progress) 

   [SIP-IDENT] Peterson, Jennings, "Enhancements for Authenticated 
             Identity Management in the Session Initiation Protocol 
             (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006. 

   [PAI]    Jennings, et al, "Private Extensions to the Session 
             Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within 
             Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002. 

   [IPTEL-CPC]  Mahy, "The Calling Party's Category tel URI 
             Parameter", draft-mahy-iptel-cpc-04.txt, October 2006. 
             (work in progress) 

   [CPC-SAML]  Schubert, et al, "Conveying Calling Party Category 
             (CPC) and Originating Line Information (OLI) using the 
             Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML)", draft-
             schubert-sipping-saml-cpc-02.txt, July 2006. (work in 
             progress) 

    [CONNECTED-ID] Elwell, et al, "Analysis of TISPAN requirements for 
             Connected Identity in the Session Initiation Protocol 
             SIP)", draft-elwell-sip-tispan-connected-identity-01.txt, 
             June 2006. (work in progress) 

14.2. Informative References 

    

   [CSI]    Loreto, Terril, "Input 3rd-Generation Partnership Project 
             (3GPP) Communications Service Identifiers Requirements on 
             the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", draft-loreto-
             sipping-3gpp-ics-requirements-00.txt, June 2006. (work in 
             progress) 


 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 57] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   [RFC3324] Watson, "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted 
             Identity", RFC 3324, November 2004. 

   [RFC3263] Rosenberg, Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation Protocol 
             (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263, June 2002. 

   [NETANN] Burger, et al, "Basic Network Media Services with SIP", 
             RFC 4240, December 2005. 

   [REFER] Sparks, "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Refer 
             Method", RFC 3515, April 2003. 

   [3PCC]    Rosenberg, et al, "Best Current Practices for Third Party 
             Call Control (3pcc) in the Session Initiation Protocol 
             (SIP)", RFC 3725, April 2004. 

   [IMS] 3GPP TS 23.228 V7.4.0 (2006-06) - 3rd Generation Partnership 
             Project; Technical Specification Group Services and 
             System Aspects; IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2 
             (Release 7) 

    

























 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 58] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

Author's Addresses 

      John Haluska 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      331 Newman Springs Road 
      Room 2Z-323 
      Red Bank, NJ  07701-5699 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 758 5735 
      Email: jhaluska@telcordia.com 
    
    
      Renee Berkowitz 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      One Telcordia Drive 
      Piscataway, NJ  08854-4157 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 699 4784 
      Email: rberkowi@telcordia.com 
    
    
      Paul Roder 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      One Telcordia Drive 
      Room RRC-4A619 
      Piscataway, NJ  08854-4157 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 699 6191 
      Email: proder2@telcordia.com 
    
      Wesley Downum 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      One Telcordia Drive 
      Piscataway, NJ  08854-4157 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 699 6201 
      Email: wdownum@telcordia.com 
    
    
      Richard Ahern 
      AT&T Customer Information Services 
      1876 Data Drive 
      Room 314 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 59] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

      Hoover, AL  35244 
      USA 
    
      Email: Richard.Ahern@bellsouth.com 
    
    
      Paul Lum Lung 
      Qwest Communications International 
      1801 California Street 
      Suite 1210 
      Denver, CO  80202 
      USA 
    
      Email: paul.lumlung@qwest.com 
    
    
     Nicholas S. Costantino 
     Soleo Communications, Inc. 
     300 Willowbrook Drive 
     Fairport, NY 14450 
    
     Email: ncostantino@soleocommunications.com 
    
    
     Chris Blackwell 
     Verizon 
     1000 Century Tel Dr 
     Room 115 
     Wentzville, MO 63385 
    
     Email: chris.blackwell@verizon.com 
    
     Jim Mellinger 
     Verizon 
     7979 N Beltline Rd 
     Irving, TX 75063 
    
     Email: james.j.mellinger@verizon.com 
    
    
     D. E. Scott 
     VoltDelta 
     2401 N. Glassell St. 
     Orange, CA  92865-2705 
      
     Email: dscott@voltdelta.com 
    
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 60] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP            July 2007 
    

   Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
 

   Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

   Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

   Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.        Expires January 5, 2008                [Page 61] 

