


S/MIME Working Group                            S. Santesson (Microsoft)
INTERNET-DRAFT Expires February 2005
                                                             August 2004

               S/MIME Capabilities in X.509 certificates
                 <draft-santesson-smime-scext-00.txt>

                          Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines a certificate extension for inclusion of S/MIME
   capabilities in public key certificates as defined by RFC 3280.

   S/MIME Capabilities provides a method of broadcasting the
   cryptographic S/MIME capabilities of the certified subject as a
   complement to use of S/MIME Capabilities signed attributes as defined
   in RFC 3851.

   Table of Contents

   1  Introduction ................................................    2
   2  S/MIME Capabilities Extension ...............................    3
   3  Use in applications .........................................    3
   4  Security Considerations .....................................    3
   5  References ..................................................    4
   6  Intellectual Property Rights ................................    4
   A  ASN.1 definitions ...........................................    6



Santesson                                                       [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT        S/MIME Capabilities extension          August 2004


   Authors' Addresses .............................................    6
   Full Copyright Statement .......................................    7

1. Introduction

   S/MIME defines in RFC 3851 the S/MIME Capabilities attribute as a
   means to communicate the cryptographic capabilities of a sender of a
   signed S/MIME message. This information can then be used by the
   recipient in subsequent S/MIME secured exchanges with the sender to
   select appropriate cryptographic properties for the exchange.

   However, the use of S/MIME in electronic mail also introduces the
   scenario where a sender of an encrypted e-mail has no prior
   established knowledge of the recipient's cryptographic capabilities
   through recent S/MIME exchanges.

   In this case the sender has no other option but to fall back to a
   default assumption of the recipient which may be incompatible with
   the recipient's capabilities and/or security policy.

   Sending an encrypted e-mail does however require possession of the
   recipient's public key certificate which in turn contains information
   about the recipient's public key cryptographic capabilities but not
   its symmetric cryptographic capabilities needed for S/MIME.

   The approach of this document to minimize the need to revert to
   default cryptographic settings due to lack of knowledge, is enable
   the capacity to include S/MIME Capabilities also in public key
   certificates.






















Santesson                                                       [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT        S/MIME Capabilities extension          August 2004


2. S/MIME Capabilities Extension

   Data objects and their syntax and semantics needed to communicate
   S/MIME capabilities have already been defined in RFC 3633 through the
   sMIMECapabilities attribute and there is no need to re-invent this
   structure.

   The S/MIME Capabilities extension does therefore reuse the data
   structure of the sMIMECapabilities attribute as well as the defined
   object identifier for this structure.

   The S/MIME Capabilities extension MUST have the following definition:

      smimeCapabilities OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=
         {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1)
         pkcs-9(9) 15}


      sMIMECapabilitiesExt EXTENSION ::= {
            SYNTAX             SMIMECapabilities
            IDENTIFIED BY      smimeCapabilities }

      SMIMECapabilities ::= SEQUENCE OF SMIMECapability

      SMIMECapability ::= SEQUENCE {
         capabilityID OBJECT IDENTIFIER,
         parameters ANY DEFINED BY capabilityID OPTIONAL }

   Algorithms should be ordered by preference

3. Use in applications

   Applications using the S/MIME Capabilities extension SHOULD not use
   information provided in this certificate extension if more recent
   S/MIME capabilities information is available from signed messages
   from the certified subject.

   In this case the information in the S/MIME capabilities extension
   SHOULD be ignored.


4  Security Considerations

   Implementers should be aware that the S/MIME capabilities extension
   contains a statement about the subject's capabilities at the time of
   certificate issuance, which may change over the lifetime of the
   certificate.




Santesson                                                       [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT        S/MIME Capabilities extension          August 2004


   Certification Authorities should therefore renew a certificate
   including S/MIME Capabilities, if the subjects cryptographic
   capabilities changes in a way that is no longer compatible with the
   current certificate.

   It is however, despite any available information about the
   recipient's cryptographic capabilities, still the responsibility of
   the sender to always choose sufficiently strong encryption for its
   information disclosure and the responsibility of the recipient to
   only accept data that has been protected according to the recipient's
   security policy.


5 References


   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC 3280] R. Housley, W. Polk, W. Ford, and D. Solo, "Internet
              X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and
              Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280,
              April 2002.

   [RFC 3851] B. Ramsdell, "Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (S/MIME) Version 3.1 Message Specification",
              RFC 3851, July 2004





6 Intellectual Property Rights

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.




Santesson                                                       [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT        S/MIME Capabilities extension          August 2004


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.














































Santesson                                                       [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT        S/MIME Capabilities extension          August 2004


A. ASN.1 definitions

   TBD

Authors' Addresses


   Stefan Santesson
   Microsoft
   Tuborg Boulevard 12
   2900 Hellerup
   Denmark

   EMail: stefans@microsoft.com





































Santesson                                                       [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT        S/MIME Capabilities extension          August 2004


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  In addition, the
   ASN.1 modules presented in Appendices A and B may be used in whole or
   in part without inclusion of the copyright notice.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process shall be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL
   NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.























Santesson                                                       [Page 7]

