


Network Working Group                                        S. Krishnan
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Standards Track                                A. Kukec
Expires: January 15, 2009                           University of Zagreb
                                                                K. Ahmed
                                                               Microsoft
                                                           July 14, 2008


                      Certificate Profile for SEND
                 draft-krishnan-cgaext-send-cert-eku-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 15, 2009.















Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


Abstract

   Secure Neighbor Discovery (SEND) Utilizes X.509v3 certificates for
   performing router authorization.  This document specifies a
   certificate profile for SEND including extended key usage values,
   revocation details and supported extensions.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Extended Key Usage Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Certificate Revocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Certificate Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13
































Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


2.  Introduction

   Secure Neighbor Discovery [RFC3971] Utilizes X.509v3 certificates for
   performing router authorization.  It uses the X.509 extension for IP
   addresses to verify whether the router is authorized to advertise the
   mentioned IP addresses.

   Since the IP addresses extension does not mention what functions the
   node can perform for the IP addresses it becomes impossible to know
   the reason for which the certificate was issued.  In order to
   facilitate issuance of certificates for specific functions, it is
   necessary to utilize the ExtKeyUsageSyntax field of the X.509
   certificate to mention the purpose for which the certificate was
   issued.  This document specifies three extended key usage values, one
   for routers, one for proxies, and one for address owners, for use
   with SEND.

   The SEND specification does not describe a revocation mechanism for
   SEND certifications.  This document describes a revocation mechanism
   for SEND certificates that uses OCSP [RFC2560]

   Finally, this document defines the set of certificate extensions that
   a SEND capable node needs to support in addition to what has been
   defined in [RFC3280].



























Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


3.  Extended Key Usage Values

   The Internet PKI document [RFC3280] specifies the extended key usage
   X.509 certificate extension.  The extension indicates one or more
   purposes for which the certified public key may be used.  The
   extended key usage extension can be used in conjunction with key
   usage extension, which indicates the intended purpose of the
   certified public key.

   The extended key usage extension syntax is repeated here for
   convenience:

     ExtKeyUsageSyntax ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF KeyPurposeId

     KeyPurposeId ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER

   This specification defines three KeyPurposeId values: one for
   authorizing routers, one for authorizing proxies, and one for address
   owners.

   The inclusion of the router authorization value indicates that the
   certificate has been issued for allowing the router to advertise
   prefix(es) that are mentioned using the X.509 extensions for IP
   addresses and AS identifiers [RFC3779]

   The inclusion of the proxy authorization value indicates that the
   certificate has been issued for allowing the proxy to perform
   proxying of neighbor discovery messages for the prefix(es) that are
   mentioned using the X.509 extensions for IP addresses and AS
   identifiers [RFC3779]

   The inclusion of the owner authorization value indicates that the
   certificate has been issued for allowing the node to use the
   address(es) or prefix(es) that are mentioned using the X.509
   extensions for IP addresses and AS identifiers [RFC3779]

   Inclusion of multiple values indicates that the certified public key
   is appropriate for use by a node performing more than one of these
   functions.

     send-kp OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=
       { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
         security(5) mechanisms(5) TBA1 }

     id-kp-sendRouter OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { send-kp 1 }

     id-kp-sendProxy OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { send-kp 2 }




Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


     id-kp-sendOwner OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { send-kp 3 }

   The extended key usage extension MAY, at the option of the
   certificate issuer, be either critical or non-critical.

   Certificate-using applications MAY require the extended key usage
   extension to be present in a certificate, and they MAY require a
   particular KeyPurposeId value to be present (such as id-kp-sendRouter
   or id-kp-sendProxy) within the extended key usage extension.  If
   multiple KeyPurposeId values are included, the certificate-using
   application need not recognize all of them, as long as the required
   KeyPurposeId value is present.







































Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


4.  Certificate Revocation

   Contrary to unbounded CRL sizes, OCSP response is bounded and small,
   and OCSP statements can be bounded with the certificate itself in the
   Certification Path messages eliminating the need for the relying
   party at one end to have a network connection.  Thus, SEND should use
   inband revocation checking supported by the OCSP [RFC2560].

   In order to support OCSP in SEND, this document defines new options
   in the Certification Path Solicitation message, as well as in
   Certification Path Advertisement message.

   The Certification Path Solicitation message would then have the
   following options.

   o  Trust Anchor: TA which the client is willing to accept

   o  OCSP Responder: The hash of the OCSP Responders public key trusted
      by the client, or the concatenated list of hashes of more OCSP
      Responders' public keys.

   The client could define only one OCSP Responder by each CPS message,
   to ensure easier matching of OCSP request and response, based on
   Identifier field in Certification Path Advertisement.  However, it is
   more appropriate to send more OCSP responders in one CPS message,
   since it is possible to match certificate and corresponding OCSP
   response by matching the target certificate identifier from the OCSP
   response to the corresponding certificate.

   The Certification Path Advertisement message would have the following
   options.

   o  Certificate

   o  Trust Anchor: to help the client to find out which advertisement
      is useful

   o  OCSP response: A definitive OCSP response message containing the
      response for each of the certificates from the request as
      specified in Section 2.2 of [RFC2560].

   o  OCSP responder: to help the client to find out which advertisement
      is useful.

   The problem for the client is that when it is in the process of
   forming the CPS message, it does not have certificates for which it
   is sending the OCSP request.  Thus, it can not form the OCSP request
   as described in [RFC2560].  However, the client can work around this



Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


   problem using the hashes of OCSP responders.  This problem is also
   described in Section 5.1 of [RFC4806].

   After the receipt of Solicitation Path Advertisement with OCSP
   response, the client can start with the OCSP response path validation
   logic defined in [RFC3280].  Before the end of this validation
   procedure, all certificates MUST be considered as provisional, and
   the client must perform this validation as soon as it connects to
   Internet, as described in [RFC3971].










































Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


5.  Certificate Extensions

   This paragraph describes certificate extensions that a compliant SEND
   implementation MUST support and set the criticality bit: Subject
   Alternative Name, Extended Key Usage, Key Usage, Basic Constraints
   and Authority Information Access.  Each compliant implementation
   SHOULD mark the following extensions as critical: Key Usage, Extended
   Key Usage, Subject Alternative Name and Basic Constraints.  The
   Authority Information Extension MUST NOT be marked as critical.  An
   implementation MUST reject all unrecognized critical extensions and
   MUST ignore all unrecognized non-critical extensions, as described in
   [RFC3280].

   The Subject Alternative Name extension (type iPAddress) contains the
   subnet prefix that the router is authorized to advertize.  It is
   described in [RFC3971].  It SHOULD be marked as critical, as it is
   possible that some certificates in the beginning does not contain
   this extension.  In such scenarios the validation of subjectAltName
   iPAddress delegation extension MAY be relaxed.

   The Extended Key Usage extension defines the application or protocol
   specific purposes for which the certificate key pair may be used.  It
   is described in Section 3.  It MUST be marked as critical.

   The Key Usage extension defines the basic purposes for which the key
   pair may be used.  The Router Authorization Certificate MUST have at
   least the digitalSignature and nonRepudiation bits set, since it's
   key pair is used for the CGA generation and Router Advertisement
   signing.  Other certificates would usually have set the keyCertSign
   bit set.  This extension MUST be marked as critical and MUST be
   processed independently of the Extended Key Usage extension.  The
   certificate purpose must be consistent with both the Extended Key
   Usage extension and the Key Usage extension.

   The Basic Constraints extension defines specifies whether the subject
   of the certificates is a CA or an end entity, as well as the maximum
   depth of valid certification path.  In accordance with [RFC3280], it
   MUST be marked as critical.

   The Authority Information Access extension specifies how to retrieve
   additional CA information, e.g. the information about the OCSP
   responder.  It MUST be marked as non-critical and usually the host
   will learn the OCSP responder from the configuration file.








Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


6.  Security Considerations

   The certification authority needs to ensure that the correct values
   for the extended key usage are inserted in each certificate that is
   issued.  Relying parties may accept or reject a particular
   certificate for an intended use based on the information provided in
   these extensions.  Incorrect representation of the information in the
   extended key usage field can cause the relying party to reject an
   otherwise appropriate certificate or accept a certificate that ought
   to be rejected.









































Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2560]  Myers, M., Ankney, R., Malpani, A., Galperin, S., and C.
              Adams, "X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online
              Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP", RFC 2560, June 1999.

   [RFC3280]  Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W., and D. Solo, "Internet
              X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
              Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280,
              April 2002.

   [RFC3779]  Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP
              Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004.

   [RFC3971]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
              Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [RFC4806]  Myers, M. and H. Tschofenig, "Online Certificate Status
              Protocol (OCSP) Extensions to IKEv2", RFC 4806,
              February 2007.




























Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900 x42871
   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Ana Kukec
   University of Zagreb
   Unska 3
   Zagreb
   Croatia

   Email: ana.kukec@fer.hr


   Khaja Ahmed
   Microsoft

   Email: khaja@windows.microsoft.com


























Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          SEND Certificate Profile               July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 15, 2009               [Page 13]

