





Network Working Group                                    Randall Atkinson
INTERNET DRAFT                                  Naval Research Laboratory
draft-ietf-sipp-sa-02.txt                                   19 April 1994




                       SIPP Security Architecture





STATUS OF THIS MEMO
     This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet  Drafts  are  working
   documents  of  the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may  also  distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

     Internet Drafts are draft  documents  valid  for  a  maximum  of  6
   months.   Internet  Drafts  may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to  use  Internet
   Drafts  as  reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress".

     This particular Internet Draft is a  product  of  the  IETF's  SIPP
   working group.  It is intended that a future version of this draft be
   submitted to the IPng  Area  Directors  and  the  IESG  for  possible
   publication  as  a  standards-track  protocol  (as a part of the SIPP
   proposal for IPng).  Discussion of this draft normally takes place on
   the SIPP Working Group mailing list: sipp@sunroof.eng.sun.com

1. INTRODUCTION

     This memo describes the overall SIPP  Security  Architecture.   The
   security  architecture  is  a  high-level  description of the several
   security mechanisms for the SIPP  protocol  and  their  relationship.
   Each security mechanism is specified separately.

2. KEY MANAGEMENT

     The Key Management protocol that will be used  with  SIPP  has  not
   been  specified yet.  However, because the key management protocol is
   coupled to the  other  security  mechanisms  only  via  the  Security
   Association  Identifier  (SAID), those other security mechanisms have
   already been defined.  What  follows  in  this  section  is  a  brief
   discussion of a few alternative approaches to key management.




Atkinson                                                        [Page 1]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


     The simplest form of key management is manual key management, where
   a  person  manually  configures each system with its own key and also
   with  the  keys  of  other  communicating  systems.   This  is  quite
   practical  in  small,  static environments but does not scale at all.
   It is not a viable medium-term or long-term approach,  but  might  be
   appropriate in a small LAN environment or with routers that only need
   to  authenticate  routing  updates  with   adjacent   routers.    All
   implementations  of  the SIPP Security Mechanisms must support manual
   key management.

     In order for SIPP  security  to  become  obiquitous,  an  Internet-
   standard  scalable key management protocol will be required.  Ideally
   such a protocol would support a number of protocols in  the  Internet
   protocol  suite,  not  just SIPP security.  There are a number of key
   management  algorithms  that  have  been  proposed  in   the   public
   literature.   Needham  &  Schroeder  have  proposed  a key management
   algorithm which relies on a centralised key distribution system. [11,
   12]  This  algorithm  is  used  in the Kerberos Authentication System
   developed at MIT under Project Athena. [10] More recently,  Diffie  &
   Hellman   have   devised  an  algorithm  which  does  not  require  a
   centralised key distribution system. [13] Unfortunately, the original
   Diffie-Hellman technique is vulnerable to an active attack.  However,
   this vulnerability can be mitigated by using signed keys to bootstrap
   into  the  Diffie-Hellman  exchange.  The Internet's Privacy Enhanced
   Mail (PEM) uses a kind of key certificate that appears  suitable  for
   use  with  the Diffie-Hellman key management algorithm. [14] However,
   such a hybrid key management protocol requires several  exchanges  to
   setup  a  session  key  between  the two parties.  It is desirable to
   minimise the number of exchanges required to setup a session key.

     There are several  means  by  which  a  key  certificate  might  be
   distributed.   One  obvious  choice would be to add some kind of host
   key certificate into the Domain Name System as a new resource  record
   type.   Another  approach  would be for each party to have a host key
   certificate available via a UDP service.  Then the originating  party
   would authenticate key management traffic to the other key management
   party using an asymmetric algorithm.  The two parties would then have
   a secure communications channel that could be used to create a shared
   session key.

     SIPP implementations must support manual key  configuration.   SIPP
   implementations  should  support  a  standard key management protocol
   once the latter is defined.  Widespread  use  of  the  SIPP  security
   mechanisms   described   below  relies  on  adequate  key  management
   mechanisms being widely deployed.






Atkinson                                                        [Page 2]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


3.0 SIPP SECURITY MECHANISMS

     There are two security  mechanisms  in  SIPP.   The  first  is  the
   Authentication  Payload  which  provides integrity and authentication
   without confidentiality.  The second is  the  Encapsulating  Security
   Payload     which    provides    integrity,    authentication,    and
   confidentiality.  These may be combined if appropriate.

3.1 AUTHENTICATION HEADER

     The SIPP Authentication Header (AH) seeks to provide integrity  and
   authentication  for  SIPP datagrams.  Non-repudiation may be provided
   by an authentication algorithm used with AH, but it is  not  provided
   by  all  authentication  algorithms  that  might  be  used  with  AH.
   Confidentiality,  and  protection  from  traffic  analysis  are   not
   provided  by  AH.  Users desiring confidentiality should use the SIPP
   Encapsulating Security Protocol (ESP).

     The  SIPP   Authentication   Header   (AH)   holds   authentication
   information for its SIPP datagram. This authentication information is
   calculated using all of the fields in the SIPP datagram which do  not
   change during transit from the originator to the recipient.  All SIPP
   headers,  payloads,  and  the  user  data  are   included   in   this
   calculation.   The only exception is that fields which need to change
   in transit (e.g.  SIPP Header's  "Hop  Count"  or  the  SIPP  Routing
   Header's  "Next Address") are omitted when the authentication data is
   calculated.

     Use of AH will increase  the  SIPP  protocol  processing  costs  in
   participating  end  systems and will also increase the communications
   latency.  The increased latency is primarily due to  the  calculation
   of  the  authentication  data  by  the sender and the calculation and
   comparison of the authentication data by the receiver for  each  SIPP
   datagram containing an Authentication Header (AH).

     All  SIPP  implementations  should  implement  the   Authentication
   Header.   Implementation  of  AH provides much stronger security than
   exists in  most  of  the  current  Internet  and  should  not  affect
   exportability  or  significantly increase implementation cost.  While
   AH could be implemented by a security gateway on behalf of hosts on a
   trusted  network behind that security gateway, this mode of operation
   is not encouraged.  Instead, all SIPP-capable  hosts  must  implement
   the  SIPP Authentication Header with at least the MD5 algorithm using
   a  128-bit  key.   Other  authentication  algorithms  may   also   be
   implemented.






Atkinson                                                        [Page 3]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


3.2 ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD

    The SIPP Encapsulating  Security  Payload  (ESP)  seeks  to  provide
   integrity, authentication, and confidentiality to SIPP datagrams.  It
   does this by encapsulating either an entire SIPP datagram or only the
   upper-layer  protocol data inside the ESP, encrypting most of the ESP
   contents, and then using the ESP as the user  data  for  a  cleartext
   SIPP  datagram.   This  cleartext SIPP datagram carries the protected
   data through  the  internetwork.   The  recipient  of  the  cleartext
   datagram removes and discards the cleartext SIPP header and cleartext
   SIPP options, decrypts the ESP, removes the  ESP  headers,  and  then
   processes  the  (now decrypted) original SIPP datagram or upper-layer
   protocol data as per the normal SIPP protocol specification.

     ESP works between hosts, between a host and a security gateway,  or
   between security gateways. This support for security gateways permits
   trusted networks to exist without the performance and monetary  costs
   of   security,   while  providing  security  for  traffic  transiting
   untrustworthy network segments.  When both hosts  directly  implement
   ESP  and  there is no intervening security gateway, then they may use
   the mode where only the upper layer protocol data (e.g. TCP  or  UDP)
   is  encrypted.  This mode reduces both the bandwidth consumed and the
   protocol processing costs for users  that  don't  need  to  keep  the
   entire  SIPP  datagram confidential.  ESP works with both unicast and
   multicast traffic, though published key management mechanisms do  not
   scale well to large or highly dynamic multicast groups.

     It is important to understand that the security properties that ESP
   provides  come  from  the  encryption mechanisms used with ESP rather
   than from the ESP itself.  Consequently the implementer's  choice  of
   encryption  algorithms,  modes, key management schemes, and keys will
   strongly influence the quality of the security provided.

     The encapsulating security approach  used  by  ESP  can  noticeably
   impact  network  performance.   SIPP protocol processing will be more
   complex, requiring both more time and more processing  power.   Using
   ESP  will  also  increase  the communications latency.  The increased
   latency is primarily due to the encryption  and  decryption  required
   for  each SIPP datagram containing an Encapsulating Security Payload.
   The precise  cost  of  ESP  will  vary  with  the  specifics  of  the
   implementation,  including  the  encryption  algorithm, key size, and
   other  factors.   Because  of  the  performance  impact,  users   not
   requiring  confidentiality  will  probably  prefer  to  use  the SIPP
   Authentication  Header  instead   of   ESP.    For   interoperability
   throughout  the  worldwide  Internet,  the use of the Data Encryption
   Standard (DES) in Cipher-Block Chaining (CBC) Mode is required of all
   systems  which  implement SIPP ESP.  Other confidentiality algorithms
   and modes may also be implemented.



Atkinson                                                        [Page 4]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


3.3 COMBINING SECURITY MECHANISMS

     In  some  cases  it  might  be  desirable  to  combine   the   SIPP
   Authentication  Header  (AH)  with  the  SIPP  Encapsulating Security
   Protocol (ESP) to obtain higher quality security.  AH always provides
   integrity  and authentication and can provide non-repudiation if used
   with  certain  authentication  algorithms.    ESP   always   provides
   integrity  and confidentiality and can provide authentication if used
   with  certain  authenticating  encryption  algorithms  and   schemes.
   Adding  the  Authentication  Header  to  a  SIPP  datagram  prior  to
   encapsulating that datagram using ESP might be  desirable  for  users
   wishing  to  have  strong integrity, authentication, confidentiality,
   and perhaps non-repudiation.  When the two mechanisms  are  combined,
   the  placement  of  the  SIPP Authentication Header makes clear which
   part of the data is being authenticated.  Details  on  combining  the
   two  mechanisms  are  provided  in  the  SIPP  Encapsulating Security
   Payload specification. [2]

3.4 OTHER SECURITY MECHANISMS

     Protection from traffic analysis is not  provided  by  any  of  the
   security   mechanisms   described   above.   It  is  unclear  whether
   meaningful  protection  from  traffic  analysis   can   be   provided
   economically  at  the Internet Layer and it appears that few Internet
   users are concerned about traffic analysis.  One  traditional  method
   for  protection  against traffic analysis is the use of suitable link
   encryption.  Another technique is to send false traffic in  order  to
   increase  the  noise  in  the data provided by traffic analysis.  The
   reader is referred to [15] for more information on  traffic  analysis
   issues.

4. DESIGN OBJECTIVES

     This section describes  some  of  the  design  objectives  of  this
   security  architecture  and  its  component  mechanisms.  The primary
   objective of this work  is  to  ensure  that  SIPP  will  have  solid
   security  mechanisms  available  to users who desire security.  These
   mechanisms are designed such that Internet users who  do  not  employ
   these  mechanisms  will  not  be  negatively impacted in their use of
   SIPP.  These mechanisms seek to be algorithm-independent so that  the
   cryptography  might  be  changed  in the future without affecting the
   other parts of the implementation.  SIPP Security requires  that  all
   conforming  implementations  support  at  least  the default standard
   algorithm.  This helps  to  ensure  interoperability  in  the  global
   Internet.   The  algorithms  used  in  SNMPv2 are used as the default
   standard algorithms for SIPP Security (i.e.  MD5  for  authentication
   and  DES CBC for confidentiality).  The SIPP Security mechanisms seek
   to be general-purpose and to avoid restricting the security  policies



Atkinson                                                        [Page 5]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


   that might be enforced.

5. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

     This entire draft discusses the SIPP Security Architecture.

     Users need to understand that the quality of the security  provided
   by the mechanisms provided by SIPP depends completely on the strength
   of the implemented cryptographic algorithms, the strength of the  key
   being   used,   the   correct  implementation  of  the  cryptographic
   algorithms, the security of the  key  management  protocol,  and  the
   correct implementation of SIPP and the several security mechanisms in
   all of the participating systems.  The security of the implementation
   is  in  part  related  to  the security of the operating system which
   embodies the security implementations.  For example, if the operating
   system  does not keep the private cryptologic keys confidential, then
   traffic using those keys will not be secure.   If  any  of  these  is
   incorrect  or  insufficiently secure, little or no real security will
   be provided to the user.

     Certain security properties (e.g. traffic analysis protection)  are
   not  provided  by  any of these mechanisms.  One possible approach to
   traffic analysis protection is appropriate use  of  link  encryption.
   [15]  Users  must  carefully  consider which security properties they
   require and take active steps to ensure that their needs are  met  by
   these or other mechanisms.

     Certain applications (e.g. electronic mail) probably need  to  have
   application-specific   security   mechanisms.    Application-specific
   security mechanisms are  out  of  the  scope  of  the  SIPP  Security
   Architecture.   Users  interested  in electronic mail security should
   consult the RFCs  describing  the  Internet's  Privacy-Enhanced  Mail
   system.   Users concerned about other application-specific mechanisms
   should consult the online RFCs to see if suitable  Internet  Standard
   mechanisms exist.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

     Many of the concepts here are derived from or  were  influenced  by
   the  US  Government's  SDNS  security  protocol  specifications,  the
   ISO/IEC's NLSP specification, or from  the  proposed  swIPe  security
   protocol.  [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] The work done for SNMP and SNMPv2 Security
   influenced the choice of default cryptological algorithms and  modes.
   [8]  Steve Bellovin, Steve Deering, George Kamis, Phil Karn, and Dave
   Mihelcic provided critiques of earlier versions of this draft.






Atkinson                                                        [Page 6]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


REFERENCES
   [1]     Randall Atkinson, SIPP Authentication Header, Internet Draft,
           draft-ietf-sip-ap-03.txt, 19 April 1994.

   [2]     Randall Atkinson, SIPP Encapsulating Security Payload, Internet
           Draft, draft-ietf-sip-esp-02.txt, 19 April 1994.

   [3]     SDNS Secure Data Network System, Security Protocol 3, SP3,
           Document SDN.301, Revision 1.5, 15 May 1989, published
           in NIST Publication NIST-IR-90-4250, February 1990.

   [4]     ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6, Network Layer Security Protocol, ISO-IEC
           DIS 11577, International Standards Organisation, Geneva,
           Switzerland, 29 November 1992.

   [5]     John Ioannidis, Matt Blaze, & Phil Karn, "swIPe: The IP
           Security Protocol", unpublished draft, 14 April 1993.

   [6]     John Ioannidis, Matt Blaze, & Phil Karn, "swIPe: Network-Layer
           Security for IP", presentation at the Spring 1993 IETF Meeting,
           Columbus, Ohio.

   [7]     ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6, Network Layer Security Protocol, ISO-IEC
           DIS 11577, Section 13.4.1, page 33, International Standards
           Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland, 29 November 1992.

   [8]     James Galvin & Keith McCloghrie, Security Protocols for version 2
           of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2), RFC-1446,
           DDN Network Information Center, April 1993.

   [9]     Steve Deering, Simple Internet Protocol Plus (SIPP) Specification,
           draft-ietf-sipp-spec-00.txt, 21 February 1994

   [10]    J. Kohl & B. Neuman, The Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5),
           RFC-1510, DDN Network Information Center, 10 September 1993.

   [11]    R.M. Needham & M.D. Schroeder, "Using Encryption for Authentication
           in Large Networks of Computers", Communications of the ACM, Vol. 21,
           No. 12, December 1978, pp. 993-999.

   [12]    R.M. Needham & M.D. Schroeder, "Authentication Revisted", ACM
           Operating Systems Review, Vol. 21, No. 1.

   [13]    W. Diffie & M. Hellman, "New Directions in Cryptography", IEEE
           Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. IT-22,  No. 6, November
           1976, pp. 644-654.

   [14]    Steve Kent, Privacy Enhancement for Internet Electronic Mail:



Atkinson                                                        [Page 7]

Internet Draft                                             19 April 1994


           Part II: Certificate-Based Key Management, RFC-1422, DDN Network
           Information Center, 10 February 1993.

   [15]    V.L. Voydock & S.T. Kent, "Security Mechanisms in High-level
           Networks", ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 15, No. 2, June 1983.


DISCLAIMER

     The views expressed in this note are those of the author and are not
   necessarily those of his employer.  The Naval Research Laboratory has
   not passed judgement on the merits, if any, of this work.  The author
   and his employer specifically disclaim responsibility for any problems
   arising from correct or incorrect implementation or use of this
   design.

AUTHOR INFORATION

   Randall Atkinson <atkinson@itd.nrl.navy.mil>
   Information Technology Division
   Naval Research Laboratory
   Washington, DC 20375-5320
   USA




























Atkinson                                                        [Page 8]

