Internet Draft                                       Denis Pinkas, Bull
draft-ietf-pkix-dpv-dpd-req-04.txt       Russ Housley, RSA Laboratories
Target Category: INFORMATIONAL                               April 2002
Expires in six months 


        Delegated Path Validation and Delegated Path Discovery 
                   Protocol Requirements (DPV&DPD-REQ)
                   <draft-ietf-pkix-dpv-dpd-req-04.txt>

Status of this memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other 
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

This document specifies the requirements for Delegated Path Validation 
(DPV) and Delegated Path Discovery (DPD) for Public Key Certificates. 
It also specifies the requirements for DPV and DPD policy management.

1. Introduction

This document specifies the requirements for Delegated Path Validation 
(DPV) and Delegated Path Discovery (DPD) for Public Key Certificates, 
using two main request/response pairs.

Delegated processing provides two primary services: DPV and DPD. 
Some clients require a server to perform certification path validation 
and have no need for data acquisition, while some other clients 
require only path discovery in support of local path validation.

The DPV request/response pair, can be used to fully delegate path 
validation processing to an DPV server, according to a set of rules, 
called a validation policy.

The DPD request/response pair can be used to obtain from a DPD server 
all the information needed (e.g., the end-entity certificate, the CA 
certificates, full CRLs, delta-CRLs, OCSP responses) to locally 
validate a certificate. The DPD server uses a set of rules, called 
a path discovery policy, to determine which information to return.

Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 1]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

A third request/response pair allows clients to obtain references for 
the policies supported by a DPV or DPD server.

1.1. Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
this document (in uppercase, as shown) are to be interpreted as 
described in [RFC2119].

2. Rationale and benefits for DPV (Delegated Path Validation)

DPV allows a server to perform a real time certificate validation for 
a validation time T, where T may be the current time or a time in the 
recent past.

In order to validate a certificate, a chain of multiple certificates, 
called a certification path, may be needed, comprising a certificate 
of the public key owner (the end entity) signed by one CA, and zero or 
more additional certificates of CAs signed by other CAs.

Offloading path validation to a server may be required by a client 
that lacks the processing, and/or communication capabilities to 
perform path construction and then local path validation.

In constrained execution environments, such as telephones and PDAs, 
memory and processing limitations may preclude local implementation of 
complete, PKIX-compliant certification path validation [PKIX-1].

In applications where minimum latency is critical, delegating 
validation to a trusted server can offer significant advantages. 
The time required to send the target certificate to the validation 
server, receive the response, and authenticate the response, 
can be considerably less than the time required for the client to 
perform certification path discovery and validation. Even if a 
certification path were readily available to the client, the 
processing time associated with signature verification for each 
certificate in the path might (especially when validating very long 
paths or using a limited processor) be greater than the delay 
associated with use of a validation server.

Another motivation for offloading path validation is that it allows 
validation against validation policies defined by the management in a 
consistent fashion across an enterprise. Clients that are able to 
do their own path validation may rely on a trusted server to do path 
validation if centralized management of validation policies is needed, 
or the clients rely on a trusted server to maintain centralized records 
of such activities.

When a client uses this service, it inherently trusts the server as 
much as it would its own path validation software (if it contained 
such software). Clients can direct the server to perform path 
validation in accordance with a particular validation policy.


Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 2]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

3. Rationale and benefits for DPD (Delegated Path Discovery)

DPD is valuable for clients that do much of the PKI processing 
themselves and simply want a server to collect information for them. 
The server is trusted to return the most current information that is 
available to it (which may not be the most current information that 
has been issued). The client will ultimately perform certification 
path validation.

A client that performs path validation for itself may get benefit in
several ways from using a server to acquire certificates, CRLs, and 
OCSP responses to aid in the validation process. In this context, the 
client is relying on the server to interact with repositories to 
acquire the data that the client would otherwise have to acquire using 
LDAP [LDAP], HTTP [HTTP], FTP [FTP] or another repository access 
protocol. Since these data items are digitally signed, the client need 
not trust the server any more than the client would trust the 
repositories.

There are several benefits to this approach; for example, a single 
query to a server can replace multiple repository queries, and caching 
by the server can reduce latency. Another benefit to the client system 
is that it need not incorporate a diverse set of software to interact 
with various forms of repositories, perhaps via different protocols, 
nor to perform the graph processing necessary to discover certification 
paths, separate from making the queries to acquire path validation data.

4. Delegated Path Validation Protocol Requirements

4.1. Basic protocol

The Delegated Path Validation (DPV) protocol allows a server to 
validate one or more public key certificates according to a validation 
policy.

If the DPV server does not support the client requested validation 
policy, then the DPV server MUST return an error.

If the DPV request does not specify a validation policy, the server 
response MUST indicate the one that was used.

Policy definitions can be quite long and complex, and some policies 
may allow for the setting of a few parameters (e.g. root self-signed 
certificates). The protocol MUST allow the client to include these 
policy dependant parameters in the DPV request. It is expected that 
most clients will simply reference a validation policy for a given 
application or accept the DPV server∆s default validation policy.

The client can request that the server determine the certificate 
validity at a time other than the current time. The DPV server MUST 
obtain revocation status information for the validation time 
in the client request. 



Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 3]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

In order to obtain the revocation status information of any 
certificate from the certification path, the DPV server might use, in 
accordance with the validation policy, different sources of revocation 
information, e.g. a combination of OCSP responses, CRLs, or delta-CRLs. 
If the revocation status information for the requested validation time 
is unavailable, then the DPV server MUST return a status indicating 
that the certificate is invalid.

The certificate to be validated MUST either be directly provided in 
the request or unambiguously referenced, such as the CA distinguished 
name, certificate serial number, and the hash of the certificate, 
like ESSCertID as defined in [ESS] or OtherSigningCertificate as 
defined in [ES-F].

The DPV client MUST be able to provide to the validation server, 
associated with each certificate to be validated, "useful 
certificates", as well as "useful revocation information". Revocation 
information includes OCSP responses, CRLs, and delta-CRLs. As an 
example, an S/MIME message might include such information, and the 
client can simply copy that information into the DPV request.

The DPV server MUST have the full certificate to be validated.  When 
the certificate is not provided in the request, the server MUST verify 
that the certificate is indeed the one being unambiguous referenced by 
the client. The DPV server MUST include either the full certificate or 
an unambiguous reference to the certificate (in case of a CA key 
compromise) in the DPV response.

Unless an error is reported, the DPV response MUST indicate one of the 
following two status alternatives:

   1) the certificate is valid according to the validation policy.

   2) the certificate is not valid according to the validation policy.

   3) the validity of the certificate is unknown according to the 
      validation policy.

When the certificate is not valid according to the validation policy, 
then the reason MUST also be indicated. Invalidity reasons include:

    a) the DPV server cannot determine the validity of the certificate 
       because a certification path cannot be constructed.

    b) the DPV server successfully constructed a certification path, but
       it was not valid according to the validation algorithm in 
       [PKIX-1].

    c) the certificate is not yet valid at this time. If another 
       request could be made later on, the certificate could possibly 
       be determined as valid. This condition may occur before a 
       certificate validity period has begun or while a certificate is 
       suspended.


Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 4]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

The protocol MUST prevent replay attacks, and the replay prevention 
mechanism employed by the protocol MUST NOT rely on clocks being 
synchronized with UTC.

The DPV request MUST allow the client to request the server to include 
in its response additional information which will allow relying parties 
not trusting the requested DPV server to be confident that the 
certificate validation has correctly been performed. Such information 
may (not necessarily exclusively) consist of a certification path, 
revocation status information from authorised CRL issuers or 
authorised OCSP responders, revocation status information from CRL 
issuers or OCSP responders trusted under the validation policy, 
time-stamp tokens from TSAs responders trusted under the validation 
policy, or a DPV response from a DPV server that is trusted under the 
validation policy.  When the certificate is valid according to the 
validation policy, the server MUST, upon request, include that 
information in the response. However, the server MAY omit that 
information when the certificate is invalid or when it cannot 
determine the validity.

The DPV response MUST be bound to the DPV request. This can be 
accomplished by repeating the important components from the request in 
the response or by including a one-way hash of the request in the 
response.

For the client to be confident that the certificate validation was 
handled by the expected DPV server, the DPV response MUST be 
authenticated, unless an error is reported (e.g. a badly formatted 
request, etc.).

For the client to be able prove to a third party that trusts the 
same DPV server that the certificate validation was handled correctly, 
the DPV response MUST be digitally signed, unless an error is reported 
(e.g. a badly formatted request, etc.). The certificate from the DPV 
server SHALL be used to identify the DPV server.

The DPV server MAY require client authentication, therefore, the DPV 
request MUST be able to be authenticated. 

There are no specific confidentiality requirement within this 
application layer protocol. However, when confidentiality is needed, 
it can be achieved with a lower-layer security protocol.

4.2. Relaying, re-direction and multicasting.

In some network environments, especially ones that include firewalls, 
a DPV server might not be able to obtain all of the information that 
it needs to process a request. However, the DPV server might be 
configured to use the services of one or more other DPV servers to 
fulfill all requests. In such cases, the client is unaware that the 
queried DPV server is using the services of other DPV servers. In such 
environments, the client-queried DPV server acts as a DPV client to 
another DPV server. Unlike the original client, the DPV server is 
expected to have moderate computing and memory resources, enabling the 

Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 5]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

use of relay, re-direct or multicasting mechanisms. The requirements 
in this section support such mechanisms for DPV server-to-DPV server 
exchanges without imposing them on DPV client-to-DPV client exchanges.

Protocols designed to satisfy these requirements MAY include optional 
fields and/or extensions to support relaying, re-direction or 
multicasting. However, DPV clients are not expected to support relay, 
re-direct or multicast. If the protocol supports such features, the 
protocol MUST include provisions for DPV clients and DPV servers that 
do not support such features, allowing them to conform to the basic 
set of requirements.

   1. When a server supports a relay mechanism, a mechanism to detect 
      loops or repetition MUST be provided.

   2. When a protocol provides the capability for a DPV server to 
      re-direct a request to another DPV server (i.e. the protocol 
      chooses to provide a referral mechanism), a mechanism to provide 
      information to be used for the re-direction SHOULD be supported.
      If such re-direction information is sent back to clients, then 
      the protocol MUST allow conforming clients to ignore it.

   3. Optional parameters in the protocol request and/or response MAY 
      be provide support for relaying, re-direction or multicasting. 
      DPV clients that ignore any such optional parameters MUST still 
      be able to use the DPV service. DPV servers that ignore any such 
      optional parameters MUST still be able to offer the DPV service, 
      although they might not be able to overcome the limitations 
      imposed by the network topology. In this way, protocol 
      implementors need not understand the syntax or semantics of any 
      such optional parameters.

5. Delegated Path Discovery Protocol Requirements

The Delegated Path Discovery (DPD) protocol allows the client to use 
a single request to collect at one time from a single server the data 
elements available at the current time that might be collected using 
different protocols (e.g. LDAP, HTTP, FTP, OCSP) or by querying 
multiple servers, to locally validate a public key certificate 
according to a single path discovery policy. The returned information 

can be used to locally validate one or more certificates for the 
current time.

Clients MUST be able to specify whether they want, in addition to the 
certification path, the revocation information associated with the 
path, for the end-entity certificate, for the CA certificates, or for 
both.

If the DPD server does not support the client requested path 
discovery policy, the DPD server MUST return an error. Some forms 
of path discovery policy can be simple. In that case it is acceptable 
to pass the parameters from the path discovery policy with each 
individual request. For example, the client might provide a set of 
trust anchors and separate revocation status conditions for the 

Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 6]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

end-entity certificate and for the other certificates. The DPD request 
MUST allow more elaborated path discovery policies to be referenced. 

It is expected that most of the time clients will only be aware of 
the referenced path discovery policy for a given application.

The DPD server response includes zero, one, or several certification 
paths. Each path consists of a sequence of certificates, starting with 
the certificate to be validated and ending with a trust anchor. If the 
trust anchor is a self-signed certificate, that self-signed certificate
is not included. In addition, if requested, the revocation information 
associated with each certificate in the path MUST also be returned.

The DPD client needs to be able to limit the number of paths returned. 
Therefore the client MUST be able to indicate the maximum number of 
certification paths to be returned (provided that they can be found). 
If the client does not specify a maximum number, then the DPD server 
MUST return a single certification path.

The paths that are returned may need to match some additional local 
criteria known only to the client. For example, the client might 
require the presence of a particular certificate extension. 

If that number cannot be reached by the server, an indication SHOULD 
be returned by the DPD server showing that an additional query will not 
return more paths.

If the paths that are returned do not match the client∆s local 
criteria, then the number of number of certification paths to be 
returned can be extended by increasing this value. Previously found 
paths will likely be returned, but the client can easily discard them. 
This avoids requirements for state information at the server, but does 
not prevent a server from maintaining a cache of previous responses.

Avoiding the maintenance of state information for previous requests 
minimizes potential denial of service attacks or other problems 
associated with server crashes.

Path discovery MUST be performed according to the path discovery policy.
The DPD response MUST indicate one of four status alternatives:

   1) one or more certification paths was found according to the 
      path discovery policy, with all of the requested revocation 
      information present.

   2) one or more certification paths was found according to the 
      path discovery policy, with a subset of the requested revocation 
      information present.

   3) one or more certification paths was found according to the 
      path discovery policy, with none of the requested revocation 
      information present.



Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 7]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

   4) no certification path was found according to the path 
      discovery policy.

The information that is returned consists of one or more certification 
paths and, if requested, its associated revocation status information 
for each element from the path.

For the client to be confident that the response originates from the 
expected DPD server, the server MAY provide an authenticated response. 
For example, the server might sign the response.

The DPD server MAY require client authentication, therefore, the DPD 
request MUST be able to be authenticated.

There are no specific confidentiality requirement within the 
application layer protocol. However, when confidentiality is needed, 
it can be achieved with a lower-layer security protocol.

6. Requirements common both to DPV and DPD

The client MUST be able to obtain references for the default policy 
or for all of the policies supported by the server by using an 
additional request/response pair. The response can include references 
to previously defined policies or to a priori known policies.

7. Validation Policy

A validation policy is a set of rules against which the validation of 
the certificate is performed.

A validation policy MAY include several trust anchors. A trust anchor 
is defined as one public key, a CA name, and a validity time interval; 
a trust anchor optionally includes additional constraints. The use of a 
self-signed certificate is one way to specify the public key to be 
used, the CA name, and the validity period of the public key.

Additional constraints for each trust anchor MAY be defined. These 
constraints might include a set of certification policy constraints or 
a set of naming constraints. These constraints MAY also be included in 
self-signed certificates.

Additional conditions that apply to the certificates in the path MAY 
also be specified in the validation policy. For example, specific 
values could be provided for the inputs to the certification path 
validation algorithm in [PKIX-1], such as user-initial-policy-set, 
initial-policy-mapping-inhibit, initial-explicit-policy, or 
initial-any-policy-inhibit.

Additional conditions that apply to the end-entity certificate MAY 
also be specified in the validation policy. For example, a specific 
name form, like an e-mail address either in the rfc822 subject 
alternative name or in the emailAddress naming attribute in the 
subject name, might be required.


Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 8]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

In order to succeed, one valid certification path (none of the 
certificates in the path are expired or revoked) MUST be found between 
an end-entity certificate and a trust anchor and all constraints that 
apply to the certification path MUST be verified.

7.1. Components for a validation policy

A validation policy is built from three components:

   1. Certification path requirements,
   2. Revocation requirements,
   3. End-entity certificate specific requirements.

Note: [ES-P] defines ASN.1 data elements that may be useful while 
defining the components of a validation policy.

7.2. Certificate path requirements

The path requirements identify a sequence of trust anchors used to 
start certification path processing and initial conditions for 
certification path validation as defined in [PKIX-1].

7.3. Revocation Requirements

Revocation information might be obtained through CRLs, delta-CRLs or 
OCSP responses. Certificate revocation requirements are specified in 
terms of checks required on the end-entity certificate and CA 
certificates.

Revocation requirements for the end-entity certificate may not be the 
same as the requirements for the CA certificates. For example, an OCSP 
response may be needed for the end-entity certificate while CRLs may 
be sufficient for the CA certificates.

The validation policy MUST specify the source of revocation 
information:

   - full CRLs (or full Authority Revocation Lists) have to be 
     collected,

   - OCSP responses, using [OCSP], have to be collected,

   - delta-CRLs and the relevant associated full CRLs (or full 
     Authority Revocation Lists) are to be collected.

   - any available revocation information has to be collected.

   - no revocation information has to be collected.

7.4. End-entity certificate specific requirements

The validation policy might require the end-entity certificate to contain 
specific extensions with specific types or values (it does not matter 
whether they are critical or non-critical). For example, the 

Pinkas, Housley                                                [Page 9]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

validation policy might require an end-entity certificate that 
contains an electronic mail address (either in the rfc822 subject alt 
name or in the emailAddress naming attribute in the subject name).

8. Path Discovery Policy

A path discovery policy is a set of rules against which the discovery 
of a certification path is performed. A path discovery policy is a 
subset of a validation policy. A path discovery policy MAY either be 
a reference to a validation policy or contain only some major elements 
from a validation policy, such as the trust anchors.

Since the DPD client is "PKI aware", it can locally apply additional 
selection criteria to the certification paths returned by the server. 
Thus, a simpler policy can be defined and used for path discovery.

8.1. Components for a Path Discovery Policy

The path discovery policy includes certification path requirements, 
revocation requirements, and end-entity certificate specific 
requirements. These requirements are specified in sections 7.2, 7.3, 
and 7.4, respectively.

9. Security considerations

A DPV client must trust a DPV server to provide the correct answer. 
However, this does not mean that all DPV clients will trust the same 
DPV servers. While a positive answer might be sufficient for one DPV 
client, that same positive answer will not necessarily convince 
another DPV client.

Other clients may trust their own DPV servers, or they might perform 
certification path validation themselves. DPV clients operating under 
an organizational policy must ensure that each of the DPV servers they 
trust is operating under that organizational policy. 

When no policy reference is present in the DPV request, the DPV client 
should verify that the policy selected by the DPV server is appropriate.

The revocation status information is obtained for the validation time. 
In case of a digital signature, it is not necessarily identical to the 
time when the private key was used. The validation time should be 
adjusted by the DPV client to compensate for:

   1) time for the end-entity to realize that its private key has 
      been or could possibly be compromised, and/or

   2) time for the end-entity to report the key compromise, and/or

   3) time for the revocation authority to process the revocation 
      request from the end-entity, and/or

   4) time for the revocation authority to update and distribute the 
      revocation status information.

Pinkas, Housley                                               [Page 10]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002


10. Acknowledgments

These requirements have been refined after some valuable inputs from 
Ambarish Malpani, Tim Polk, and Paul Hoffman.

11. References

   [PKIX-1]

      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure.
      Certificate and CRL Profile. RFC 2459
      R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, D. Solo.
      or its successor as soon as it can be referenced.

   [OCSP]

      X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure. 
      Online Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP. RFC 2560
      M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, C. Adams.

   [ES-F]

      Electronic Signature Formats for long term electronic signatures
      RFC 3126. D. Pinkas, J. Ross, N. Pope. September 2001.

   [ES-P]

      Electronic Signature Policies. RFC 3125.
      D. Pinkas, J. Ross, N. Pope. September 2001.

   [CMS]

      Cryptographic Message Syntax. RFC 2630. R. Housley June 1999.
      or its successor as soon as it can be referenced.

   [ESS]

      Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME. RFC 2634. P. Hoffman. 
      RFC 2634, June 1999.

   [ISO-X509]

      ISO/IEC 9594-8/ITU-T Recommendation X.509, "Information
      Technology - Open Systems Interconnection: The Directory:
      Authentication Framework," 1997 edition.

   [FTP]

      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure. Operational Protocols:
      FTP and HTTP. RFC 2585. R. Housley, P. Hoffman. May 1999.




Pinkas, Housley                                               [Page 11]

Internet Draft               DPV&DPD-REQ                     April 2002

   [HTTP]

      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure. Operational Protocols:
      FTP and HTTP. RFC 2585. R. Housley, P. Hoffman. May 1999.

   [LDAP]

      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Operational Protocols 
      LDAPv2. RFC 2559. S. Boeyen, T. Howes, P. Richard. April 1999.

12. Authors' addresses

   Denis Pinkas
   Bull.
   68, Route de Versailles
   78434 Louveciennes CEDEX
   FRANCE
   Denis.Pinkas@bull.net

   Russell Housley
   RSA Laboratories
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   rhousley@rsasecurity.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Pinkas, Housley                                               [Page 12]

