


Network Working Group                                           S. Jeong
Internet-Draft                                                 M-K. Shin
Intended status: Informational                                      ETRI
Expires: September 5, 2010                                      T. Egawa
                                                                     NEC
                                                               H. Otsuki
                                                                    NiCT
                                                           March 4, 2010


                Network Virtualization Problem Statement
               draft-shin-virtualization-meta-arch-01.txt

Abstract

   This document analyzes and discusses the problem space of supporting
   network virtualization in the networks.  Furthermore, some key
   requirements for enabling network virtualization in the networks are
   investigated and described.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Definition of Network Virtualization  . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Problem Statement for Network Virtualization  . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Requirements for Network Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Applicability and Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





























Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


1.  Introduction

   Conventionally, virtualization generally refers to a technique to
   hide the physical characteristics of resources so that other systems,
   applications, or end users can interact with those resources without
   the knowledge of the physical characteristics.  The main objectives
   of virtualization are to simplify the use of the underlying resource,
   to create multiple logical instances of the resource, and to separate
   the uses of the underlying resources.

   The followings list the benefits of virtualization.

   o  Partitioning: Multiple applications or operating systems can be
      simultaneously supported within a single physical machine.
      Multiple physical machines can be consolidated into virtual
      machines on either a scale-up or scale-down architecture.
      Computing resources are treated as a uniform pool to be allocated
      to virtual machines in a controlled manner.

   o  Isolation: Virtual machines are completely isolated from the host
      machine and other virtual machines.  Even though a virtual machine
      crashes, the others are not affected.  Data in one virtual machine
      do not leak across virtual machines and applications can only
      communicate over configured network connections.  Unauthorized
      accesses to other virtual machines are prohibited.

   o  Encapsulation: Complete virtual machine environment can be saved
      as a single file that enables easy backup, move, and copy.
      Standardized virtualized hardware is presented to the application
      guaranteeing compatibility.

   The virtualization technology has been extensively studied for
   decades and the network virtualization is expected to be realized on
   the basis of traditional virtualization technology, especially server
   virtualization.  The server virtualization is the ability to run an
   entire virtual machine with its own guest OS on another OS or on a
   bare-machine.  So, it allows multiple virtual machines with
   heterogeneous guest OSes to run in isolation on the same physical
   machine.  Each virtual machine has its own set of virtual hardware in
   order to load a guest OS and applications.  The guest OS can utilize
   a consistent, normalized set of H/W regardless of the characteristics
   of physical H/W specification.

   The advantages of server virtualization are as follows.

   o  Since several virtual servers share a single set of hardware, it
      is possible to achieve better resource utilization and to lower
      hardware cost.



Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


   o  Server virtualization makes it easier to provision and to
      reallocate servers by setting up a server using a pre-existing
      template and shifting server images from one physical server to
      another to balance workloads or improve efficiency.

   o  Secure environment can be provided among virtual servers because
      each server is isolated from the others.

   This document analyzes and discusses the problem space of supporting
   network virtualization in the networks.  Furthermore, some key
   requirements for enabling network virtualization in the networks are
   investigated and described.

1.1.  Definition of Network Virtualization

   Network virtualization is the technology that enables the creation of
   logically isolated network partitions over shared physical network
   infrastructures so that multiple heterogeneous virtual networks can
   simultaneously coexist over the shared infrastructures.  Also,
   network virtualization allows the aggregation of multiple resources
   and makes the aggregated resources appear as a single resource [1].

   The virtual networks over physical infrastructure are completely
   isolated each other, so different virtual networks may use different
   network technologies, for example, different protocols and packet
   formats can be supported on each virtual network without
   interference.  When combined with programmability feature in network
   elements, users of virtual networks can program the network elements
   on any layers from physical layer to application layer according to
   users' requirements.  Furthermore, it is even possible to define a
   new layering architecture without interfering the operation of other
   virtual networks.  In other words, each virtual network can provide
   the corresponding user group with full network services similar to
   those provided by a traditional non-virtualized network.  From the
   users' perspective, each user accesses a dedicated network
   independently.  Also, network virtualization can reduce the total
   cost by increasing the utilization of resources [1].


2.  Problem Statement for Network Virtualization

   The motivation of network virtualization is to de-ossify the current
   network architectures.  Network virtualization allows multiple
   virtual networks to coexist on top of a shared physical
   infrastructure.  It can realize virtual networks with programmable
   network elements, so that users can perform experimentation on any
   layers.  It also supports the architecture of multiple architectures.
   For example, by utilizing network virtualization technology,



Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


   different virtual networks can provide different end-to-end packet
   delivery systems and may use different protocols and packet formats
   [2].

   The followings summarize the problem statement for network
   virtualization [3].

   In the current networks, such as Internet, users can utilize multiple
   network services over a shared physical infrastructure, so unexpected
   behavior of a service may affect other coexisting services and may
   cause security problems, performance degradation of other services,
   and so on.  Network virtualization guarantees isolation of network
   services by creating isolated logical network environments between
   users belonging to separate groups.

   In the current networks, the network service providers hardly offer
   resources encompassing the physical capability of the resources.
   However, by leveraging network virtualization, it is possible to
   provide high performance resources for users by logically aggregating
   multiple resources into single resource.  Therefore, a logical
   network consisting of requested resources can guarantee users'
   performance requirements.

   It is actually restricted to scale physical resources according to
   users' demands in the current networks.  Users of network
   virtualization, however, can add as many virtual resources to their
   virtual network as they need.  That is, requested size of a virtual
   network can be provided.  In addition to the size, coexistence of
   multiple logical networks is one of the fundamental motivations
   behind network virtualization.  Legacy networks hardly provide
   multiple networks, but multiple virtual networks can be created in a
   shared physical network with the same resources.


3.  Requirements for Network Virtualization

   The following list summarizes some key functions, which need to be
   supported by the network to provide network virtualization feature
   [2].

   o  Since today's network application traffic tends to indicate more
      and more unpredictable variations, each virtual network would like
      to adjust available bandwidth according to traffic demand changes.
      Furthermore, a network application may dynamically request new
      capability that is not supported by the current network
      configuration.  Thus, the network virtualization should offer a
      method that the virtual networks are capable of easily and rapidly
      creating their own network topologies and dynamically



Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


      reconfiguring them.

   o  Virtual networks can be multiplexed over a shared network
      infrastructure.  However, this can be liable to restrict network
      performance and cause instability due to interference by other
      virtual networks.  The network virtualization should be capable of
      providing the complete performance isolation among virtual
      networks.

   o  It is known that some of emerging network services will require
      extremely high bandwidth, for example more than hundreds Gbps with
      low latency and jitter.  However, it may not be possible to
      satisfy such high end requirements with the current network and
      transport layer technologies.  Thus, each virtual network should
      be capable of directly utilizing lower-layer transmission
      technologies such as wavelength and TDM (time-division
      multiplexing) provided by a transport network.

   o  To support diverse network services, the virtual network should
      retain the capability of customizing network control and
      operations independent from those in the physical network or other
      virtual networks.  At the same time, the virtual network may want
      to avoid complex physical network operations that are fully
      dependent on the types of network layers and equipment vendors.
      To disengage the virtual network from the complexity of the
      physical network, the network virtualization should be capable of
      abstracting the physical network information and provides the
      simple interface for resource control to the virtual networks.

   o  Considering the utility of customers, each virtual network should
      be capable of using physical network resources and constructing a
      network topology.  However, one possible problem is that some
      abnormal virtual networks may occupy most of the resources, which
      deteriorates other virtual network performance due to network
      resource exhaustion.  So, the network virtualization should
      provide the capability to regulate the upper limit of resource
      consumption by each virtual network in order to maintain the
      overall utility and performance.


4.  Applicability and Use Cases

   This section describes the applicability of network virtualization.
   The applicability of network virtualization may be classified into
   two broad categories according to the characteristics of
   virtualization; namely isolation and aggregation [2].

   From the view point of isolation, network virtualization enables the



Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


   complete isolation between each logical network partition.  Typical
   use case of this category is that it is possible to create new
   business model by separating the conventional Internet service
   provider's role into network provider and service provider.  The
   network provider creates customized logical network partitions
   according to the service providers' requirements, such as network
   bandwidth, the number and functional capability of network elements
   in the logical network partitions, total cost, and so on.  The
   service provider can provide various services and applications for
   users without the burden of building its own network infrastructure.
   Moreover, the service provider can safely test an innovative pilot
   service or application that requires special features of network
   without affecting other existing services.  From the perspective of
   network providers, they can increase the hardware utilization ratio
   and can reduce the operational cost of network infrastructure.  From
   the viewpoint of service providers, it is possible to reduce the cost
   for building network infrastructure.  Also, they can utilize the
   flexibility for the creation of network and application services.

   The second applicability is aggregation.  In the computing field, it
   is common to logically aggregate multiple computing resources into a
   single resource in order to support applications or services that
   require very high performance exceeding single resource's capability.
   Building a high performance computing node by clustering many smaller
   nodes would be the typical use case of resource aggregation.  Similar
   to this use case, network virtualization can allow building a logical
   network element whose capability is hard to be supported by a single
   one.  The logical network element can support various functions and
   can easily expand its capability by aggregating multiple network
   elements.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  Acknowledgments

   This version of the problem statement reflects the discussion results
   of the following people.  Many thanks to Takashi Kurimoto, Takashi
   Miyamura, Alex Galis for their comments.


7.  Informative References

   [1]  Anderson, T., "Overcoming the Internet Impasse through
        Virtualization", IEEE Computer , 2005.



Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


   [2]  Jeong, S. and H. Otsuki, "Framework of Network Virtualization",
        ITU-T Focus Group on Future Networks , January 2010.

   [3]  Mosharaf, N. and R. Boutaba, "A Survey of Network
        Virtualization", Technical Report: CS-2008-25 , October 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Sangjin Jeong
   ETRI
   138 Gajeongno, Yuseong
   Daejeon,   305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 1877
   Email: sjjeong@etri.re.kr


   Myung-Ki Shin
   ETRI
   138 Gajeongno, Yuseong
   Daejeon,   305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 4847
   Email: mkshin@etri.re.kr


   Takashi Egawa
   NEC Corporation
   1753 Shimonumabe
   Nakahara-Ku, Kawasaki
   Kanagawa,   211-8666
   Japan

   Phone: +81 44 431 7770
   Email: t-egawa@ct.jp.nec.com













Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS             March 2010


   Hideki Otsuki
   NiCT
   4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi
   Koganei
   Tokyo,   184-8795
   Japan

   Phone: +81 42 327 6931
   Email: hideki.otsuki@nict.go.jp










































Jeong, et al.           Expires September 5, 2010               [Page 9]


