

 
Network Working Group                     Don Fedyk, David Allan, Nortel 
Internet Draft                              Greg Sunderwood, Bell Canada 
Category: Standards Track                           Himanshu Shah, Ciena 
                                                    Nabil Bitar, Verizon 
                                 Attila Takacs, Diego Caviglia, Ericsson 
                                                                       
                                                            October 2006 
 
                         GMPLS control of Ethernet 
                   draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
   
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire in March 2007. 
 
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
 
Abstract 
 
   Carrier Grade Ethernet transport solutions require the capability of 
   flexible service provisioning and fast protection switching. 
   Currently, Ethernet is being extended in IEEE to meet the scalability 
   needs of transport networks.  
    
   The IETF specified GMPLS to control transport networks. To enable 
   integration of Ethernet based transport solutions the extension of 
   GMPLS control plane for Ethernet is of value.   
    
    
   Fedyk et.al            Expires March 2007                    Page 1 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
    
   This memo describes how a GMPLS control plane may be applied to 
   Provider Backbone Transport (PBT) and how GMPLS can be used to 
   configure VLAN-aware Ethernet switches in order to establish Ethernet 
   P2P and P2MP MAC switched paths and P2P/P2MP VID based trees.  This 
   document assumes any standard changes to IEEE data planes will be 
   undertaken only in the IEEE.  
    
Conventions used in this document  
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",   
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 2 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction...................................................5 
   2. Terminology....................................................5 
   3. GMPLS Control of PBT Path creation and maintenance.............6 
   3.1  Using a GMPLS Control Plane for Ethernet.....................7 
   3.2  Control Plane Network........................................7 
   3.3  Signaling....................................................8 
   3.4  Ethernet Label..............................................10 
   3.5  Ethernet Service............................................11 
   3.6  GMPLS Link Discovery........................................11 
   3.7  GMPLS Routing...............................................12 
   3.8  Path Computation............................................12 
   3.8.1 Combinations of GMPLS Features.............................12 
   3.9  Addresses, Interfaces, and Labels...........................13 
   4. Specific Procedures...........................................14 
   4.1  PT to PT connections........................................14 
   4.1.1 P2P connections with shared forwarding.....................14 
   4.1.2 Dynamic P2P symmetry with shared forwarding................15 
   4.1.3 Planned P2P symmetry.......................................15 
   4.1.4 Path Maintenance...........................................16 
   4.2  P2MP VID/DMAC Connections...................................16 
   4.2.1 Setup procedures...........................................16 
   4.2.2 Maintenance Procedures.....................................16 
   4.3  P2P/P2MP VID Trees..........................................16 
   4.3.1 Setup Procedures...........................................17 
   4.3.2 Maintenance procedures.....................................17 
   4.4  OAM MEP ID and MA ID synchronization........................17 
   4.5  Protection Paths............................................18 
   5. Error conditions..............................................18 
   5.1  Invalid VID value for configured VID/DMAC range.............18 
   5.2  Invalid VID value for configured VID range..................18 
   5.3  Invalid MAC Address.........................................18 
   5.4  Invalid ERO for Upstream Label Object.......................18 
   5.5  Invalid ERO for Suggested Label Object......................19 
   5.6  Switch is not IVL capable...................................19 
   5.7  Switch is not SVL capable...................................19 
   5.8  Invalid VID in upstream label object........................19 
   6. Deployment Scenarios..........................................19 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................19 
   8. IANA Considerations...........................................19 
   9. References....................................................19 
   9.1  Normative References........................................19 
   9.2  Informative References......................................20 
   10.  Author's Address............................................21 
   11.  Intellectual Property Statement.............................22 
   12.  Disclaimer of Validity......................................22 
   13.  Copyright Statement.........................................22 
   14.  Acknowledgments.............................................22 
   A 1.  Aspects of configuring Ethernet Forwarding.................24 
   A 2.  Overview of configuration of VID/DMAC tuples...............27 
   A 3.  Overview of configuration of VID port membership...........29 
   A 4.  OAM Aspects................................................29 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 3 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   A 5.  QOS Aspects................................................30 
   A 6.  Resiliency Aspects.........................................30 
   A 6.1 E2E Path protection........................................30 


















































 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 4 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   Ethernet switches are increasing in capability. As a consequence the 
   role of Ethernet is rapidly expanding in networks that were the 
   domain of other technologies such as SONET/SDH TDM and ATM. The 
   question of how Ethernet will evolve and what capabilities it can 
   offer in these areas is still under development.   
    
   Operators are considering the deployment of Ethernet based transport 
   solutions. The IEEE is working on amendments of VLAN-aware bridges 
   (802.1Q) to meet scalability and service provisioning needs of 
   operators. The work on 802.1ad Provider Bridges (PB) has already been 
   finalized while the specification of 802.ah Provider Backbone Bridges 
   (PBB) is expected to be ready in 2007. Parallel to the improvements 
   of bridging functionalities standardization of 802.1ag Connectivity 
   Fault Management (CFM) is also ongoing. CFM will equip bridged 
   networks with service fault management and performance monitoring 
   capabilities. In ITU-T Y.1731 work is ongoing to specify extensive 
   OAM capabilities for Ethernet based on CFM. Moreover, in G.8031 
   Ethernet protection switching is being defined based on CFM's 
   continuity check protocol. ITU-T G.8031 relies on p2p Ethernet paths 
   configuration for working and protection traffic. P2p Ethernet paths 
   are constructed using a p2p VLAN configuration between the head-end 
   and tail-end of a protection segment. Note this is only a non-
   exhaustive list summarizing major activities pursuing Carrier Grade 
   Ethernet transport.  
   The 802.1ad Provider Bridges and 802.1ah Provider Backbone Bridges 
   are the respective amendments of the 802.1Q standard. The newly 
   introduced functionalities add a hierarchical tunneling capability to 
   Ethernet networks based on VLANs.  
    
   For Ethernet transport service provisioning, IEEE provides managed 
   objects that can be statically configured through Network Management 
   Systems and/or dynamically controlled through an Ethernet control 
   Plane. 
    
   Provider Backbone Transport (PBT) is simply the data plane of 
   Ethernet (802.1Q, 802.1ah) without an form of Spanning tree control 
   plane. This document applies to PBT and is applicable to 802.1 when 
   used for a suitable Pseudo wire service as described in this 
   document. 
    
   The main purpose of this document is to specify a control plane for 
   PBT that uses techniques for Ethernet.   
    
2. Terminology 
    
   In addition to well understood GMPLS terms, this memo uses 
   terminology from IEEE 802.1 and introduces a few new terms: 
    
   B-MAC        Backbone MAC 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 5 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   B-VID        Backbone VLAN ID 
   B-VLAN       Backbone VLAN 
   COS          Class of Service 
   C-MAC        Customer MAC 
   C-VID        Customer VLAN ID 
   C-VLAN       Customer VLAN 
   DMAC         Destination MAC Address 
   IVL          Independent VLAN Learning 
   MAC          Media Access Control 
   MP2MP        Multipoint to multipoint 
   PBB          Provider Backbone Bridge 
   PBT          Provider Backbone Transport 
   P2P          Point to Point 
   P2MP         Point to Multipoint 
   QOS          Quality of Service 
   SMAC         Source MAC Address 
   S-VID        Service VLAN ID 
   SVL          Shared VLAN Learning 
   VID          VLAN ID 
   VLAN         Virtual LAN 
    
    
    
3. GMPLS Control of PBT Path creation and maintenance 
    
   PBT is an Ethernet connection technology, being specified in the 
   IEEE, that can be controlled by configuration of static filtering 
   enties [see Appendix A]. PBT paths are created switch by switch by 
   simple configuration of Ethernet logical ports and assignment of PBT 
   labels. We term a PBT path a form of Ethernet LSP (Eth-LSP).  PBT 
   paths may be configured by command line interface on the switches or 
   coordinated from a management system. This memo proposes GMPLS as a 
   mechanism to automate PBT paths.  
    
   One motive for using GMPLS over simple provisioning is GMPLS 
   provides a reduction in the number of commands and an improvement in 
   the coordination of commands required to establish and maintain an 
   Eth-LSP. It also provides the capability for automation by dynamic 
   modification of parameters, on-net/off-net path computation and 
   automatic reaction to network changes without manual intervention. 
   GMPLS utilizes per connection configuration and signaling both which 
   reduce the operational overhead of establishing a path.  
    
   PBT uses the Ethernet data plane in its native form. When 
   configuring a PBT path with GMPLS, the DMAC and VID are carried in a 
   generalized label and are assigned hop by hop and it is invariant 
   within a domain.  PBT Eth-LSPs are by nature uni-directional since 
   the DMAC must be inherently different in the two directions. The VID 
   may be the same or different in each direction as it is only used to 
   used to identify the path co-jointly with the DMAC. To be consistent 
   with GMPLS terminology, paths are created first as an explicit route 
   object (ERO) and data plane labels are assigned from the available 

 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 6 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   label pool at the destination switches. Each PBT label is a domain 
   wide unique label, the VID/DMAC, for each direction.   
    
    
   Several attributes may be associated with an Eth-LSP, including: 
   - bandwidth requirements of the path. This can be used, for example, 
     to request a fixed bandwidth path, where the committed information 
     rate and peak information rate. 
   - priority level; 
   - preemption characteristics; 
   - protection/resiliency requirements; 
   - routing policy, such as an explicit route; 
   - policing requirements 
    
   Note GMPLS currently does not support unsymmetrical attributes in 
   each direction for a bidirectional LSP. GMPLS control of PBT should 
   allow these parmeters to be specified independently. 
    
   In addition to the above policies based on either under-subscription 
   or over-subscription can be supported.  
    
    
3.1 Using a GMPLS Control Plane for Ethernet 
    
   GMPLS [RFC3495] has been adapted to the control of optical switches 
   for the purpose of managing optical paths. GMPLS signaling is well 
   suited to setup paths with labels but it does require an IP control 
   plane and IP connectivity.    
    
   In many Ethernet deployment situations, the addition of a complete 
   GMPLS control plane may be excessive for the switch technology or 
   the network application.  For this reason we consider partial 
   application of GMPLS either complete functionality applied to a 
   subset of the switches and/or partial functionality applied to some 
   or all switches. For discussion purposes, we decompose the problem 
   of applying GMPLS into the functions of Signaling, Routing, Link 
   discovery and Path management. We can use some functions of GMPLS 
   alone or in partial combinations. In most cases using all functions 
   of GMPLS is less of an operational overhead than any partial 
   combinations. Also, using only some components of GMPLS can lead to 
   more provisioned overhead for some objects than a purely static 
   system (see "Combinations of GMPLS Features").   
    
                                      
3.2 Control Plane Network 
 
   In order to have a GMPLS control plane, an IP control plane 
   consisting of an IGP with TE extension needs to be established. This 
   IGP views each hop as a terminated IP adjacency and should not be 
   interpreted as a distinct routed subnet for the purpose of carrying 
   IP bearer traffic. In other words IP is the control plane but the 
   forwarding plane is not IP. 
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 7 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   This IP control plane can be provided as a separate independent 
   network (out of band) or integrated with the Ethernet switches.  
    
   If the IP control plane is a separate network, it may be provided as 
   a Layer 2 connected LAN where the Ethernet switches are connected 
   via a bridged network or HUB.  It may also be provided by an 
   external network that provides IP connectivity but in this case, the 
   control topology of the GMPLS/Ethernet switches may not be the same 
   topology as the physical data plane network.  
    
   If the IP control plane is integrated with the switches it may be 
   provided by a bridged VLAN that uses the Data bearing channels of 
   the network between adjacent nodes. This ties the fate of the 
   controlled paths and the IP control plane links, which is not unlike 
   the situation with MPLS networks or even some GMPLS optical 
   networks.   
                            
3.3 Signaling  
    
   GMPLS signaling is well suited to the set up of PBT on Ethernet 
   switches. GMPLS signaling uses either numbered or unnumbered links 
   where the link is either explicitly IP addressed or associated with 
   a switch loopback address. If LMP [RFC4204] is used, the creation of 
   these unnumbered interfaces can be automated. If LMP is not used 
   there is an additional provisioning requirement to add GMPLS link 
   identifiers. For large-scale implementations LMP would be 
   beneficial. As mentioned earlier, the primary benefit of signaling 
   is the control of a path from an endpoint. GMPLS can be used to 
   create bi-directional or unidirectional paths, bi-directional paths 
   being the preferred mode of operation for numerous reasons (OAM 
   consistency etc.). In this document we only consider bidirectional 
   paths that share the same route/resources both for P2P and P2MP 
   services.    
    
   Signaling enables the ability to dynamically establish a path and to 
   adjust the path in a coordinated fashion after the path has been 
   established. Signaling also improves multi-vendor interoperability 
   over simple management since the signaling is standard and handles a 
   number of dynamic functions. This allows the network to adapt to 
   changing conditions or failures with a single mechanism. Signaling 
   can be used for pure static configured paths as well.    
    
   To use GMPLS RSVP-TE signaling a few modifications are required.  A 
   new label is defined that contains the VID/DMAC tuple.  On the 
   initiating and terminating nodes, a function administers the VIDs 
   associated with the SMAC and DMAC respectively.  PBT is designed to 
   be bidirectional and symmetric just like ethernet. Therefore in PBT 
   the packet SMAC is the same as the DMAC used for the associated 
   reverse PBT path and the DMAC is the same as the SMAC for the 
   reverse PBT path.  
    


 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 8 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   To initiate a bi-directional VID/DMAC P2P or P2MP path, the 
   initiator of the PATH message uses procedures outlined in [GMPLS-
   SIGNALING] possibly augmented with [MPLS-P2MP], it: 
    
   1) Sets the LSP encoding type to Ethernet. 
         
   2) Sets the LSP switching type to MAC [IANA to define]. 
         
   3) Sets the GPID to Unknown (1) or Ethernet Multiplexed [IANA to 
   define]. 
         
   4) Sets the UPSTREAM_LABEL to the VID/SMAC tuple where the VID is 
   administered from the configured VID/DMAC range. Downstream switches 
   must use the SUGGESTED LABEL or return a path Error condition 
   indicating why the label could not be used. Alternatively, if the 
   optional LABEL SET object is implemented, the upstream switches can 
   use this to specify the required label. 
    
   At intermediate switches the UPSTREAM_LABEL object and value is 
   passed unmodified.  The VID/SMAC tuple is used to create a static 
   forwarding entry in the Filtering Database of bridges at each hop 
   for the upstream direction. The port derived form the ERO and the 
   VID and DMAC included in the label constitute the static entry. 
    
   One capability of a connectionless Ethernet data plane is to reuse 
   destination forwarding entries for packets from any source within a 
   VLAN to a destination. When setting up point to point PBT 
   connections for multiple sources sharing a common destination this 
   capability can be preserved provided certain requirements are met. 
   We refer to this capability as Shared Forwarding.  Shared forwarding 
   happens opportunistically when conditions are met as a local 
   decision by label allocation at each end for the traffic to that 
   end. To achieve shared forwarding, a Path computation engine should 
   ensure the ERO is consistent with an existing path for the shared 
   segments. If a path satisfies the consistency check, the upstream 
   end of the signaling may chose to share an existing DMAC for the 
   upstream traffic with an existing Eth-LSP.  The consistency that the 
   Eth-LSP share the same port and the paths of the Eth-LSP share one 
   or more hops consecutively but once the paths diverge they must 
   remain divergent.  If no existing path has this behavior the path 
   will be created unshared either by using another VID or another DMAC 
   or both.  In other words shared forwarding happens when paths share 
   segments from the source and when the Upstream label is chosen to be 
   the same as the existing path.  Similarly for the downstream path 
   shared forwarding happens when, an existing path that shares 
   segments with the new paths ERO, viewed from the destination switch 
   and when the downstream label is chosen to be the same and the 
   existing path.  
   In this manner shared forwarding is a function that is controlled 
   primarily by path calculation and in combination with the local 
   label allocation at the end points of the path.  
    

 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 9 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   At the destination, a VID is allocated in the local MAC range for 
   the DMAC and the VID/DMAC tuple is passed in the GENERALIZED_LABEL 
   in the RESV message.  As with the UPSTREAM_LABEL, intermediate 
   switches use the GENERALIZED_LABEL object and pass it on unchanged, 
   upstream.  The VID/DMAC tuple is installed in the forwarding table 
   at each hop. This creates a bi-directional path as the PATH and RESV 
   messages follow the same path. 
    
   To initiate a P2MP VID path the initiator of the PATH message uses 
   procedures outlined in [GMPLS-SIGNALING] and [MPLS-P2MP]. A P2MP 
   tree consists of a VID tree in the forward direction (from root to 
   leaves) and a set of P2P paths running on identical paths from Tree 
   to root in the reverse direction. VID labels with common MAC 
   addresses are allocated in the forward direction and a single 
   VID/DMAC label in the reverse direction: 
    
   1) Sets the LSP encoding type to Ethernet. 
         
   2) Sets the LSP switching type to L2SC. 
         
   3) Sets the GPID to unknown. 
    
   4) Set the technology specific information in the TSPEC to indicate 
   domain-wide label.  
    
   5) Sets the UPSTREAM LABEL specified as a single VID/DMAC from the 
   configured VID range. 
    
   6) VID translation may optionally be permitted on a local basis 
   between two switches by a downstream switch replying with a VID/DMAC 
   other than the SUGGESTED LABEL. The upstream switch then sets a VID 
   translation on the port associated with the label to allow VID 
   translation. This flexibility allows the tree to be constructed with 
   out having to worry about colliding with another tree using the same 
   VID. 
     
    
3.4 Ethernet Label 
    
   The Ethernet label is a new generalized label with a suggested 
   format of: 
    
    
    
    
       0                   1                   2                   3 
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |0 0 0 0|        VLAN ID        |       MAC (highest 2 bytes)   | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |                       MAC Address                             | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 10 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   The semantics of the new label type for a non-zero MAC address is 
   that that the label is passed unchanged. This label is a domain wide 
   label.  This has similarity to the way in which a wavelength label 
   is handled at an intermediate switch that cannot perform wavelength 
   conversion, and is described in [GMPLS-RSVP]. 
    
   These domain wide labels are allocated to switches that control the 
   assignment of labels. This label space does not have to be globally 
   unique because the labels are only valid within a single provider.  
   When using configuration, a tool would have to perform a consistency 
   check to make sure that label terminations were unique. When using 
   GMPLS signaling it is assumed a unique pool of labels would be 
   assigned to each switch. The DMAC addresses are domain wide unique 
   and so is the combination of VID/DMAC. Should an error occur and a 
   duplicate label be assigned to one or more switches GMPLS signaling 
   procedures would allow the first assignment of the label and prevent 
   duplicate label from colliding. If a collision occurs an alarm would 
   be generated. In fact some of these procedures have been defined in 
   GMPLS control of photonic networks where a lambda may exist as a 
   form of domain wide label. 
    
 
3.5 Ethernet Service 
    
   Ethernet Switched Paths that are setup either by configuration or 
   signaling can be used to provide an Ethernet service to customers of 
   the Ethernet network.  The Metro Ethernet Forum has defined some 
   services in MEF.6 (e.g., Ethernet Private Line), and these are also 
   aligned with ITU-T G.8011-x Recommendations.  Of particular interest 
   are the bandwidth profile parameters in MEF.10 and whose associated 
   bandwidth profile algorithm are based on [RFC4115][RFC3270].  
   Consideration should be given to supporting these in any signaling 
   extensions for Ethernet LSPs. This will be addressed in a future 
   version of this specification. 
    
3.6 GMPLS Link Discovery 
 
   Link discovery is one of the building blocks of GMPLS. It is also a 
   capability that has been specified for Ethernet in IEEE 802.1AB. 
   Link discovery is optional but the benefits of running link 
   discovery in large systems are significant. Link discovery reduces 
   configuration and the possibility of errors in configuration as well 
   as exposing misconnections. It is likely that a standard Ethernet 
   implementation would have 802.1AB functions. A recommendation is 
   that standard 802.1AB could be run with an extension to feed 
   information into an LMP [RFC4204] information model. LMP is a 
   superset capability while 802.1AB has certain capabilities just for 
   Ethernet. See Figure 3.    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 11 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
               +---------+           +---------+ 
               |         |           |         |    
               |  LMP    | ----------|  LMP    | 
               | +-------+  IP (opt) +-------+ | 
               | |802.1AB| ----------|802.1AB| |  
               +-+-------+  Ethernet +-------+-+ 
                                      
                     Figure 3 Link Discovery Hierarchy 
 
 
3.7 GMPLS Routing 
    
   GMPLS routing [GMPLS-ROUTING] is IP routing with the TLV extensions 
   for the purpose of carrying around GMPLS TE information. The TE 
   information is populated with TE resources from coordinated with LMP 
   or from configuration if LMP is not available. The bandwidth 
   resources of the links are tracked as Eth-LSPs are set up. GMPLS 
   Routing is an optional piece but it is highly valuable in 
   maintaining topology and distributing the TE database for path 
   management and dynamic path computation.  
    
3.8 Path Computation 
    
   There has been a lot of recent activity in the area of path 
   computation [PATH-COMP].  Originally MPLS path computation was 
   performed locally in a TE database on a router. While this is non-
   optimal for situations where bandwidth is highly managed, it was 
   acceptable when a few paths are required in a primarily 
   connectionless environment; if a large number of coordinated paths 
   are required, it is advantageous to have a more sophisticated path 
   computation engine capable of optimizing the path routing of a sub 
   network. The path computation could take the form of paths being 
   computed either on a management station with local computation for 
   rerouting or more sophisticated path computation servers.  
    
3.8.1   Combinations of GMPLS Features 
    
   The combinations of LMP, Routing, Signaling and Path computation can 
   be all supported on a switch or a subset of GMPLS features can be 
   supported.  
    
   Signaling is the minimal function that might be supported on a small 
   switch. The ability to process Signaling messages with an ERO may be 
   all that is desired on an end point. In this case the path 
   computation would be performed off network.  
    
   Routing for GMPLS is the next important function since it provides 
   the forwarding of signaling functions and transport of TE 
   information. There is no requirement to provide full IP routing for 
   data traffic, only hop by hop routing for the control plane. However 
   it is possible to design switches without routing that could proxy 
   their routing to other larger switches. In the proxied case, there 
   would be little difference in the routing database but the small 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 12 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   switches would not have to perform routing operations. The 
   information for the proxied routing might be configured or it might 
   be data filled by an automated procedure.  No new protocols are 
   envisioned for the case where routing is proxied.  
    
   LMP is optional. The primary benefit of LMP in addition to 802.1AB 
   is LMP's capability to optimize routing information for the purpose 
   of link bundling on large switches. LMP has the capability to 
   compress the information required to represent a large number of 
   parallel resources automatically and reduce the amount of 
   configuration.  
    
    
3.9  Addresses, Interfaces, and Labels 
    
   This specification uses an addressing scheme and a label space for 
   the ingress/egress connection; the hierarchical GMPLS Switch 
   Address/Port ID and the Ethernet VID/DMAC tuple or VID/Multicast MAC 
   as a label space.  
    
                                     GMPLS Switch Address 
                                             | 
                                             V          N=named port 
        +----+                            +-----+         <port index> 
        |    |       label=VID/DMAC       |     |         <MAC> 
        | PB |       label=VID/MMAC       |     |         <string> 
   -----N    N----------------------------N PBB N---------- 
        |    |                            |(MAC)|   \     
        |    |                            /     |     Customer   
        +----+                           /+-----+     Facing      
      PBT Transit            Provider MAC PBT edge    Ports 
        Switch                             Switch 
    
             Figure 4 Ethernet/GMPLS Addressing & Label Space 
    
    
   Depending on how the service is defined and set up one or more of 
   these identifiers may be used for actual setup. An Ethernet port name 
   is common to both configured VID/DMAC, configured VID and bridging 
   modes of operation. One implication of this is that a port index and 
   a MAC address of a port on the switch may be effectively 
   interchangeable for signaling purposes. 
    
   For a GMPLS based system, the GMPLS Switch Address/logical port is 
   the logical signaling identifier for the control plane via which 
   Ethernet layer label bindings are solicited. In order to create a 
   point to point path an association must be made between the ingress 
   and egress node.  But the actual label distributed via signaling and 
   instantiated in the switch forwarding tables identifies the upstream 
   and downstream egress VID/DMAC of the PBT tunnel (see Figure 4). This 
   label is typically an internal provider hidden domain wide label that 
   is out of the locally administered label space.  
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 13 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   GMPLS uses identifiers in the form of 32 bit numbers which are in the 
   IP address notation but these are not IP addresses. An IP routing 
   control plane for the propagation of TE information may be supported.  
   The provider MAC port addresses are exchanged by the LLDP and by LMP 
   if supported. However these identifiers are merely for link control 
   and legacy Ethernet support and have local link scope. Actual label 
   assignment is performed by the signaling initiator and terminator. 
    
   A particular port on a provider network switch would have:  
   - A MAC 
   - A 32 bit IPv4 Switch address or 128 bit IPv6 address plus 32 bit 
   port Identifier  
   - One (or more) Mnemonic String Identifiers 
    
   This multiple naming convention leaves the issue of resolving the set 
   given one of the port identifiers. On a particular node, mapping is 
   relatively straightforward.  The preferred solution to this is to use 
   the GMPLS IP switch address for signaling resolution. In so doing, 
   the problem of setting up a path is reduced to figuring out what 
   switch supports an egress MAC address and then finding the 
   corresponding GMPLS IP switch address and performing all signaling 
   and routing with respect to the GMPLS switch address.  
    
   There are several options to achieve this:  
   - Provisioning 
   - Auto discovery protocols that carry MAC address 
   - Augmenting Routing TE with MAC Addresses 
   - Name Servers with identifier/address registration 
    
   This will be clarified in a subsequent version of this document. 
    
    
4.  Specific Procedures 
    
4.1  PT to PT connections  
    
   The Data Plane for Ethernet has three key fields: VID, DMAC and SMAC.  
   A connection instance is uniquely identified by the DMAC, the VID and 
   the SMAC for the purpose of the provider network terminations. The 
   VID and DMAC tuple identifies the forwarding multiplex at transit 
   switches and a simple degenerate form of the multiplex is P2P (only 
   one VID/DMAC/SMAC connection uses the VID/DMAC tuple).  
    
   This results in unique labels end to end. The data streams may merge, 
   the forwarding entries may be shared but the headers are still unique 
   allowing the connection to be de-multiplexed downstream.     
    
4.1.1   P2P connections with shared forwarding 
    
   The VID/DMAC can be considered to be a shared forwarding identifier 
   or label for a multiplex consisting of some number of P2P connections 
   distinctly identified by the MAC VID/DMAC/SMAC tuple. The reason for 
   using a shared forwarding entry is it reuses existing labels and 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 14 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   forwarding hardware. In some ways this is analogous to an LDP label 
   merge but in the shared forwarding case the path control only the 
   forwarding entry is reused. 
    
   VLAN tagged Ethernet packets include priority marking. Priority bits 
   can be used to indicate class of Service (COS) and drop priority. 
   Thus, traffic from multiple COSs could be multiplexed on the same ESP 
   (i.e., similar to E-LSPs) and queuing and drop decisions are made 
   based on the p-bits. This means that the queue selection can be done 
   based on a per flow (i.e., ESP + priority) basis and is decoupled 
   from the actual steering of the packet at any given node.  
    
   A switch terminating an ESP will frequently have more than one 
   suitable candidate path and it may choose to share a forwarding 
   entry.(common VID/DMAC , unique SMAC). It is a local decision of how 
   this is performed but the best choice is a path that maximizes the 
   shared forwarding.  
    
   The concept of bandwidth management still applies equally well with 
   shared forwarding. As an example consider a PBT edge switch that 
   terminates an Ethernet LSP with the following attributes: bandwidth 
   B1, DMAC D, SMAC S1, VID V. A request to establish an additional 
   Ethernet LSP with attributes (bandwidth B2, DMAC D, SMAC S2, VID V) 
   can be accepted provided there is sufficient link capacity remaining. 
    
    
4.1.2  Dynamic P2P symmetry with shared forwarding 
    
   Similar to how a destination switch may select a VID/DMAC from the 
   set of existing shared forwarding multiplexes rooted at the 
   destination node, the originating switch may also do so for the 
   reverse path. Once the initial ERO has been computed and the set of 
   existing Ethernet LSPs that include the target DMAC have been pruned, 
   the originating switch may select the optimal (by whatever criteria) 
   existing shared forwarding multiplex for the new destination to merge 
   with and offer its own VID/DMAC tuple for itself as a destination. 
   This is identified via use of the UPSTREAM LABEL object. 
    
4.1.3   Planned P2P symmetry 
    
   Normally the originating switch will not have knowledge of the set of 
   shared forwarding paths rooted on the destination node. 
    
   Use of a Path Computation Server or other planning style of tool with 
   more complete knowledge of the network configuration may wish to 
   impose pre-selection of shared forwarding multiplexes to use for both 
   directions. In this scenario the originating switch uses the 
   SUGGESTED LABEL and UPSTREAM LABEL objects to indicate complete 
   selection of the shared forwarding multiplexes at both ends. This may 
   also result in the establishment of a new VID/DMAC path as the 
   SUGGESTED LABEL object may legitimately refer to a path that does not 
   yet exist. 
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 15 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
4.1.4   Path Maintenance 
    
   Make before break procedures can be employed to modify the 
   characteristics of a P2P Ethernet LSP. As described in [RFC3209], 
   the LSP ID in the sender template is updated as the new path is 
   signaled. The procedures (including those for shared forwarding) are 
   identical to those employed in establishing a new LSP, with the 
   extended tunnel ID in the signaling exchange ensuring that double 
   booking of the associated resources does not occur. 
    
   Where individual paths in a protection group are modified, signaling 
   procedures may be combined with Protection Switching (PS) 
   coordination to administratively force PS switching operations such 
   that modifications are only ever performed on the protection path. 
    
4.2  P2MP VID/DMAC Connections 
    
4.2.1 Setup procedures 
    
   The group DMAC is administered from a central pool of multicast 
   addresses and the VLAN selected from the configured VID/DMAC range. 
   The P2MP tree is constructed via incremental addition of leaves to 
   the tree in signaling exchange where the root is the originating 
   switch (as per (MPLS-P2MP). The multicast VID/DMAC are encoded in the 
   suggested label object using the Ethernet label encoding. 
    
   Where a return path is required the unicast MAC corresponding to the 
   originating interface and a VID selected from the configured VID/DMAC 
   range is encoded as an Ethernet label in the upstream label object. 
    
4.2.2   Maintenance Procedures 
 
   Maintenance and modification to a P2MP tree can be achieved by a 
   number of means. The preferred technique being to modify existing 
   VLAN configuration vs. assignment of a new label and completely 
   constructing a new tree.  
    
   Make before break on a live tree reusing existing label assignments 
   requires a 1:1 or 1+1 construct. The protection switch state of the 
   traffic is forced on the working tree and locked (PS not allowed) 
   while the backup tree is modified. Explicit path tear of leaves to 
   be modified is required to ensure no loops are left behind as 
   artifacts of tree modification. Once modifications are complete, a 
   forced switch to the backup tree occurs and the original tree may be 
   similarly modified. This also suggests that 1+1 or 1:1 resilience 
   can be achieved for P2MP trees for any single failure (switch on any 
   failure and use restoration techniques to repair the failed tree). 
    
4.3 P2P/P2MP VID Trees 
    



 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 16 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
4.3.1   Setup Procedures 
 
   The VID is administered from the central pool of VLAN IDs 
   corresponding to the configured VID range. The P2MP VID tree is 
   constructed via incremental addition of leaves to the tree in 
   signaling exchange where the root is the originating switch as per 
   [MPLS-P2MP]. 
    
   Where (*,*) connectivity is to be configured a single VID is employed 
   and encoded as an Ethernet label in the suggested label object with 
   MAC address set to zero. 
    
   Where communication is to be constrained to root to leaves and leaves 
   to root only, asymmetrical VID configuration is used with the 
   suggested label object encoding the root to leaf VID and the upstream 
   label object encoding the leaf to root VID. 
    
4.3.2   Maintenance procedures 
 
   Maintenance and modification to a P2P or P2MP VID tree can be 
   achieved by a number of means. The preferred technique being to move 
   traffic off the tree, modify the tree and then shift traffic back to 
   the tree. This ensures that there are no transient loops in the tree 
   that are artifacts of interactions of the GMPLS control plane, soft 
   state and the Ethernet data plane. 
    
   Make before break on a live tree requires a 1:1 or 1+1 construct. 
   The protection switch state of the traffic is forced on the working 
   tree and locked (PS not allowed) while the backup tree is modified. 
   Explicit path tear of leaves to be modified is required to ensure no 
   loops are left behind as artifacts of tree modification. Once 
   modifications are complete, a forced switch to the backup tree 
   occurs and the original tree may be similarly modified. This also 
   suggests that 1+1 or 1:1 resilience can be achieved for P2MP trees 
   for any single failure (switch on any failure and use restoration 
   techniques to repair the failed tree). 
 
    
4.4 OAM MEP ID and MA ID synchronization 
    
   The Maintenance end point IDs (MEP IDs) and maintenance association 
   IDs for the switched path endpoints can be synchronized using the 
   ETH-MCC (maintenance communication channel) transaction set once the 
   switched path has been established. 
    
   MEPs are located at the endpoints of the Ethernet LSP. Typical 
   configuration associated with a MEP is Maintenance Domain Name, 
   Short Maintenance Association Name, and MA Level, MEP ID, and CCM 
   transmission rate (when ETH-CC functionality is desired). As part of 
   the synchronization, it is verified that the Maintenance Domain 
   Name, Short Maintenance Association Name, MA Level, and CCM 
   transmission rate are the same. It is also determined that MEP IDs 
   are unique for each MEP. 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 17 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
    
   Server MEPs can be considered at the intermediate points of the PBT 
   network. Upon network failures (e.g. physical link failures), the 
   Server MEPs can initiate the unicast AIS frames for each Ethernet 
   LSP end-point that is present in the forwarding table. The only 
   configuration required at the Server MEPs is the MA Level which 
   should be the same as the MA Level configured at the Ethernet LSP 
   MEPs. 
    
   Besides the unicast CCM and AIS functionality, the PBT MEPs can also 
   offer the LBM/LBR and LMM/LMR functionalities for on-demand 
   connectivity verification and loss measurement purposes. 
    
4.5 Protection Paths 
    
   When protection is used for path recovery it is required to 
   associate the working and protection paths into a protection group. 
   This is achieved as defined in [RECOVERY_SIG] using the ASSOCIATION 
   and PROTECTION objects. Protection may be used for P2P VID/DMAC, 
   P2MP VID/DMAC and P2P/P2MP VID configured modes of operation. The 
   'P' bit in the protection object indicates the role (working or 
   protection) of the LSP currently being signaled. 
    
   If the initiating switch wishes to use G.8031 [G-8031] data plane 
   protection switching coordination (vs. control plane notifications), 
   it sets the N bit to 1 in the protection object. This must be 
   consistently applied for all paths associated as a protection group. 
    
   If the terminating switch does not support G.8031, the error 
   "Admission Control Failure/Unsupported Notification Type" is used.  
 
5. Error conditions 
    
   The following errors have been identified as being unique to these 
   procedures and in addition to those already defined. This will be 
   addressed in a proper IANA considerations section in a future 
   version of the document: 
    
5.1 Invalid VID value for configured VID/DMAC range 
    
   The originator of the error is not configured to use the VID value 
   in conjunction with GMPLS signaling of VID/DMAC tuples. This may be 
   any switch along the path. 
    
5.2 Invalid VID value for configured VID range 
    
5.3 Invalid MAC Address 
    
   The MAC address is out of a reserved range that cannot be used by 
   then node which is processing the address.   
     
5.4 Invalid ERO for Upstream Label Object 
     
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 18 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
    The ERO offered has discontinuities with the identified VID/DMAC 
    path in the UPSTREAM LABEL object. 
     
5.5 Invalid ERO for Suggested Label Object 
    
   The ERO offered has discontinuities with the identified VID/DMAC 
   path in the SUGGESTED LABEL object.  
    
5.6 Switch is not IVL capable 
 
    This error may arise only in P2MP VID Tree allocation. 
    
5.7 Switch is not SVL capable 
     
    This error may arise only in P2MP VID Tree allocation. 
    
    
5.8 Invalid VID in upstream label object 
     
    The VID in the upstream label object for the "asymmetrical VID" 
    P2MP tree did not correspond to the VID used in previous 
    transactions. 
     
6. Deployment Scenarios  
    
   This technique of GMPLS controlled Ethernet switching is applicable 
   to all deployment scenarios considered by the design team [CCAMP-
   ETHERNET]. 
     
     
7. Security Considerations 
    
   The architecture assumes that the GMPLS controlled Ethernet subnet 
   consists of trusted devices and that the UNI ports to the domain are 
   untrusted. Care is required to ensure untrusted access to the trusted 
   domain does not occur. Where GMPLS is applied to the control of VLAN 
   only, the commonly known techniques for mitigation of Ethernet DOS 
   attacks may be required on UNI ports. 
    
8. IANA Considerations 
    
   New values are required for signaling and error codes as indicated. 
   This section will be completed in a later version. 
    
9. References 
    
9.1  Normative References 
 
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate  
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  
    


 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 19 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   [CCAMP-ETHERNET] Papadimitriou, D. et.al, "A Framework for 
      Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Ethernet", internet draft, draft-
      papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-ethernet-framework-00.txt , June 2005  
    
   [GMPLS-SIGNALING] Berger, L. (editor), "Generalized MPLS -Signaling 
      Functional Description", January 2003, RFC3471. 
    
   [GMPLS-ROUTING] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., "Routing Extensions in 
      Support of Generalized MPLS", RFC 4202, October 2005 
    
   [GMPLS-RSVP] Berger, L. et.al., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label  
      Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic  
      Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", IETF RFC 3473, January 2003. 
    
    
9.2  Informative References 
    
   [RFC4115] Aboul-Magd, O. et.al. "A Differentiated Service Two-Rate,  
      Three-Color Marker with Efficient Handling of in-Profile Traffic",  
      IETF RFC 4115, July 2005 
    
   [G-8031] ITU-T Draft Recommendation G.8031, Ethernet Protection 
      Switching. 
     
   [RFC3495] E. Mannie, Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
      Switching (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3495. 
    
   [IEEE 802.1ab] "IEEE Draft Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area  
      Networks, Station and Media Access Control Connectivity  
      Discovery". 
                          
   [IEEE 802.1ag] "IEEE standard for Connectivity Fault Management", 
      work in progress. 
    
   [IEEE 802.1ah] "IEEE standard for Provider Backbone Bridges", work in 
      progress. 
    
   [RFC4204] Lang. J. Editor, "Link Management Protocol (LMP)" RFC4204, 
      October 2005 
    
   [MEF.6] The Metro Ethernet Forum MEF 6 (2004), "Ethernet Services 
      Definitions - Phase I". 
 
   [MEF.10] The Metro Ethernet Forum MEF 10 (2004), "Ethernet Services 
      Attributes Phase 1". 
    
   [RFC3270] Le Faucheur, F. et.al., "Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      (MPLS) Support of Differentiated Services" IETF RFC 3270, May 
      2002. 
    
   [MPLS-P2MP] Aggarwal, R. Ed., "Extensions to RSVP-TE for Point to 
      Multipoint TE LSPs", work in progress. 
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 20 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   [MYERS] Myers et.al. "Rethinking the service model, scaling Ethernet 
      to a million nodes", http://100x100network.org/papers/myers-   
      hotnets2004.pdf. 
    
   [PATH-COMP] Farrel, A. et.al., "Path Computation Element (PCE) 
      Architecture", work in progress. 
    
   [PWoPBT] Allan et.al., "Pseudo Wires over Provider Backbone 
      Transport", draft-allan-pw-o-pbt-01.txt, work in progress. 
    
   [RFC3985] Bryant, S., Pate, P. et al., "Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-
      to Edge (PWE3) Architecture", IETF RFC 3985, March 2005. 
    
   [RECOVERY_SIG] Lang et.al., "RSVP-TE Extensions in support of End-
      to-End Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)-based 
      Recovery ", work in progress. 
    
   [RFC3209] Awduche et.al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP  
      Tunnels, IETF RFC 3209, December 2001. 
    
   [Y.1731] ITU-T Draft Recommendation Y.1731(ethoam), " OAM Functions 
      and Mechanisms for Ethernet based Networks ", work in progress. 
    
    
10.  Author's Address 
 
   Don Fedyk 
   Nortel Networks 
   600 Technology Park Drive    Phone: +1-978-288-3041 
   Billerica, MA, 01821         Email: dwfedyk@nortel.com 
    
   David Allan 
   Nortel Networks              Phone: +1-613-763-6362 
   3500 Carling Ave.            Email: dallan@nortel.com 
   Ottawa, Ontario, CANADA 
    
   Greg Sunderwood 
   Bell Canada                  Phone: +1-604-648-7770 
   Suite 1500,                  Email: greg.sunderwood@gt.ca 
   1066 West Hastings Street 
   Vancouver, BC, CANADA 
   V6E 2X1 
    
   Himanshu Shah 
   Ciena                        Phone: 978-489-2196 
   35 Nagog Park,               Email: hshah@ciena.com 
   Acton, MA 01720               
    
   Nabil Bitar                  Phone: (781) 466-2161 
   Verizon,                     Email: nabil.n.bitar@verizon.com 
   40 Sylvan Rd.,  
   Waltham, MA 02451 
    
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 21 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   Attila Takacs 
   Ericsson  
   1. Laborc u.  
   Budapest, HUNGARY 1037       Email: attila.takacs@ericsson.com 
    
   Diego Caviglia 
   Ericsson 
                                Email: diego.caviglia@ericsson.com 
    
11. Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
12. Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
13. Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
    
14. Acknowledgments 
 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 22 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   The authors would like to thank Dinesh Mohan, Nigel Bragg, Stephen 
   Shew and Sandra Ballarte for their extensive contributions to this 
   document. 


















































 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 23 
Appendix A 
    
A 1.   Aspects of configuring Ethernet Forwarding 
    
   Ethernet as specified today is a complete system consisting of a 
   data plane and a number of control plane functions. Spanning tree, 
   data plane flooding and MAC learning combine to populate forwarding 
   tables and produce resilient any-to-any behavior in a bridged 
   network.  
    
   Ethernet consists of a very simple and reliable data plane that has 
   been optimized and mass produced. By simply disabling some Ethernet 
   control plane functionality, it is possible to employ alternative 
   control planes and obtain different forwarding behaviors. 
    
   Customer     Provider        Provider         
   Bridge/      Bridge          Backbone                                         
                                Bridge 
        
   C-MAC/C-VID------------------802.1Q -------------------C-MAC-CVID 
                S-VID-----------802.1ad------------S-VID 
                        B-MAC---802.1ah---B-MAC 
                        B-VID---802.1ah---B-VID 
    
                     Figure 1 802.1 MAC/VLAN Hierarchy 
    
   Recent works in IETF Pseudo Wire Emulation [RFC3985] and IEEE 802 
   are defining a separation of Ethernet functions permitting an 
   increasing degree of provider control. The result is that the 
   Ethernet service to the customer appears the same, yet the provider 
   components and behaviors have become decoupled from the customer 
   presentation and the provider has gained control of all VID/DMAC 
   endpoints. 
     
   One example of this is the 802.1ah work in hierarchical bridging 
   whereby customer Ethernet frames are fully encapsulated into a 
   provider Ethernet frame, isolating the customer VID/DMAC space from 
   the provider VID/DMAC space. Another example would be the direct 
   transport of pseudo wires PWs ["Dry Martini" or PW over layer 2] 
   where the Ethernet network fulfills the role of the PSN in the PWE 
   architecture. In both cases the behavior of the provider's network 
   is as per 802.1Q. 
    
   The Ethernet data plane provides protocol multiplexing via the ether 
   type field which allows encapsulation of different protocols 
   supporting various applications. More recently, the Carrier Ethernet 
   effort has created provider and customer separation that enables 
   another level of multiplexing. This in effect creates provider MAC 
   endpoints in the Ethernet sub-network controlled by the provider. In 
   this document we concentrate on the provider solutions and therefore 
   subsequent references to VLAN, VID and MAC refer to those under 
   provider control, be it in the backbone layer of 802.1ah or the PSN 
    
    
   Fedyk et.al            Expires March 2007                   Page 24 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   layer of "Dry Martini". Also in the case where the Customer service 
   is Ethernet, the Customer Ethernet service is the same native 
   Ethernet service with functions such as bridging, learning and 
   spanning trees all functioning over the provider infrastructure. 
    
   With the provider in exclusive control of their Ethernet sub-network 
   and all customer specific state pushed to the edges of that sub-
   network, the ability of the provider to exploit latent Ethernet 
   behavior is facilitated. One key capability sought is to overcome 
   limitations, such as single spanning tree path for all traffic 
   within a VLAN, imposed by bridging (see [MYERS] for a discussion). 
    
   Bridging offers a simple solution for any-to-any connectivity within 
   a VLAN partition via the Spanning tree, flooding and MAC learning. 
   Spanning tree provides some unnecessary capabilities for point to 
   point services and since the Spanning tree must interconnect all 
   MACs with the same VLAN IDs (VIDs) it consumes a scarce resource 
   (VIDs). In this document we present that it is easier to modify 
   Ethernet to scale engineered P2P services and this is the approach 
   we take with PBT and PW over Ethernet. (The number of usable VLANs 
   IDs in conventional Ethernet bridging is constrained to 4094, 
   therefore the use of VLAN only configuration for all forwarding 
   could be limited for some applications where large number of point 
   to point connections are required.) This is because in Ethernet, 
   each Spanning tree is associated with one or more VLAN IDs. Also 
   Port membership in a VLAN is configured which controls the 
   connectivity of all MAC interfaces participating in the VLAN.  
    
   The roots for PBT capability exist in the Ethernet management plane. 
   The management of Ethernet switches provides for static 
   configuration of Ethernet forwarding. The Ethernet Control plane 
   allows for forwarding entries that are statically provisioned or 
   configured. In this document we are expanding the meaning of 
   "configured" from an Ethernet Control plane sense to mean either 
   provisioned, or controlled by GMPLS. The connectivity aspects of 
   Ethernet forwarding is based upon VLANs and MAC addresses. In other 
   words the VLAN + DMAC are an Ethernet Label that can be looked up at 
   each switch to determine the egress link (or links in the case of 
   link aggregation).  
                      
   In this document, we discuss, point to point (P2P) and point to 
   multipoint (P2MP) connections via static configuration of VLAN/DMAC 
   tuples. (MAC-only configuration is considered a degenerate case 
   corresponding to VLAN zero). 
    
   This is a finer granularity than traditional VLAN networks since 
   each P2P connection is independent. By provisioning MAC addresses 
   independently of Spanning tree in a domain, both the VLAN and the 
   VLAN/DMAC configured forwarding can be exploited. This greatly 
   extends the scalability of what can be achieved in a pure Ethernet 
   bridged sub network. 
    

 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 25 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   For compatibility and flexibility with existing Ethernet hardware, 
   we preserve the global/domain wide uniqueness and semantics of MAC 
   addresses as interface names or multicast group addresses. (In 
   Ethernet overlap of MAC addresses across VLANs is allowed. However 
   for PBT MAC addresses should be unique for all VLANs assigned to 
   PBT. In many cases the MAC addresses can be out of the locally 
   administered space) We then redefine the semantics associated with 
   administration and uses of VLAN values for the case of explicit 
   forwarding such as you get with statically configured IVL (or SVL) 
   Ethernet. 
    
   The result is a new architecture where configured VID + DMAC provide 
   a forwarding table that is consistent with existing Ethernet 
   switching. At the same time it provides domain wide labels that can 
   be controlled by a common GMPLS control plane. This makes GMPLS 
   control and resource management procedures ideal to create paths. 
   The outcome is that the GMPLS control plane can be utilized to set 
   up the following atomic modes of connectivity: 
    
          1) P2P connectivity and MP2P multiplexed connectivity based 
             on configuration of unicast MAC addresses in conjunction 
             with a VID from a set of pre-configured VIDs. 
          2) P2MP connectivity based on configuration of multicast MAC 
             address in conjunction with a VID from a set of pre-
             configured VIDs. This corresponds to (Source, Group) or 
             (S,G) multicast. 
          3) P2MP connectivity based on configuration of VID port 
             membership. This corresponds to (S,*) or (*,*) multicast 
             (where * represents the extent of the VLAN Tree). 
          4) MP2MP connectivity based on configuration of VID port 
             membership (P2MP trees in which leaves are permitted to 
             communicate). Although, we caution that this approach 
             poses resilience issues (discussed in section 5) and hence 
             is not recommended. 
    
   Items 1 and 2 above are restricted to "Independent VLAN Learning" 
   capable Ethernet switches [802.1Q].  
    
   The modes above are not completely distinct. Some modes involve 
   combinations of P2P connections in one direction and MP connectivity 
   in the other direction.  Also, more than one mode may be combined in 
   a single GMPLS transaction. One example is the incremental addition 
   of a leaf to a P2MP tree with a corresponding MP2P return path 
   (analogous to a root initiated join).  
    
   In order to realize the above connectivity modes, a partition of the  
   VLAN IDs from traditional Ethernet needs to be established. The 
   partition allows for a pool of Ethernet labels for manual 
   configuration and/or for GMPLS control plane usage. The VID 
   partition actually consists of a "configured VID/DMAC range" and 
   "configured VID range" since in some instances the label is a 
   VID/DMAC and sometimes the label is a VID/Mulitcast DMAC.  

 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 26 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
A 2.   Overview of configuration of VID/DMAC tuples 
    
   Existing Ethernet Switches may perform Independent VLAN Learning 
   (IVL) based forwarding on the basis of a VID/DMAC tuple as described 
   in 802.1Q. IVL is an example where the VLAN is partitioned and each 
   is used as a unique filter for forwarding. In this document we build 
   on that concept of IVL partitioning of the VID. The basic operation 
   of an Ethernet switch is filtering on VID and forwarding on DMAC. 
   The resulting operation is the same as performing a full 60 bit 
   lookup (VID (12) + DMAC(48)) for point to point operations, only 
   requiring uniqueness of the full 60 bits for forwarding to resolve 
   correctly. We can call this an Ethernet domain wide label.  
    
   We have complete route freedom for each domain wide label (60 bit 
   VLAN/DMAC tuple) and the ability to define multiple connectivity 
   instances or paths per DMAC for each of the VIDs in the "configured 
   VID/DMAC range".  
    
   We have preserved the semantics of MAC addresses, and simply broaden 
   the potential interpretations of VLAN ID from spanning tree 
   identifier to topology instance identifier. Therefore, we can 
   concurrently operate both standard bridging and configured 
   unicast/multicast operation side by side. We partition the VID space 
   and allocate a range of VIDs (say 'n' VIDs) as only significant when 
   combined with a configured DMAC address (the aforementioned 
   "configured VID/DMAC range" of VIDs). We can then consider a VID in 
   that range as an individual connectivity instance identifier for a 
   configured P2P path terminating at the associated DMAC address. Or 
   in the case of P2MP, a P2MP multicast tree corresponding to the 
   destination multicast group address. Note that this is destination 
   based forwarding consistent with how Ethernet works today. The only 
   thing changed is the mechanism of populating the forwarding tables.  
    
   Ethernet MAC addresses are typically globally unique since the 48 
   bits consists of 24 bit Organizational Unique Identifier and a 24 
   bit serial number. There is also a bit set aside for Multicast and 
   for local addresses out of the OUI field. We define domain wide as 
   within a single organization, or more strictly within a single 
   network within an organization. For provider MAC addresses that will 
   only be used in a domain wide sense we can define MAC addresses out 
   of a either the local space or the global space since they both have 
   the domain wide unique property. When used in the context of GMPLS, 
   it is useful to think of a domain wide pool of labels where switches 
   are assigned a set of MAC addresses. These labels are assigned 
   traffic that terminates on the respective switches.  
    
   It is also worth noting that unique identification of source in the 
   form of the SMAC is carried e2e in the MAC header. So although we 
   have a 60 bit domain wide unique label, it may be shared by multiple 
   sources and the full connection identifier for an individual P2P 
   instance is 108 bits (SMAC, VID and DMAC). The SMAC is not 
   referenced in forwarding operations but it would allow additional 
   context for tracing or other operations at the end of the path.   
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 27 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
    
   GMPLS signaling procedures can be designed to create the bi-
   directional path delegating label allocation of the combined 
   VID/DMAC Label to the destination/source associated with the MACs 
   for each direction of unicast forwarding. Creating P2P path is a 
   well understood control plane requirement. 
    
   For multicast group addresses, the VID/DMAC concatenated label can 
   be distributed by the source but label assignment (as it encodes 
   global multicast group information) requires coordination within the 
   GMPLS controlled domain. 
    
   As mentioned earlier, this technique results in a single unique and 
   invariant identifier, in our case a VID/DMAC label associated with 
   the path termination or the multicast group.  There can be up to 
   4094 labels to any one MAC address.  However, practically, from 
   Ethernet network wide aspect, there would be only a handful of VLANs 
   allocated for PBT. In addition, all 48 bits are not completely 
   available for the MAC addresses.  One way to maximize the space is 
   to use the locally administered space. This is a large number for 
   P2P applications and even larger when shared or multiplexed 
   forwarding is leveraged. In practice, most network scaling 
   requirements may be met via allocation of only a small portion of 
   the VID space, to the configured VID/DMAC range. The result is 
   minimal impact on the number of remaining bridging VLANs that can be 
   concurrently supported.  
    
   In order to use this unique 60 bit label, we disable the normal 
   mechanisms by which Ethernet populates the forwarding table for the 
   allocated range of VIDs. When a path is setup, for a specific label 
   across a contiguous sequence of Ethernet switches, a unidirectional 
   connection is the functional building block for an Ethernet Label 
   Switched path (Eth-LSP).  
    
   In P2P mode a bi-directional path is composed of two unidirectional 
   paths that are created with a single RSVP-TE session. The technique 
   does not require the VID to be common in both directions. However, 
   keeping in line with regular Ethernet these paths are symmetrical 
   such that a single bi-directional connection is composed of two 
   unidirectional paths that have common routing (i.e. traverse the 
   same switches and links) in the network and hence share the same 
   fate.  
   In P2MP mode a bi-directional path is composed of a unidirectional 
   tree and a number of P2P paths from the leaves of the tree to the 
   root. Similarly these paths may have bandwidth and must have common 
   routing as in the P2P case.  
    
   There are a few modifications required to standard Ethernet to make 
   this approach robust: 
    
   1. In Standard Ethernet, discontinuities in forwarding table 
   configuration in the path of a connection will normally result in 
   packets being flooded as "unknown". For configured operation (e.g. 
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 28 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
   PBT), unknown addresses are indicative of a fault or configuration 
   error and the flooding of these is undesirable in meshed topologies. 
   Therefore flooding of "unknown" unicast/multicast MAC addresses must 
   be disabled for the "configured VID/DMAC range".  
    
   2. MAC learning is not required, and although it will not interfere 
   with management/control population of the forwarding tables, since 
   static entries are not overridden, it appears prudent to explicitly 
   disable MAC learning for the configured VID/DMAC and VID range. 
    
   3. Spanning tree is disabled for the allocated VID/DMAC and VID 
   range and port blocking must be disabled to achieve complete 
   configured route freedom. As noted earlier, it is a control plane 
   requirement to ensure configured paths are loop free.  
    
   All three modifications described above are within the scope of 
   acceptable configuration options defined in IEEE802.1Q 
   specification. 
    
    
A 3.   Overview of configuration of VID port membership 
    
   Procedures almost identical to that for configuration of P2P 
   VID/DMAC tuples can also be used for the incremental configuration 
   of P2MP VID trees. For the replication of forwarding in this case 
   the label is common for the multipoint destinations. The MAC field 
   is set to multicast address and is common to the multicast 
   community. The VID is a distinguisher common to the multicast 
   community. The signaling procedures are as per that for [MPLS-P2MP]. 
    
   Since VID translation is relatively new and is not a ubiquitously 
   deployed capability, we consider a VID to be a domain global value. 
   Therefore, the VID value to be used by the originating switch may be 
   assigned by management and nominally is required to be invariant 
   across the network. The ability to indicate permissibility of 
   translation will be addressed in a future version of the document. 
    
   A procedure known as "asymmetrical VID" may be employed to constrain 
   connectivity (root to leaves, and leaves to root only) when switches 
   also support shared VLAN learning (or SVL). This would be consistent 
   with the root as a point of failure.  
    
A 4.   OAM Aspects 
    
   Robustness is enhanced with the addition of data plane OAM to 
   provide both fault and performance management.  
    
   For the configured VID/DMAC unicast mode of behavior, the hardware 
   performs unicast packet forwarding of known MAC addresses exactly as 
   Ethernet currently operates. The OAM currently defined,[802.1ag and 
   Y.1731] can also be reused without modification of the protocols. 
   However currently if the VID for PBT is different in each direction 
   some modification of the OAM may be required.   
 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 29 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
    
   An additional benefit of domain wide path identifiers for data plane 
   forwarding, is the tight coupling of the 60 bit unique connection ID 
   (VID/DMAC) and the associated OAM packets. It is a simple matter to 
   determine a broken path or misdirected packet since the unique 
   connection ID cannot be altered on the Eth-LSP. This is in fact one 
   of the most powerful and unique aspects of the domain wide label for 
   any type of rapid diagnosis of the data plane faults. It is also 
   independent of the control plane so it works equally well for 
   provisioned or GMPLS controlled paths.  
    
   Bi-directional transactions (e.g. ETH-LB) and reverse direction 
   transactions (e.g. ETH-AIS) MAY have a different VID for each 
   direction. Currently Y.1731 & 802.1ag makes no representations with 
   respect to this. 
    
   For configured multicast VID/DMAC mode, the current versions of 
   802.1ag and Y.1731] make no representation as to how PDUs which are 
   not using unicast addresses or which use OAM reserved multicast 
   addresses are handled. Therefore this specification makes no 
   representation as to whether such trees can be instrumented. 
    
   When configured VID mode of operation is used PBT can be forced to 
   use the same VID in both directions, emulating the current Ethernet 
   data plane and the OAM functions as defined in the current versions 
   of 802.1ag and Y.1731 can be used with no restriction. 
    
A 5.   QOS Aspects 
    
   Ethernet VLAN tags include priority tagging in the form of the 
   802.1p priority bits. When combined with configuration of the paths 
   via management or control plane, priority tagging produces the 
   Ethernet equivalent of an MPLS-TE E-LSPs [RFC3270]. Priority tagged 
   Ethernet PDUs self-identify the required queuing discipline 
   independent of the configured connectivity.  
    
   It should be noted that the consequence of this is that there is a 
   common COS model across the different modes of configured operation 
   specified in this document. 
    
   The actual QOS objects required for signaling will be in a future 
   version of this memo. 
    
A 6.   Resiliency Aspects 
    
A 6.1  E2E Path protection 
 
   One for One(1:1) protection is a primary LSP with a disjoint 
   dedicated back up LSP. One plus one (1+1) protection is a primary 
   LSP with a disjoint backup LSP that may share resources with other 
   LSPs. One for One and One plus One Automatic Protection Switching 
   strategies are supported. Such schemes offer: 

 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 30 
Internet Draft     draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-pbt-01.txt 
                                    
          1) Engineered disjoint protection paths that can protect both 
             directions of traffic. 
          2) Fast switchover due to tunable OAM mechanisms.  
          3) Revertive path capability when primary paths are restored. 
          4) Option for redialing paths under failure.  
    
   Specific procedures for establishment of protection paths and 
   associating paths into "protection groups" are TBD. 
    
   Note that E2E path protection is able to respond to failures with a 
   number of configurable intervals. The loss of CCM OAM cells or ETH-
   AIS cells in the data plane can trigger paths to switch. In the case 
   of CCM OAM cells, the detection time is typically 3.5 times the CCM 
   interval plus the propagation delay from the fault.   
    
    





































 
Fedyk et al.             Expires March 2007               Page 31 

