


ECRIT                                                     H. Schulzrinne
Internet-Draft                                       Columbia University
Intended status: Informational                                  L. Liess
Expires: April 15, 2009                                 Deutsche Telekom
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                  Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                                B. Stark
                                                                    AT&T
                                                                A. Kuett
                                                                   Skype
                                                        October 12, 2008


          Location Hiding: Problem Statement and Requirements
              draft-ietf-ecrit-location-hiding-req-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 15, 2009.

Abstract

   The emergency services architecture developed in the IETF Emergency
   Context Resolution with Internet Technology (ECRIT) working group
   describes an architecture where location information is provided by
   access networks to end points or VoIP service providers in order to
   determine the correct dial string and information to route the call



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


   to a Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP).  For determining the PSAP
   Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) the usage of the Location-to-
   Service Translation (LoST) Protocol is envisioned.

   This document explores the architectural impact for the IETF
   emergency services architecture for situations where the Internet
   Access Provider (IAP) and/or the Internet Service Provider (ISP) are
   only willing to disclose limited or no location information.

   This document provides a problem statement and lists requirements.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Emergency Services Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Location Hiding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Location by Reference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  High-Level Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Detailed Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Desirable Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10




















Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Emergency Services Architecture

   The emergency services architecture developed in the IETF Emergency
   Context Resolution with Internet Technology (ECRIT) working group,
   see [I-D.ietf-ecrit-framework], describes an architecture where
   location information is provided by access networks to end points or
   VoIP service providers in order to determine the correct dial string
   and information to route the call to a Public Safety Answering Point
   (PSAP).  The Location-to-Service Translation (LoST) Protocol
   [RFC5222] allows callers and other call-routing entities to determine
   the PSAP Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for a specific
   geographical location together with a service URI [RFC5031].  The
   basic architecture is shown in Figure 1 of [I-D.ietf-ecrit-framework]
   and further detailed in the message flow in Figure 2 of
   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-framework].

   For emergency services, location information is needed in three ways:
   1.  Emergency call routing to the PSAP that is responsible for a
       specific geographical region
   2.  Dispatch of the emergency personnel to the scene of an accident,
       crime or other types of incidents
   3.  Additionally, a VSP may need to verify that an call is indeed an
       emergency call and may therefore require location information to
       ensure that calls routed to a specific URI point to a PSAP.

   It is very important to note that this document only discusses
   location hiding in the context of location information that is need
   for call routing.  ISPs have no interest or even legal basis for
   hiding location information from emergency services personnel.

1.2.  Location Hiding

   In some cases, location providers (e.g., Internet Access Providers
   (IAPs) and/or the Internet Service Providers (ISPs)) are unwilling to
   provide precise location information to end points or VSPs, as is
   called for in the above model.  The decision to deny location can be
   driven by a number of technical and business concerns.  Some
   providers may perceive a risk that allowing users to access location
   information for non-emergency purposes or prior to an emergency call
   will incur additional server load and thus costs.  Other providers
   may not want to make location information available without the
   ability to charge for it.







Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


1.3.  Location by Reference

   The work on the Location Configuration Protocol (LCP) indicated the
   need to provide the capability to obtain Location-by-References
   (LbyRs) in addition to Location-by-Value (LbyV) from a Location
   Information Server (LIS).

   The LCP problem statement and requirements document can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps].  The requirements for obtaining an LbyR
   via the LCP and the corresponding dereferencing step can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements].

   HTTP Enabled Location Delivery (HELD), see
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery], is an instantiation of the
   LCP concept and allows LbyVs and LbyRs to be requested.

   A location reference may already satisfy the requirement for location
   hiding if the PSAP has the appropriate credentials to resolve the
   reference.  This requires a trust relationship between the PSAP and
   the ISP.  Note that the requirement being met here is for delivery of
   location information to the PSAP, not for LoST routing or for
   validation at the VSP.

   Unfortunately, a location reference is not compatible with LoST, as
   LoST requires an information value rather than a reference.  Also,
   LoST servers may be operated by the VSP, which may not have a trust
   relationship with the ISP.


2.  Terminology

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119], with the
   important qualification that, unless otherwise stated, these terms
   apply to the design of an solution supporting location hiding, not
   its implementation or application.

   This document reuses terminology from [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps].


3.  Requirements

3.1.  High-Level Requirements







Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


   Req-A:  There MUST be a way an access network can withhold detailed
      location information from any entity it wishes to, and
      specifically, the endpoint, and a VSP.

   Req-B:  The ISP/IAP MUST support the ability of the endpoint or the
      VSP to route emergency calls.

   Req-C:  The VSP MUST be able to validate that a call purported to be
      an emergency call is being routed to a bona fide URI, which is
      denoted by being a URI in LoST for the designated emergency
      service.

   Req-D:  The PSAP MUST be provided precise location information (by
      value) for emergency callers.  The endpoint and/or VSP may provide
      this information either by value or by reference.

3.2.  Detailed Requirements

   Req-1:  The proposed solution MUST NOT assume a business or trust
      relationship between the caller's VSP and the caller's ISP.

   Req-2:  A solution MUST consider deployment scenarios where a VSP is
      outside the jurisdiction of the PSAP.

   Req-3:  The solution MUST offer automated discovery of servers and
      other behavior, i.e., no manual configuration can be assumed.

   Req-4:  The steps needed by the endpoint for emergency calling SHOULD
      be no different when location is withheld vs. when location is not
      withheld.  In particular, user agents cannot require additional
      configuration to discover which particular environment (hiding or
      no hiding) they find themselves in.

   Req-5:  The solution SHOULD work for non-SIP entities, without the
      ISP/IAP having to support these protocols.

   Req-6:  The solution MUST work if PSAP boundaries have holes.

   Req-7:  The solution MUST NOT assume the existence of Emergency
      Service Routing Proxies (ESRPs) per country, state and city.

   Req-8:  The solution MUST consider that service boundaries for
      different emergency services may differ, but they overlap at the
      location of the caller.







Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


   Req-9:  Though the solution MAY add steps to the emergency call
      routing process described in [framework], these steps MUST NOT
      significantly increase call setup latency.  For example, the
      revised process MUST NOT include "trial-and-error" operations on
      its critical path, such as attempts at LbyR resolutions that may
      take time to time out.

   Req-10:  The solution MUST allow the end host to determine PSAP/ESRP
      URLs prior to the call, for all emergency services.

   Req-11:  The solution MUST allow UAs to discover at least their dial
      string ahead of the emergency call.

   Req-12:  The solution MUST have minimal impact on UAs.

   Req-13:  The solution MUST NOT interfere with the use of LoST for
      non-emergency services.

   Req-14:  Deleted

   Req-15:  Calls may reach a PSTN gateway, rather than the PSAP
      directly.


3.3.  Desirable Properties

   o  The solution MUST NOT shift effort(externality), i.e., the
      convenience of the location-hiding ISP MUST NOT impose a burden on
      user agents or non-hiding ISPs/IAPs and SHOULD NOT impose a burden
      on VSPs.

   o  The solution SHOULD minimize the impact on LoST, SIP conveyance
      [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance] and DHCP.

   o  The solution SHOULD NOT rely on DHCP for LoST configuration, as
      the information in the DHCP server provided by the ISP may not
      reach the UA, due to NATs.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document does not raise additional security consideration beyond
   those mentioned in [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps] and discussed in this



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


   document.


6.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank the following ECRIT working group members (in
   no particular order) for their contributions:

   o  Andrew Newton (andy@hxr.us)
   o  James Winterbottom (James.Winterbottom@andrew.com)
   o  Brian Rosen (br@brianrosen.net)
   o  Richard Barnes (rbarnes@bbn.com)
   o  Marc Linsner (mlinsner@cisco.com)
   o  Ted Hardie (hardie@qualcomm.com)


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps]
              Tschofenig, H. and H. Schulzrinne, "GEOPRIV Layer 7
              Location Configuration Protocol; Problem Statement and
              Requirements", draft-ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps-08 (work in
              progress), June 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance]
              Polk, J. and B. Rosen, "Location Conveyance for the
              Session Initiation Protocol",
              draft-ietf-sip-location-conveyance-10 (work in progress),
              September 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-framework]
              Rosen, B., Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., and A. Newton,
              "Framework for Emergency Calling using Internet
              Multimedia", draft-ietf-ecrit-framework-06 (work in
              progress), July 2008.

   [RFC5222]  Hardie, T., Newton, A., Schulzrinne, H., and H.
              Tschofenig, "LoST: A Location-to-Service Translation
              Protocol", RFC 5222, August 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements]



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


              Marshall, R., "Requirements for a Location-by-Reference
              Mechanism", draft-ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements-03 (work
              in progress), July 2008.

   [RFC5031]  Schulzrinne, H., "A Uniform Resource Name (URN) for
              Emergency and Other Well-Known Services", RFC 5031,
              January 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]
              Barnes, M., Winterbottom, J., Thomson, M., and B. Stark,
              "HTTP Enabled Location Delivery (HELD)",
              draft-ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery-09 (work in
              progress), September 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   US

   Phone: +1 212 939 7004
   Email: hgs+ecrit@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu


   Laura Liess
   Deutsche Telekom Networks
   Deutsche Telekom Allee 7
   Darmstadt, Hessen  64295
   Germany

   Phone:
   Email: Laura.Liess@t-systems.com
   URI:   http://www.telekom.de













Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Barbara Stark
   AT&T
   725 W Peachtree St, NE
   Atlanta, GA  30308
   USA

   Phone: +1 404 499 7026
   Email: barbara.stark@att.com


   Andres Kuett
   Skype


   Email: andres.kytt@skype.net

























Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Location Hiding Requirements          October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires April 15, 2009                [Page 10]


