


None                                                      P. Saint-Andre
Internet-Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended status: Standards Track                             K. Zeilenga
Expires: December 5, 2009                                  Isode Limited
                                                               J. Hodges
                                                                 NeuStar
                                                               R. Morgan
                                                               Internet2
                                                            June 3, 2009


   Best Practices for Checking of Server Identities in the Context of
                     Transport Layer Security (TLS)
                draft-saintandre-tls-server-id-check-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 5, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.



Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            TLS Server Identities                June 2009


Abstract

   This document specifies the how an entity establishing a TLS
   connection, or other PKI-based interaction, with a server should
   verify the server identity.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Server Identity Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     3.1.  Comparison of DNS Names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Comparison of IP Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  Comparison of Other subjectName Types . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6































Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            TLS Server Identities                June 2009


1.  Introduction

   Establishing a TLS-based connection [TLS] with a server, or any other
   sort of client-server PKI-based interaction, entails, on the part of
   the client, verifying the "server's identity" based upon information
   presented by the server in its certificate correlated with the
   information about the server ensconced in the Domain Name System
   (DNS).

   Presently, various Internet-Drafts utilizing TLS or prescribing PKI-
   based interactions, either prescribe their own server identity check,
   or reference [LDAP-AUTH] or its predecesor [LDAP-TLS]. [there may be
   other I-Ds referencing other specs that describe the equivalent of
   server identity checks]

   Converging our present understanding of this critical aspect of PKI-
   based interactions is desirable in that it will hopefully encourage
   more coherence in specifications and actual implementations thereof,
   as well as ease the burden of crafting new specifications because
   this aspect has been factored out and separately standardized.

   This document extracts the "server identity check" section from
   [LDAP-AUTH], with the goal of becoming a stand-alone BCP document
   appropriately referenceable by I-Ds and thus RFCs.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [TERMS].


3.  Server Identity Check

   In order to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks, the client MUST verify
   the server's identity (as presented in the server's Certificate
   message).  In this section, the client's understanding of the
   server's identity (typically the identity used to establish the
   transport connection) is called the "reference identity".

   The client determines the type (e.g., DNS name or IP address) of the
   reference identity and performs a comparison between the reference
   identity and each subjectAltName value of the corresponding type
   until a match is produced.  Once a match is produced, the server's
   identity has been verified, and the server identity check is
   complete.  Different subjectAltName types are matched in different
   ways.  Sections 3.1.3.1 - 3.1.3.3 explain how to compare values of



Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            TLS Server Identities                June 2009


   various subjectAltName types.

   The client may map the reference identity to a different type prior
   to performing a comparison.  Mappings may be performed for all
   available subjectAltName types to which the reference identity can be
   mapped; however, the reference identity should only be mapped to
   types for which the mapping is either inherently secure (e.g.,
   extracting the DNS name from a URI to compare with a subjectAltName
   of type dNSName) or for which the mapping is performed in a secure
   manner (e.g., using DNSSEC, or using user- or admin-configured host-
   to-address/address-to-host lookup tables).

   The server's identity may also be verified by comparing the reference
   identity to the Common Name (CN) [LDAP-SCHEMA] value in the leaf
   Relative Distinguished Name (RDN) of the subjectName field of the
   server's certificate.  This comparison is performed using the rules
   for comparison of DNS names in Section 3.1.3.1, below, with the
   exception that no wildcard matching is allowed.  Although the use of
   the Common Name value is existing practice, it is deprecated, and
   Certification Authorities are encouraged to provide subjectAltName
   values instead.  Note that the TLS implementation may represent DNs
   in certificates according to X.500 or other conventions.  For
   example, some X.500 implementations order the RDNs in a DN using a
   left-to-right (most significant to least significant) convention
   instead of LDAP's right-to-left convention.

   If the server identity check fails, user-oriented clients SHOULD
   either notify the user (clients may give the user the opportunity to
   continue with the LDAP session in this case) or close the transport
   connection and indicate that the server's identity is suspect.
   Automated clients SHOULD close the transport connection and then
   return or log an error indicating that the server's identity is
   suspect or both.

   Beyond the server identity check described in this section, clients
   should be prepared to do further checking to ensure that the server
   is authorized to provide the service it is requested to provide.  The
   client may need to make use of local policy information in making
   this determination.

3.1.  Comparison of DNS Names

   If the reference identity is an internationalized domain name,
   conforming implementations MUST convert it to the ASCII Compatible
   Encoding (ACE) format as specified in Section 4 of [IDNA] before
   comparison with subjectAltName values of type dNSName.  Specifically,
   conforming implementations MUST perform the conversion operation
   specified in Section 4 of RFC 3490 as follows:



Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            TLS Server Identities                June 2009


   o  in step 1, the domain name SHALL be considered a "stored string";
   o  in step 3, set the flag called "UseSTD3ASCIIRules";
   o  in step 4, process each label with the "ToASCII" operation; and
   o  in step 5, change all label separators to U+002E (full stop).

   After performing the "to-ASCII" conversion, the DNS labels and names
   MUST be compared for equality according to the rules specified in
   Section 3 of RFC3490.

   The '*' (ASCII 42) wildcard character is allowed in subjectAltName
   values of type dNSName, and then only as the left-most (least
   significant) DNS label in that value.  This wildcard matches any
   left-most DNS label in the server name.  That is, the subject
   *.example.com matches the server names a.example.com and
   b.example.com, but does not match example.com or a.b.example.com.

3.2.  Comparison of IP Addresses

   When the reference identity is an IP address, the identity MUST be
   converted to the "network byte order" octet string representation
   [IP] [IPv6].  For IP Version 4, as specified in RFC 791, the octet
   string will contain exactly four octets.  For IP Version 6, as
   specified in RFC 2460, the octet string will contain exactly sixteen
   octets.  This octet string is then compared against subjectAltName
   values of type iPAddress.  A match occurs if the reference identity
   octet string and value octet strings are identical.

3.3.  Comparison of Other subjectName Types

   Client implementations MAY support matching against subjectAltName
   values of other types as described in other documents.


4.  Security Considerations

   To follow.


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [IDNA]     Faltstrom, P., Hoffman, P., and A. Costello,
              "Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)",
              RFC 3490, March 2003.

   [IP]       Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              September 1981.



Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            TLS Server Identities                June 2009


   [IPv6]     Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [LDAP-AUTH]
              Harrison, R., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
              (LDAP): Authentication Methods and Security Mechanisms",
              RFC 4513, June 2006.

   [LDAP-SCHEMA]
              Sciberras, A., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
              (LDAP): Schema for User Applications", RFC 4519,
              June 2006.

   [TERMS]    Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [TLS]      Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

5.2.  Informative References

   [LDAP-TLS]
              Hodges, J., Morgan, R., and M. Wahl, "Lightweight
              Directory Access Protocol (v3): Extension for Transport
              Layer Security", RFC 2830, May 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   Peter Saint-Andre
   Cisco

   Email: psaintan@cisco.com


   Kurt D. Zeilenga
   Isode Limited

   Email: Kurt.Zeilenga@Isode.COM


   Jeff Hodges
   NeuStar

   Email: Jeff.Hodges@KingsMountain.com






Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            TLS Server Identities                June 2009


   RL 'Bob' Morgan
   UWashington/Internet2

   Email: rlmorgan@washington.edu















































Saint-Andre, et al.     Expires December 5, 2009                [Page 7]

