


Mobility Extensions                                            W. Haddad
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Informational                               G. Tsirtsis
Expires: August 28, 2008                                        Qualcomm
                                                                  B. Lim
                                                               Panasonic
                                                             S. Krishnan
                                                       Ericsson Research
                                                       February 25, 2008


                      Mobile IPv6 Residual Threats
               draft-haddad-mext-mip6-residual-threats-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 28, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).









Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


Abstract

   This memo aims to highlight specific residual threats in the Mobile
   IPv6 design.  These threats are inherited in the design of new
   mechanisms built on top of the mobility protocol, and are raising
   concerns regarding the amplitude of their potential impacts.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Residual Threats Associated with a Malicious Mobile Node . . .  5
     3.1.  Violating Trust between the Mobile Node and its Home
           Agent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Violating Trust between a Multihomed Mobile Node and
           its Home Agents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10




























Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


1.  Introduction

   The design of Mobile IPv6 protocol (described in [MIPv6]) did not
   address a set of specific threats for various reasons.  In fact,
   these residual threats were (rightly or not) not considered of equal
   importance than others which required immediate action.  However, as
   these threats are implicitely inherited in the design of new
   mechanisms built on top of MIPv6, their potential impact is raising
   some concerns.

   This memo aims to describe these residual threats and to motivate
   designers to take a fresh look at the reasoning behind leaving them
   in an unconvincing state and to address them in case it is needed.






































Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [TERM].














































Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


3.  Residual Threats Associated with a Malicious Mobile Node

3.1.  Violating Trust between the Mobile Node and its Home Agent

   The trust model that guided MIPv6 protocol design was based on two
   main assumptions.  The first one considers that the mobile node (MN)
   will always refrain from misusing the relationship with its home
   agent (HA).  It follows that the HA can always blindly accept any
   information sent by the MN.  Thus, the second assumption requests the
   HA to accept any new care-of address(es) (CoA(s)) claimed by the MN
   and sent in a valid binding update (BU) message(s).

   The justification behind the first assumption is the tracing ability
   that the HA is supposed to always acquire over the MN.  In other
   words, the MN is always supposed to fear being traced -as the target
   is also supposed to complain- thus, refrain from misusing a mutual
   trust which can appear now as being "imposed" on both nodes.  We
   argue that such assumption is too naive when applied in the real
   world as it is simply impossible to back it with a solid proof that
   confirm the existence of enough anxiety to deter all potential
   attackers from launching malicious act in such particular context.

   In fact, the lack of any reachability test between the MN and its HA,
   prior to or after sending a BU message, enables a malicious MN to
   launch a network flooding attack against any potential target by
   simply claiming a new CoA which is topologically located within the
   targeted network.  This is especially possible when only the
   bidirectional tunneling (BT) mode is used and/or when the enhanced
   route optimization mode (described in [ERO]) is in use.  Without
   testing the new CoA reachability, the HA will simply re-route data
   packets to the new CoA, i.e., targeted network, and the MN can keep
   sending acknowledgment messages to all its CN(s) in order to maintain
   the attack as long as needed.  Note that this type of attack is not
   new as it has been well analyzed in [MROD] and its effects on the
   targeted network are mitigated by imposing a periodic return
   routability procedure.

   Moreover, as MIPv6 is acquiring many extensions, such attack on the
   HA side may get amplified with the MN's ability to register multiple
   CoAs with the HA.  Such scenario is better described in [Multih_Sec].

3.2.  Violating Trust between a Multihomed Mobile Node and its Home
      Agents

   Multiple Care-of Address registration (MCoA) protocol (described in
   [MCoA]) extends the MIPv6 protocol to enable a multi-interface MN to
   register multiple CoAs at its HA.  The fundamental difference between
   MIPv6 and MCoA is that for a given home address (HoA) in MIPv6, the



Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


   MN is only able to bind a single 'fake' CoA.  Hence, this implies
   that once a malicious MN binds the 'fake' CoA at HA, that MN loses
   its ability to use that HoA for communication.  However, in MCoA,
   with the ability to bind several CoAs to a single HoA, a malicious MN
   could bind a mixture of 'real' and 'fake' CoAs.  The MN can still use
   the HoA for communication by directing control traffic towards its
   'real' CoA.

   Likewise in the trust model described in [MROD] between the MN and
   its HA, it permits the HA to 'blindly' accept any binding that the MN
   makes.  This trust relationship is further strengthened when one
   assume that ingress filtering is being used such that when the HA
   receives a BU message from the MN stating its CoA as the source
   address, the HA trusts that the incoming packets do indeed originate
   from the specified source address.  In addition, the HA also trusts
   the routing infrastructure that packets forwarded by the HA would be
   sent to the intended destination.  This assumption makes it possible
   for the HA to somewhat trust the MN if the MN sends the binding of
   each CoA individually (e.g. one BU message per CoA).

   However, such a trust is no longer valid when the MN utilizes a
   single BU message to register its multiple CoAs at its HA.  This
   technique is explained in [MCoA] with the aim of introducing some
   optimization when registering multiple CoAs for a MN.  Such
   optimization technique is useful in scenarios when resources (e.g.
   bandwidth) are scarce on some of the MN's interfaces, since it allows
   the MN to send a BU message containing multiple CoAs to its HA from
   an interface that does not have such resource constraint.  Moreover,
   in MIPv6, the use of the alternate CoA option permits the MN to
   achieve the same effect of registering a CoA for another interface
   via a specific interface.  This introduces the risk of having 'fake'
   CoAs registered at the HA and compromise the security of the network.
   If these 'fake' CoAs are IP addresses of other MNs, it is possible
   for the malicious MN to instruct the HA to re-direct traffic towards
   these 'fake' CoAs, thereby flooding these MNs with useless traffic.

   With such a threat towards the network, some mechanism might be need
   in order for the HA to verify the CoA for the MN prior to binding or
   using them for packet routing.












Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


4.  Security Considerations

   This document is a security analysis of some specific parts in the
   MIPv6 protocol.  It describes residual threats in the protocol which
   may not appear necessarily new for the reader.  It is worth noting in
   this context that most of the above threats can be mitigated by
   ingress filtering.  However, the particular case where a malicious
   mobile node provides its HA with fake CoA(s) configured with the same
   subnet prefix as the one it is using cannot be countered by ingress
   filtering and requires additional mechanisms to block it.









































Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [ERO]      Vogt, C., Arkko, J., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route
              Optimization for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, June 2006.

   [MIPv6]    Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              for IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [MROD]     Nikander, P., Arkko, J., Aura, T., and E. Nordmark,
              "Mobile IPv6 version 6 Route Optimization Security Design
              Background", RFC 4225, December 2005.

   [TERM]     Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, BCP , March 1997.

5.2.  Informative References

   [MCoA]     Wakikawa, R., Ernst, T., Nagami, K., and V. Devarapalli,
              "Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration", Internet
              Draft, draft-ietf-monami6-multiplecoa-05.txt,
              January 2008.

   [Multih_Sec]
              Lim, B., Ng, C., and K. Aso, "Verification of Care-of
              Addresses in Multiple Bindings Registration", Internet
              Draft, draft-lim-mext-multiple-coa-verify-00.txt,
              November 2007.






















Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Wassim Haddad

   Email: wmhaddad@gmail.com


   Georges Tsirtsis
   Qualcomm


   Phone: +908 443 8174
   Email: tsirtsis@qualcomm.com


   Benjamin Lim
   Panasonic Singapore Laboratories Pte Ltd
   Blk 1022 Tai Seng Ave #06-3530
   Tai Seng Industrial Estate
   Singapore 534415

   Phone: +65 65505478
   Email: benjamin.limck@sg.panasonic.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson Research
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900
   Email: Suresh.Krishnan@ericsson.com


















Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           MIPv6 Residual Threats            February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Haddad, et al.           Expires August 28, 2008               [Page 10]

