


Network Working Group                                         RFC Editor
Internet-Draft                                                   USC/ISI
Intended status: Informational                           August 24, 2007
Expires: February 25, 2008


              RFC Editor Proposal for Handling RFC Errata
                   draft-rfc-editor-errata-process-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 25, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document describes the current RFC Editor procedures for
   handling the submission, verification, and posting of errata for the
   RFC Series, and then proposes a more efficient and transparent
   process.  The main concepts are (1) distributing the responsibility
   for verification to the appropriate organization or person for each
   RFC stream, and (2) using a Web portal to automate the book-keeping
   for handling errata.




RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Background on RFC Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Current Errata Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Proposed Errata Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  Reporting Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Verifying Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.3.  Posting Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.4.  Errata Announcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.5.  Role of the RFC Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Possibilities for Posting Errata  . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12

































RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


1.  Introduction

   This document proposes significant changes in the current procedures
   and mechanisms for handling RFC errata, to improve efficiency and
   accountability of errata processing.  The main concepts are (1)
   distributing responsibility for errata verification to the
   appropriate body or person for each RFC stream, and (2) using a Web
   portal to automate the book-keeping task for verifying and posting
   errata.  The RFC Editor is seeking comments from the IETF community
   on the proposed procedure.

   The proposed errata process assumes the organization of RFC
   publication into four document streams [RFC4844]: (1) the IETF
   stream, which includes both working group and individual submissions,
   (2) the IAB stream, (3) the IRTF stream, and (4) the Independent
   Submission stream.  We propose that personnel representing each
   stream be responsible for verifying the errata reported for that
   stream's RFCs.  In particular, we propose that one or more stream-
   specific parties (SSPs) be designated with responsibility for
   verifying and posting errata for each stream.  At the organizational
   level, the SSPs might be:

      o IESG for IETF documents

      o IAB for IAB documents

      o IRSG for IRTF documents

      o RFC Editor/Editorial Board for Independent Submissions

1.1.  Background on RFC Errata

   The RFC Editor began to collect and post RFC errata in 2000.  The
   idea was to discourage readers from repeatedly pointing out the same
   typos in published RFCs.  This evolved into the current errata
   verification and posting process, which is a manually operated,
   email-based task.

   Unfortunately, our understanding of the errata problem was wrong in
   several ways.  The number of errors reported turned out to be
   significantly greater than anticipated, and the process of vetting
   and posting required more human resources.

   Another issue with errata is that some of the reported errors are not
   simply editorial, but rather correct technical contents of RFCs.  A
   savvy implementer of the specification can often, but not always,
   figure out what was intended by the RFC as published, but technical
   errors should be announced somehow.  Furthermore, posting technical



RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


   errata for Standards Track documents should always involve the IESG,
   as a matter of correct process.  Technical errata may require much
   review and discussion among the author(s), Area Directors, and other
   interested parties.

   We note that allowing technical errata is a slippery slope: there may
   be a temptation to use errata to "fix" protocol design errors, rather
   than publishing new RFCs that update the erroneous documents.  In
   general, an erratum is intended to report an error in a document,
   rather than an error in the design of the protocol or other entity
   defined in the document, but this distinction may be too imprecise to
   avoid hard choices.  For the IETF stream, these choices should be
   made by the IESG, not the RFC Editor.

   In summary, errata have become a much larger, more complex, and more
   important issue than they were originally.  This proposal attempts to
   address these problems.

1.2.  Current Errata Process

   The following is a summary of the current RFC Editor errata
   verification and posting process.  The RFC Editor must:

   o  Review email and relevant RFCs to ensure that the reported errata
      are real.

   o  Disentangle multiple errors reported in one message.

   o  Check that each error has not already been posted.

   o  Attempt to determine whether the errata are editorial or
      technical.

   o  Move the errata report message(s) to the pending folder.

   o  Forward each erratum report to the author(s) of the published RFC.

   o  Track bounce messages (contact information for authors is often
      out of date) and try to find current contact information.

   o  Forward the message to the relevant ADs if we are unable to find
      current author contact information.

   o  Track follow-up email.

   o  Figure out how to post when reporters/authors do not submit errata
      in the original/new format.  This is often a problem when
      reporters submit email claiming an error, but do not offer



RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


      corrective text.

   o  Post verified errata and discard rejected errata.

   Currently, posting an erratum means that it is:

   1.  Available from the RFC errata page:
       http://www.rfc-editor.org/errata.html.

   2.  Linked to from the results of the RFC search engine:
       http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfcsearch.html.

   3.  Linked to from some HTML versions of the RFC.  For example, see
       http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119.

   There are currently four possible states for processing an erratum:

   1.  Reported - the erratum has been reported but is unverified.

   2.  Verified - the erratum has been edited as necessary and verified.

   3.  Posted - the erratum has been made public through the channels
       listed above.  (See also Appendix A).

   4.  Rejected - The reported erratum was redundant or incorrect and
       has been discarded.

   During 2006, the RFC Editor was understaffed for the growing load of
   RFCs to be published (see
   http://www.rfc-editor.org/num_rfc_year.html).  To catch up, the RFC
   Editor suspended all activities not directly related to RFC
   publication.  As a result, more than a year's worth of errata reports
   have not been verified or posted.  As resources allowed, the RFC
   Editor provided the following interim measures:

   1.  Posting on the RFC Editor Web site an unlinked mailbox text file
       (mbox format) of all errata-related email that we received (ftp:/
       /ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/pending-errata/pending-errata.msgs).

   2.  For those few errata that we did add to the errata database, mark
       them UNVERIFIED.  We believe that the proposed Web portal will
       significantly speed catching up on these past reports as well as
       handle future reports more efficiently.








RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


2.  Proposed Errata Process

   We propose that a Web application ("portal") be used to manage and
   automate the reporting, verifying, and posting of errata.  Such a Web
   portal will lead to a more uniform reporting process, ease
   communication among the parties responsible for verification, and
   automate the posting of verified errata.

   The Web portal will automatically post an erratum when it is marked
   verified, so there will be just three possible states for an erratum
   under this proposal:

   1.  Reported - the erratum has been reported but is unverified.

   2.  Verified - the erratum has been edited as necessary, verified,
       and posted.

   3.  Rejected - The erratum was redundant or incorrect and has been
       discarded.  These will not be retained.

   This Web interface will support the following three functions:

   1.  Retrieve -- display all posted errata for a specific RFC number.

   2.  Report -- report a new erratum, as described below.

   3.  Verify/Edit -- used by an SSP to edit, verify, and post an
       erratum.

   The following sections describe the steps in the proposed process.

2.1.  Reporting Errata

   A member of the Internet community (the "reporter") would navigate to
   the errata Report Web page and enter the RFC number of the document
   containing the error.  All earlier (i.e., reported and verified)
   errata for that RFC would be displayed, and the reporter would be
   asked to check that the new erratum was not already posted.  This
   should help prevent multiple reports of the same error.












RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


   The user would then report the erratum using a Web form to create a
   report record in the RFC Erratum database.  This report record may be
   augmented by information drawn from the primary RFC Editor database
   or supplied by the SSP.  We envision that an erratum report record
   might include the following fields:

             *RFC #
             *Reporter name
             *Reporter email address
              Report date
             *Type [editorial, technical]
              Section #
             *Original text
             *Corrected text
              Notes/Rationale

              Document stream for RFC
              Internet Draft file name (when available)
              Area (for IETF stream)
              Working Group name (if group is still active)
              Category ("status") of RFC
              SSP Identity


        * indicates information required of reporter

   The report would trigger an email notification message to the
   appropriate SSP, to the RFC author(s), and to the RFC Editor.  The
   SSP could forward the notification email further; for example, an
   Area Director might forward it to the chair of the responsible
   working group, if it still exists.

   Generally, we would want the reporter to enter a new erratum using
   the Original and Corrected Text fields.  However, there should also
   be a free-text Notes/Rationale field, for those errata that cannot
   easily be put into the old/new format.  For example, the Notes field
   could be used to report a global error without having to specify each
   occurrence:

      "Throughout the text, references to the Unicode character g-clef
      should be represented as 'g-clef U+1D11E F0 9D 84 9E'."

   The Report page might allow a small number of errors (e.g., 4) in the
   same RFC to be submitted at the same time, using the Original/
   Corrected form.  By having the user separate the errata entries, the
   SSP should have an easier time verifying each entry.  We also hope
   that this will encourage users to submit only the most valuable
   errata.



RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


   In the case of early RFCs for which the RFC Editor does not have
   associated stream or area information, the portal will send the
   initial email to the RFC Editor and the authors (whose contact
   information is likely out of date; see below).  The RFC Editor will
   track down verifiers (perhaps by determining an appropriate SSP and
   seeking guidance) or verify the report, if possible.

   When author email addresses are out of date, the RFC Editor could
   forward the bounce messages to the SSP, who would then have the
   option of seeking current author contact information or relying on
   other individuals with knowledge of the subject matter.

   The reporter would be asked to make a judgment on the errata type --
   technical vs. editorial.  If the reporter has both editorial and
   technical errors in the same RFC, the two classes of errata must be
   entered as separate reports.  This initial classification should be
   very useful to the SSP; for example, it might allow technical errata
   to be processed with higher priority than editorial errata.  It would
   also allow the RFC Editor to monitor editorial errata to note
   frequent editorial errors, possibly leading to improvements in the
   editorial process.

   We expect that the reporter will usually make the right technical/
   editorial classification, with the aid of published guidelines.
   However, in case of mis-classification, the SSP or the RFC Editor
   would be able to change the initial classification.

2.2.  Verifying Errata

   When the reporter clicked SUBMIT on the Report page, a notification
   message would be sent to the relevant SSP and the authors.  Including
   them all as addressees in one message would facilitate cooperation in
   verifying the error.

   The SSP and the authors would determine the validity of the reported
   erratum, by whatever procedure the SSP or the stream owner
   determines.  The RFC Editor would not normally track the verification
   process.  The SSP, not the author(s) or the RFC Editor, would have
   final responsibility for verifying or rejecting each report.  This
   should avoid a great deal of complexity and confusion.

   The SSP identity would be added to the record, and the SSP would have
   a login account on the errata portal to edit her/his errata records
   as necessary.  The SSP would be provided with a check screen that
   showed the entry as it will be displayed when it is posted.

   The Notes/Rationale field would allow users to submit information in
   any fashion they like, so there is a possibility of multiple errors



RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


   being reported in this field.  The SSP would be able to edit the
   report record to split it into multiple records to maintain one
   record per erratum (for example, to handle the case where some
   reported errors are accepted and some are rejected).

   Based on experience, we know that some errata reports will require
   significant email discussion between the reporter and the author(s)
   and/or SSPs (in particular, the IESG) before the final decision on a
   record can be made.  The final outcome will be captured in the errata
   entry, but any controversy or explanatory material could be recorded
   in the Notes/Rationale section.

2.3.  Posting Errata

   A logged-in SSP can use the Web portal to mark the errata as verified
   or rejected.  If verified, the errata would be posted; if rejected,
   the errata would be discarded.  In either case, the portal would send
   a notification message to the reporter, the SSP, the authors, and the
   RFC Editor.

   It sometimes happens that there are errata for errata, i.e., earlier
   postings must be altered.  In this case, the RFC Editor must be able
   to do the update as requested by an SSP or to grant an SSP temporary
   write access to the record to be updated.

   We propose to continue posting errata as described in Section 1.2.
   However, there are other possibilities for errata posting that should
   be considered by the community; see Appendix A.

2.4.  Errata Announcements

   The RFC Editor would propose to announce verified errata postings to
   the rfc-distribution list.  If the SSP felt the errata was important
   enough, s/he might want to submit a note to the ietf-announce list.
   However, we do not believe it is necessary to inundate the ietf-
   announce list with mail each time an errata is verified, rejected, or
   altered.

2.5.  Role of the RFC Editor

   The role of the RFC Editor in errata processing would be to:

   1.  Operate the Web portal.

   2.  Maintain the Errata Database.

   3.  Make changes in previously posted errata at the request of the
       corresponding SSP, or give the SSP temporary write access to the



RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


       record.

   4.  Act as SSP for Independent Submissions.

   5.  Send nudge messages (hopefully, automatically) to SSPs for errata
       that have been in the Reported stage for a very long time.


3.  Transition

   There are currently approximately 200 unverified, unposted errata
   entries captured in email messages.  If and when there is consensus
   on the general procedure defined here, the RFC Editor can sort the
   pending reports by stream and pass them to the SSPs for further
   processing.


4.  Security Considerations

   It will be necessary to have access control for editing and posting
   errata reports.  A logged-in SSP would be able to edit and/or post
   any pending record in the stream that s/he "owned".  However, we
   propose that once the SSP has clicked on "Verify and Post" and the
   record entry has been committed to the errata database, the SSP would
   lose write access to it.  This is a safety feature to prevent
   inadvertent or malicious changes to the database, even if the
   passwords for some SSP logins may become fairly widely known.
   However, the RFC Editor would always have write access to posted
   entries and could make later changes when necessary.


5.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations for this document.


6.  Informative References

   [RFC4844]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC
              Series and RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.











RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


Appendix A.  Possibilities for Posting Errata

   Choosing any of these possibilities for posting errata should be
   decided by the IETF community and its governing bodies.

   1.  Brian Carpenter has suggested an approach similar to that used by
       W3C: Add a URL to every published RFC that points to its errata
       (if any).

         For W3C examples, see:

            http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xmlschema-2-20041028/ and

            http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xml-names-20060816

         They include the text:

            "Please refer to the <errata> for this document, which may
             include some normative corrections."

         where <errata> is a hyperlink to the list of all errata or a
         page that says:

            "There are no errata to this document yet."

       Similarly, a URL could be added to all (future) RFCs pointing to
       where the relevant errata are posted.

   2.  Another possibility would be to add new errata files to the RFC
       repository, e.g., with names of the form: rfcnnnn.err.txt.  Such
       a file would contain all the errata for the corresponding RFC.

   3.  As mentioned in Section 1.2, there are HTML versions of RFCs with
       errata links; these are currently hosted by tools.ietf.org, but
       they could be made available on the RFC Editor Web site as well.


Author's Address

   RFC Editor
   USC/ISI
   4676 Admiralty Way
   Marina del Rey, CA  90292
   USA

   Email: rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org





RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





RFC Editor              Expires February 25, 2008              [Page 12]


