Networking Working Group                                      A. Brandt 
Internet Draft                                             Zensys, Inc. 
Intended status: Informational                                 G. Porcu 
Expires: January 2009                                    Telecom Italia 
                                                          July 14, 2008 
 
                                      
    Home Automation Routing Requirement in Low Power and Lossy Networks 
                   draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-02 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

Abstract 

   This document presents home control and automation application 
   specific requirements for ROuting in Low power and Lossy networks 
   (ROLL). In a modern home, a high number of wireless devices are used 
   for a wide set of purposes. Examples include lighting control, 
   heating control, sensors, leak detectors, healthcare systems and 
   advanced remote controls. Because such devices only cover a limited 
 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   radio range, multi-hop routing is often required. The aim of this 
   document is to specify the routing requirements for networks 
   comprising such constrained devices in a home network environment.  

Requirements Language 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Terminology....................................................3 
   2. Introduction...................................................3 
   3. Home automation applications...................................4 
      3.1. Turning off the house when leaving........................4 
      3.2. Energy conservation and optimizing energy consumption.....5 
      3.3. Moving a remote control around............................5 
      3.4. Adding a new lamp module to the system....................6 
      3.5. Controlling battery operated window shades................6 
      3.6. Remote video surveillance.................................6 
      3.7. Healthcare................................................7 
         3.7.1. At-home health reporting.............................7 
         3.7.2. At-home health monitoring............................8 
         3.7.3. Healthcare routing considerations....................8 
      3.8. Alarm systems.............................................8 
      3.9. Battery-powered devices...................................9 
   4. Unique requirements of home automation applications............9 
      4.1. Support of groupcast......................................9 
      4.2. Constraint-based Routing.................................10 
      4.3. Support of Mobility......................................10 
      4.4. Support of Periodical Scanning...........................11 
      4.5. Scalability..............................................11 
      4.6. Convergence Time.........................................11 
      4.7. Manageability............................................12 
   5. Traffic Pattern...............................................12 
   6. Open issues...................................................13 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................13 
   8. IANA Considerations...........................................13 
   9. Acknowledgments...............................................13 
   10. References...................................................14 
      10.1. Normative References....................................14 
      10.2. Informative References..................................14 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................15 
    

 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

1. Terminology 

   ROLL:        ROuting in Low-power and Lossy networks 

   ROLL device:  A ROLL network node with constrained CPU and memory 
                 resources; potentially constrained power resources. 

   Access Point: The access point is an infrastructure device that 
                 connects the low power and lossy network system to the 
                 Internet, possibly via a customer premises local area 
                 network (LAN). 

   LAN:         Local Area Network. 

   PAN:         Personal Area Network. 
                 A geographically limited wireless network based on 
                 e.g. 802.15.4 or Z-Wave radio. 

   Channel:      Radio frequency band used to transmit a modulated 
                 signal carrying packets. 

   Downstream:   Data direction traveling from a Local Area Network 
                 (LAN) to a Personal Area Network (PAN) device. 

   Upstream:     Data direction traveling from a PAN to a LAN device. 

   Sensor:      A PAN device that measures data and/or detects an 
                 event. 

    

2. Introduction 

   This document presents the home control and automation application 
   specific requirements for Routing in Low power and Lossy Networks 
   (ROLL). In a modern home, a high number of wireless devices are used 
   for a wide set of purposes. Examples include lighting control 
   modules, heating control panels, light sensors, temperature sensors, 
   gas/water leak detectors, motion detectors, video surveillance, 
   healthcare systems and advanced remote controls. Basic home control 
   modules such as wall switches and plug-in modules may be turned into 
   an advanced home automation solution via the use of an IP-enabled 
   application responding to events generated by wall switches, motion 
   sensors, light sensors, rain sensors, and so on. 

   Because such devices only cover a limited radio range, multi-hop 
   routing is often required. These devices are usually highly 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   constrained in term of resources such as battery and memory and 
   operate in unstable environments. Persons moving around in a house, 
   opening or closing a door or starting a microwave oven affect the 
   reception of weak radio signals. Reflection and absorption may cause 
   a reliable radio link to turn unreliable for a period of time and 
   then being reusable again, thus the term "lossy". 

   Unlike other categories of PANs, the connected home area is very much 
   consumer-oriented. The implications on network nodes in this aspect, 
   is that devices are very cost sensitive, which leads to resource-
   constrained environments having slow CPUs and small memory 
   footprints. At the same time, nodes have to be physically small which 
   puts a limit to the physical size of the battery; and thus, the 
   battery capacity. As a result, it is common for low-power sensor-
   style nodes to shut down radio and CPU resources for most of the 
   time. Often, the radio uses the same power for listening as for 
   transmitting. 

   Section 3 describes a few typical use cases for home automation 
   applications. Section 4 discusses the routing requirements for 
   networks comprising such constrained devices in a home network 
   environment. These requirements may be overlapping requirements 
   derived from other application-specific requirements. 

3. Home automation applications 

   Home automation applications represent a special segment of networked 
   wireless devices with its unique set of requirements. To facilitate 
   the requirements discussion in Section 4, this section lists a few 
   typical use cases of home automation applications. New applications 
   are being developed at a high pace and this section does not mean to 
   be exhaustive. Most home automation applications tend to be running 
   some kind of command/response protocol. The command may come from 
   several places. For instance a lamp may be turned on, not only be a 
   wall switch but also from a movement sensor. 

3.1. Turning off the house when leaving 

   Using the direct analogy to an electronic car key, a house owner may 
   activate the "leaving home" function from an electronic house key, 
   mobile phone, etc. For the sake of visual impression, all lights 
   should turn off at the same time. At least, it should appear to 
   happen at the same time. A well-known problem in wireless home 
   automation is the "popcorn effect": Lamps are turned on one at a 
   time, at a rate so slow that it is clearly visible. Some existing 
   home automation solutions use a clever mix of a "subnet groupcast" 

 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   message with no acknowledgement and no forwarding before sending 
   acknowledged singlecast messages to each lighting device. 

   The controller forms the groups and decides which nodes should 
   receive "turn-off" or "turn-on" requests. 

3.2. Energy conservation and optimizing energy consumption 

   Parts of the world using air conditioning may let shades go down and 
   turn off the AC device when leaving home. Air conditioning may start 
   by timer or via motion sensor when the owner returns home. The owner 
   may even activate the air conditioning via cell phone before getting 
   home. 

   Geographical areas using central heating may turn off heating when 
   not at home and use a reduced temperature during night time. 

   The power grid may experience periods where more wind-generated power 
   is produced than is needed. Typically this may happen during night 
   hours. The washing machine and dish washer may just as well work 
   while power is cheap. The electric car should also charge its 
   batteries on cheap power. 

   In periods where electricity demands exceed available supply, 
   appliances such as air conditioning, climate control systems, washing 
   machines etc. can be turned off to avoid overloading the power grid. 
   Wireless remote control of the household appliances is well-suited 
   for this application. The start/stop decision for the appliances can 
   be regulated by dynamic power pricing information obtained from the 
   electricity utility companies. Moreover, in order to achieve 
   effective electricity savings, the energy monitoring application 
   running on the Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) must guarantee that the 
   power consumption of the ROLL devices is much lower than that of the 
   appliance itself. 

   Most of these applications are mains powered and are thus ideal for 
   providing reliable, always-on routing resources. Battery-powered 
   nodes, by comparison, are constrained routing resources and may only 
   provide reliable routing under some circumstances.  

3.3. Moving a remote control around 

   A remote control is a typical example of a mobile device in a home 
   automation network. An advanced remote control may be used for 
   dimming the light in the dining room while eating and later on, 
   turning up the music while doing the dishes in the kitchen. Reaction 
   must appear to be instant (within a few hundred milliseconds) even 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   when the remote control has moved to a new location. The remote 
   control may be communicating to either a central home automation 
   controller or directly to the lamps and the media center. 

3.4. Adding a new lamp module to the system 

   Small-size, low-cost modules may have no user interface except for a 
   single button. Thus, an automated inclusion process is needed for 
   controllers to find new modules. Inclusion covers the detection of 
   neighbors and assignment of a unique node ID. Inclusion should be 
   completed within a few seconds. 

   Distribution of unique addresses is usually performed by a central 
   controller. In this case, it must be possible to route the inclusion 
   request from the joining node to the central controller even before 
   the joining node is assigned a unique address. 

3.5. Controlling battery operated window shades 

   In consumer premises, window shades are often battery-powered as 
   there is no access to mains power over the windows. For battery 
   conservation purposes, the receiver is sleeping most of the time. A 
   home automation controller sending commands to window shades via ROLL 
   devices will have no problems delivering the packet to the router, 
   but the router may have to wait for some time before the command can 
   be delivered to the window shades if the receiver is sleeping; e.g. 
   up to 250ms. 

3.6. Remote video surveillance 

   Remote video surveillance is a fairly classic application for Home 
   networking providing the ability for the end user to get a video 
   stream from a Web Cam reached via the Internet, which can be 
   triggered by the end-user that has received an alarm from a movement 
   sensor or smoke detector - or the user simply wants to check the home 
   status via video. 
   Note that in the former case, more than likely, there will be a form 
   of inter-device communication: indeed, upon detecting some movement 
   in the home, the movement sensor may send a request to the light 
   controller to turn-on the lights, to the Web Cam to start a video 
   stream that would then be directed to the end user (cell phone, PDA) 
   via the Internet. 
   By contrast with other applications, e.g. industrial sensors where 
   data would mainly be originated by sensor to a sink and vice versa, 
   this scenario implicates a direct inter-device communication between 
   ROLL devices. 

 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

3.7. Healthcare 

   By adding communication capability to devices, patients and elderly 
   citizens may be able to do simple measurements at home. Thanks to 
   online devices, a doctor can keep an eye on the patient's health and 
   receive warnings if a new trend is discovered by automated filters.  

   Fine-grained daily measurements presented in proper ways may allow 
   the doctor to establish a more precise diagnosis. 

   Such applications may be realized as wearable products which 
   frequently do a measurement and automatically deliver the result to a 
   data sink locally or over the Internet. 

   Applications falling in this category are referred to as at-home 
   health reporting. Whether measurements are done in a fixed interval 
   or if they are manually activated, they leave all processing to the 
   receiving data sink. 

   A more active category of applications may send an alarm if some 
   alarm condition is triggered. This category of applications is 
   referred to as at-home health monitoring. Measurements are 
   interpreted in the device and may cause reporting of an event if an 
   alarm is triggered. 

   Many implementations may overlap both categories. 

3.7.1. At-home health reporting 

   Applications might include: 

   o  Temperature 

   o  Weight 

   o  Blood pressure 

   o  Insulin level 

   Measurements may be stored for long term statistics. At the same 
   time, a critically high blood pressure may cause the generation of an 
   alarm report. Refer to 3.7.2.  

   To avoid a high number of request messages, nodes may be configured 
   to autonomously do a measurement and send a report in intervals. 


 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

3.7.2. At-home health monitoring 

   An alarm event may become active e.g. if the measured blood pressure 
   exceeds a threshold or if a person falls to the ground. 

   Applications might include: 

   o  Temperature 

   o  Weight 

   o  Blood pressure 

   o  Insulin level 

   o  Electrocardiogram (ECG) 

   o  Position tracker 

3.7.3. Healthcare routing considerations 

   From a ROLL perspective, all the above-mentioned applications may run 
   on battery. They may also be portable and therefore need to locate a 
   new neighbor router on a frequent basis. 
   Not being powered most of the time, the nodes should not be used as 
   routing nodes. However, sleeping, battery-powered nodes may be 
   involved in routing. Examples include cases where a person falls 
   during a power blackout. In that case it may be that no mains-powered 
   routers are available for forwarding the alarm message to a (battery-
   backed) internet gateway located out of direct range. 

   Delivery of measurement data has a more relaxed requirement for route 
   discovery time compared to a remote control. On the other hand, it is 
   critical that a "person fell" alarm is actually delivered in the end. 

3.8. Alarm systems 

   A home security alarm system is comprised of various devices like 
   vibration detectors, fire or carbon monoxide detection system, door 
   or window contacts, glass-break detector, presence sensor, panic 
   button, home security key. 

   Some smoke alarms are battery powered and at the same time mounted in 
   a high place. Battery-powered safety devices should only be used for 
   routing if no other alternatives exist to avoid draining the battery. 
   A smoke alarm with a drained battery does not provide a lot of 

 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   safety. Also, it may be inconvenient to exchange battery in a smoke 
   alarm.  

   Alarm system applications may have both a synchronous and an 
   asynchronous behavior; i.e. they may be periodically queried by a 
   central control application (e.g. for a periodical refreshment of the 
   network state), or send a message to the control application on their 
   own initiative basing upon the status of the environment they 
   monitor. 

   When a node (or a group of nodes) identifies a risk situation (e.g. 
   intrusion, smoke, fire), it sends an alarm message to the control 
   centre that could autonomously forward it via Internet or interact 
   with the WSN (e.g. trying to obtain more detailed information or 
   asking to other nodes close to the alarm event).  Alarm messages 
   have, obviously, strict low-latency requirements. 

   Finally, routing via battery-powered nodes may be very slowly 
   reacting if the nodes are sleeping most of the time (they could 
   appear unresponsive to the alarm detection). To ensure fast message 
   delivery and avoid battery drain, routing should be avoided via this 
   category of devices. 

3.9. Battery-powered devices 

   For convenience and low operational costs, power consumption of 
   consumer products must be kept at a very low level to achieve a long 
   battery lifetime. One implication of this fact is that RAM memory is 
   limited and it may even be powered down; leaving only a few 100 bytes 
   of RAM alive during the sleep phase. 

   The use of battery powered devices reduces installation costs and 
   does enable installation of devices even where main power lines are 
   not available. On the other hand, in order to be cost effective and 
   efficient, the devices have to maximize the sleep phase with a duty 
   cycle lower than 10%. 

4. Unique requirements of home automation applications 

   Home automation applications have a number of specific requirements 
   related to the set of home networking applications and the perceived 
   operation of the system. 

4.1. Support of groupcast 

   Groupcast, in the context of home automation, is defined as the 
   ability to simultaneously transmit a message to a group of recipients 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   without prior interaction with the group members (i.e. group setup). 
   A use-case for groupcast is given in Section 3.1.  

   Broadcast and groupcast in home automation MAY be used to deliver the 
   illusion that all recipients respond simultaneously. Distant 
   recipients out of direct range may not react to the (unacknowledged) 
   groupcast.  Acknowledged unicast delivery MUST be used subsequently. 

   The support of unicast, groupcast and broadcast also has an 
   implication on the addressing scheme and are outside the scope of 
   this document that focuses on the routing requirements aspects. 

   It MUST be to possible to address a group of receivers known by the 
   sender even if the receivers do not know that they have been grouped 
   by the sender. 

4.2. Constraint-based Routing 

   Simple battery-powered nodes such as movement sensors on garage doors 
   and rain meters may not be able to assist in routing. Depending on 
   the node type, the node never listens at all, listens rarely or makes 
   contact on demand to a pre-configured target node. Attempting to 
   communicate to such nodes may require long time before getting a 
   response. 

   Other battery-powered nodes may have the capability to participate in 
   routing. The routing protocol should either share the load between 
   nodes to preserve battery or only route via mains-powered nodes if 
   possible. The most reliable routing resource may be a battery-backed, 
   mains-powered smoke alarm. 

   The routing protocol MUST support constraint-based routing taking 
   into account node properties (CPU, memory, level of energy, sleep 
   intervals, safety/convenience of changing battery). 

4.3. Support of Mobility 

   In a home environment, although the majority of devices are fixed 
   devices, there is still a variety of mobile devices: for example a 
   multi-purpose remote control is likely to move. Another example of 
   mobile devices is wearable healthcare devices. 

   While healthcare devices delivering measurement results can tolerate 
   route discovery times measured in seconds, a remote control appears 
   unresponsive if using more than 0.5 seconds to e.g. pause the music. 


 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   While, in theory, all battery-powered devices and mains-powered plug-
   in modules may be moved, the predominant case is that the sending 
   node has moved while the rest of the network has not changed. 

   The routing protocol MUST provide mobility with convergence time 
   below 0.5 second if only the sender has moved. 

   A non-responsive node can either be caused by 1) a failure in the 
   node, 2) a failed link on the path to the node or 3) a moved node. In 
   the first two cases, the node can be expected to reappear at roughly 
   the same location in the network, whereas it can return anywhere in 
   the network in the latter case. The search strategy in the routing 
   protocol will behave differently depending on this expectation. The 
   routing protocol SHOULD make use of the fact that if not being able 
   to deliver a packet, it is most likely that the sending node moved; 
   rather than a failure occurred in that node or in a link on the path 
   towards it. 

4.4. Support of Periodical Scanning 

   The routing protocol MUST support the recognition of neighbors and 
   periodical scanning. This process SHOULD preserve energy capacity as 
   much as possible. 

   (Derived from use case 3.8. Alarm Systems) 

4.5. Scalability 

   Looking at the number of wall switches, power outlets, sensors of 
   various nature, video equipment and so on in a modern house, it seems 
   quite realistic that hundreds of low power devices may form a home 
   automation network in a fully populated "smart" home. Moving towards 
   professional building automation, the number of such devices may be 
   in the order of several thousands. 

   Thus, the routing protocol MUST support 250 devices in a subnet. 
   The routing protocol SHOULD support 2500 devices in a subnet. 

4.6. Convergence Time 

   A home automation Personal Area Network (PAN) is subject to various 
   instability due to signal strength variation, moving persons and the 
   like. Furthermore, as the number of devices increases, the 
   probability of a node failure also increases.  

   Measured from the transmission of a packet, the following convergence 
   time requirements apply. 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   The routing protocol MUST converge within 0.5 second if no nodes have 
   moved. 

   The routing protocol MUST converge within 2 seconds if the 
   destination node of the packet has moved. 

4.7. Manageability 

   The ability of the home network to support auto-configuration is of 
   the utmost importance. Indeed, most end users will not have the 
   expertise and the skills to perform advanced configuration and 
   troubleshooting. Thus the routing protocol designed for home PAN MUST 
   provide a set of features including zero-configuration of the routing 
   protocol for a new node to be added to the network. From ROLL 
   perspective, zero-configuration means that a node can obtain an 
   address and join the network on its own, without human intervention. 

   The routing protocol MUST support the ability to isolate a 
   misbehaving node thus preserving the correct operation of overall 
   network. 

5. Traffic Pattern 

   Depending on the philosophy of the home network, wall switches may be 
   configured to directly control individual lamps or alternatively, all 
   wall switches send control commands to a central lighting control 
   computer which again sends out control commands to relevant devices. 

   In a distributed system, the traffic tends to be any-to-many. In a 
   centralized system, it is a mix of any-to-one and one-to-many. 

   Wall switches only generate traffic when activated, which typically 
   happens from a one to tens of times per hour.  

   Remote controls have a similar transmit pattern to wall switches, but 
   are activated more frequently. 

   Temperature/air pressure/rain sensors send frames when queried by the 
   user or can be preconfigured to send measurements at fixed intervals 
   (typically minutes). Motion sensors typically send a frame when 
   motion is first detected and another frame when an idle period with 
   no movement has elapsed. The highest transmission frequency depends 
   on the idle period used in the sensor. Sometimes, a timer will 
   trigger a frame transmission when an extended period without status 
   change has elapsed. 


 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   All frames sent in the above examples are quite short, typically less 
   than 5 bytes of payload. Lost frames and interference from other 
   transmitters may lead to retransmissions. In all cases, 
   acknowledgment frames with a size of a few bytes are used.  

6. Open issues 

   Other items to be addressed in further revisions of this document 
   include: 

   o  Load Balancing (Symmetrical and Asymmetrical) 

   o  Security 

    

7. Security Considerations 

   Encryption can be employed to provide confidentiality, integrity and 
   authentication of the messages carried on the wireless links. Adding 
   these capabilities to the ROLL devices will degrade energy efficiency 
   and increase cost, so a trade-off must be made for each specific 
   application. 

   Door locks, alarm sensors and medication dosage equipment are 
   examples where strong encryption and authentication are needed. The 
   command to unlock a door must be authenticated, as must the 
   communication between an alarm sensor and the central alarm 
   controller. Furthermore, traffic analysis of the alarm system 
   communication must not reveal if the alarm is activated.  

   Light dimmers, window shades, motion sensors, weight sensors etc. may 
   not need encryption. 

   Protection against unintentional inclusion in neighboring networks 
   must be provided. Providing confidentiality, integrity and 
   authentication against malicious opponents is optional.  

8. IANA Considerations 

   This document includes no request to IANA. 

9. Acknowledgments 

   J. P. Vasseur, Jonathan Hui, Eunsook "Eunah" Kim, Mischa Dohler and 
   Massimo Maggiorotti are gratefully acknowledged for their 
   contributions to this document. 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

10. References 

10.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

10.2. Informative References 

Author's Addresses 

    
   Anders Brandt 
   Zensys, Inc. 
   Emdrupvej 26 
   Copenhagen, DK-2100 
   Denmark 

   Email: abr@zen-sys.com 
    

    

    

   Giorgio Porcu 
   Telecom Italia 
   Piazza degli Affari, 2 
   20123 Milan 
   Italy 

   Email: giorgio.porcu@guest.telecomitalia.it 
    

    

    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs           July 2008 
    

   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    






 
 
Brandt                 Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 15] 

