


Network Working Group                                          J. Galvin
Internet-Draft                                         eList eXpress LLC
Expires: July 25, 2002                                  January 24, 2002


  IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall Process: Operation
                of the Nominating and Recall Committees
                     draft-galvin-rfc2727bis-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 25, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The process by which the members of the IAB and IESG are selected,
   confirmed, and recalled is specified.  This document is a self-
   consistent, organized compilation of the process as it was known at
   the time of publication.

Discussion of this Draft

   Please direct all comments, suggestions, and questions regarding this
   draft to the following mailing list:

      ietf-nomcom@lists.elistx.com



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


   To subscribe to that mailing list you may send a message with the
   single word "subscribe" in the body to:

      ietf-nomcom-request@lists.elistx.com

   Or you may visit the web-based subscription manager at:

      <http://lists.elistx.com/subscribe>











































Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


1. Introduction

   This document is a revision of and supercedes RFC2727.  [1] It is a
   complete specification of the process by which members of the IAB and
   IESG are selected, confirmed, and recalled as of the date of its
   approval.  However, these procedures are subject to change and such
   change takes effect immediately upon its approval, regardless of
   whether this document has yet been revised.

   The following two assumptions continue to be true of this
   specification.

   1.  The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) and Internet Research
       Steering Group (IRSG) are not a part of the process described
       here.

   2.  The organization (and re-organization) of the IESG is not a part
       of the process described here.

   The time frames specified here use IETF meetings as a frame of
   reference.  The time frames assume that the IETF meets three times
   per calendar year with approximately equal amounts of time between
   them.  The meetings are referred to as the First IETF, Second IETF,
   or Third IETF as needed.

   A sitting member of either the IAB or IESG is a person who is
   currently serving a term of membership in that committee.

   The remainder of this document is divided into four major topics as
   follows.

   General: This a set of rules and constraints that apply to the
      selection and confirmation process as a whole.

   Nominating Committee Selection: This is the process by which
      volunteers from the IETF community are recognized to serve on the
      committee that nominates candidates to serve on the IESG and IAB.

   Nominating Committee Operation: This is the set of principles, rules,
      and constraints that guide the activities of the nominating
      committee, including the confirmation process.

   Member Recall: This is the process by which the behavior of a sitting
      member of the IESG or IAB may be questioned, perhaps resulting in
      the removal of the sitting member.

   A final section describes how this document differs from its
   predecessor: RFC2727. [1]



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


2. General

   The following set of rules apply to the selection and confirmation
   process as a whole.  If necessary, a paragraph discussing the
   interpretation of each rule is included.

   1.  The principal functions of the nominating committee are to review
       the open IESG and IAB positions and to either nominate its
       incumbent or recruit a superior candidate.

       The nominating committee does not select the open positions to be
       reviewed; it is instructed as to which positions to review.

       At a minimum, the nominating committee will be given the title of
       the position to be reviewed.  The nominating committee may be
       given a desirable set of qualifications for the candidate
       nominated to fill each position.

       Incumbents must notify the nominating committee if they do not
       wish to be nominated.

       The nominating committee does not confirm its candidates; it
       presents its candidates to the appropriate confirming body as
       indicated below.

   2.  The annual selection and confirmation process is expected to be
       completed within 3 months.

       The annual selection and confirmation process is expected to be
       completed one month prior to the friday of the week before the
       First IETF.  It is expected to begin 4 months prior to the Friday
       of the week before the First IETF.

   3.  One-half of each of the then current IESG and IAB positions is
       selected to be reviewed each year.

       The intent of this rule to ensure the review of approximately
       one-half of each of the sitting IESG and IAB members each year.
       It is recognized that circumstances may exist that will require
       the nominating committee to review more or less than one-half of
       the current positions, e.g., if the IESG or IAB have re-organized
       prior to this process and created new positions, or if there are
       an odd number of current positions.

   4.  Confirmed candidates are expected to serve at least a 2 year
       term.

       The intent of this rule is to ensure that members of the IESG and



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


       IAB serve the number of years that best facilitates the review of
       one-half of the members each year.

       It is consistent with this rule for the nominating committee to
       choose one or more of the currently open positions to which it
       may assign a term greater than 2 years in order to ensure the
       ideal application of this rule in the future.

       It is consistent with this rule for the nominating committee to
       choose one or more of the currently open positions that share
       responsibilities with other positions (both those being reviewed
       and those sitting) to which it may assign a term greater than 2
       years to ensure that all such members will not be reviewed at the
       same time.

       All sitting member terms end during the First IETF meeting
       corresponding to the end of the term for which they were
       confirmed.  All confirmed candidate terms begin during the First
       IETF meeting corresponding to the beginning of the term for which
       they were confirmed.  Normally, the confirmed candidate's term
       begins when the currently sitting member's term ends on the last
       day of the meeting.  A term may begin or end no sooner than the
       first day of the meeting and no later than the last day of the
       meeting as determined by the mutual agreement of the currently
       sitting member and the confirmed candidate.  The confirmed
       candidate's term may overlap the sitting member's term during the
       meeting as determined by their mutual agreement.

   5.  Mid-term vacancies are filled by the same rules as documented
       here with four qualifications.  First, the most recently
       constituted nominating committee is reconvened to nominate a
       candidate to fill the vacancy.  Second, the selection and
       confirmation process is expected to be completed within 1 month,
       with all other time periods otherwise unspecified prorated
       accordingly.  Third, the confirming body has two weeks from the
       day it is notified of a candidate to reject the candidate,
       otherwise the candidate is assumed to have been confirmed.
       Fourth, the term of the confirmed candidate will be either:

       1.  the remainder of the term of the open position if that
           remainder is not less than one year.

       2.  the remainder of the term of the open position plus the next
           2 year term if that remainder is less than one year.

   6.  All deliberations and supporting information that relate to
       specific nominees, candidates, and confirmed candidates are
       confidential.



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 5]


       The nominating committee and confirming body members will be
       exposed to confidential information as a result of their
       deliberations, their interactions with those they consult, and
       from those who provide requested supporting information.  All
       members and all other participants are expected to handle this
       information in a manner consistent with its sensitivity.

       It is consistent with this rule for current nominating committee
       members who have served on prior nominating committees to advise
       the current committee on deliberations and results of the prior
       committee, as necessary and appropriate.

   7.  The Chair is responsible for ensuring all information related to
       the selection and confirmation of candidates is archived with the
       Internet Society President upon completion of the nominating
       committee's responsibilities.

       Information includes but is not limited to the archive of any
       electronic discussion forum used by the nominating committee, for
       example, a mailing list.

       All electronic information should be collected and formatted as a
       single file using a popular application format, for example, zip
       or tar, to facilitate its management and storage.

       Electronic information should be encrypted using a popular and
       generally well regarded security application.  Encryption keys
       must be provided separately to the Internet Society President in
       a mutually agreed upon format.

   8.  Unless otherwise specified, the advise and consent model is used
       throughout the process.  This model is characterized as follows.

       1.  The IETF Executive Director advises the nominating committee
           of the IESG and IAB positions to be reviewed.

       2.  The nominating committee selects candidates and advises the
           confirming bodies of them.

       3.  The sitting IAB members review the IESG candidates,
           consenting to some, all, or none.

           If all of the candidates are confirmed, the job of the
           nominating committee with respect to reviewing the open IESG
           positions is considered complete.  If some or none of the
           candidates are confirmed, the nominating committee must
           reconvene to select alternate candidates for the rejected
           candidates.  Any additional time required by the nominating
           committee should not exceed its maximum time allotment.




Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


       4.  The Internet Society Board of Trustees reviews the IAB
           candidates, consenting to some, all, or none.

           If all of the candidates are confirmed, the job of the
           nominating committee with respect to reviewing the open IAB
           positions is considered complete.  If some or none of the
           candidates are confirmed, the nominating committee must
           reconvene to select alternate candidates for the rejected
           candidates.  Any additional time required by the nominating
           committee should not exceed its maximum time allotment.

       5.  The confirming bodies decide their consent according to a
           mechanism of their own choosing, which must ensure that at
           least one-half of the sitting members agree with the
           decision.

           At least one-half of the sitting members of the confirming
           bodies must agree to either confirm or reject each individual
           nominee.  The agreement must be decided within a reasonable
           timeframe.  The agreement may be decided by conducting a
           formal vote, by asserting consensus based on informal
           exchanges (email), or by whatever mechanism is used to
           conduct the normal business of the confirming body.




























Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


3. Nominating Committee Selection

   The following set of rules apply to the creation of the nominating
   committee and the selection of its members.

   1.  The committee comprises at least a non-voting Chair, 10 voting
       volunteers, and 3 non-voting liaisons.

       Any committee member may propose the addition of a non-voting
       advisor to participate in some or all of the deliberations of the
       committee.  The addition must be approved by both the voting and
       non-voting members of the committee according to its established
       voting mechanism.  Advisors participate as individuals.

       Any committee member may propose the addition of a non-voting
       liaison from other unrepresented organizations to participate in
       some or all of the deliberations of the committee.  The addition
       must be approved by both the voting and non-voting members of the
       committee according to its established voting mechanism.
       Liaisons participate as representatives of their respective
       organizations.

       Advisors and liaisons must meet the usual requirements for
       membership in the nominating committee.  In the case of liaisons
       the requirements apply to the organization not to the individual.

   2.  The Internet Society President appoints the non-voting Chair, who
       must meet the usual requirements for membership in the nominating
       committee.

       The nominating committee Chair must agree to invest the time
       necessary to ensure that the nominating committee completes its
       assigned duties and to perform in the best interests of the IETF
       community in that role.

       The appointment must be completed no later than the Second IETF
       meeting to ensure it can be announced during a plenary session at
       that meeting as determined by the IETF secretariat.  This ensures
       the Chair has approximately two months to conduct the selection
       process for the nominating committee members and approximately
       one month to organize one or more initial meetings of the
       nominating committee prior to the Third IETF meeting.

   3.  The Chair obtains the list of IESG and IAB positions to be
       reviewed and publishes it along with a solicitation for names of
       volunteers from the IETF community willing to serve on the
       nominating committee.




Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


       The list of open positions is published with the solicitation to
       facilitate community members choosing between volunteering for an
       open position and volunteering for the nominating committee.

       The opportunity to volunteer must be available for at least one
       month.  The opportunity to volunteer must end no later than one
       week prior to the earliest time at which the selection process
       may begin.

       The list and solicitation must be publicized using at least the
       same mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its
       announcements.

   4.  Members of the IETF community must have attended at least 2 of
       the last 3 IETF meetings in order to volunteer.

       The 3 meetings are the three most recent meetings that ended
       prior to the date on which the solicitation for nominating
       committee volunteers was submitted for distribution to the IETF
       community.

   5.  Internet Society Board of Trustees, sitting members of the IAB,
       and sitting members of the IESG may not volunteer.

   6.  The Chair announces an enumerated list of the pool of volunteers
       from which the 10 voting volunteers will be randomly selected.

       The announcement must be made at least one week prior to the
       earliest time the selection process may begin.

       The announcement must be made using at least the same mechanism
       used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

       The enumerated list should be announced incrementally to ensure
       the pool of volunteers is unbiased.  The enumeration is immutable
       such that if a volunteer withdraws or is otherwise ineligible to
       be selected, that slot is left blank and is skipped during the
       execution of the selection process.

   7.  The Chair randomly selects the 10 voting volunteers from the pool
       of names of volunteers using a method that can be independently
       verified to be unbiased and fair.

       A method is fair if each eligible volunteer is equally likely to
       be selected.  A method is unbiased if no one can influence its
       outcome in favor of a specific outcome.

       The method must include an announcement of an enumerated list of



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


       the pool of names together with the specific algorithm for how
       names will be chosen from the list.

       The method must depend on random data whose value is not known at
       the time the list and algorithm are announced and can not be
       known for at least one week from the time of the announcement.

       As soon as the random data is available it must be possible for
       anyone with access to it to execute the method and confirm that
       the correct 10 voting volunteers were selected.

       If a selected volunteer is unable to complete their commitment
       for any reason, it must be possible to iterate the method and
       randomly select the next eligible volunteer in turn.

       One possible method is described in RFC2777. [2]

       All announcements must be made using at least the mechanism used
       by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

   8.  The sitting IAB and IESG members each appoint a non-voting
       liaison to the nominating committee from their current membership
       who are not sitting in an open position.

   9.  The Chair of the prior year's nominating committee serves as a
       non-voting liaison.

       The prior year's Chair may select a designee from a pool composed
       of the voting members of the prior year's committee and all prior
       Chairs if the Chair is unavailable.  If the prior year's Chair is
       unavailable and is unable or unwilling to make such a designation
       in a timely fashion, the Chair of the current committee may do
       so.

       Selecting a prior year's committee member as the designee permits
       the experience of the prior year's deliberations to be readily
       available to the current committee.  Selecting an earlier prior
       year Chair as the designee permits the experience of being a
       Chair as well as that Chair's committee deliberations to be
       readily available to the current committee.











Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


4. Nominating Committee Operation

   The following rules apply to the operation of the nominating
   committee.  If necessary, a paragraph discussing the interpretation
   of each rule is included.

   The rules are organized approximately in the order in which they
   would be invoked.

   The term nominee refers to an individual under consideration by the
   nominating committee.  The term candidate refers to a nominee that
   has been selected by the nominating committee to be considered for
   confirmation by a confirming body.  A confirmed candidate is a
   candidate that has been reviewed and approved by a confirming body.

   1.   All rules and special circumstances not otherwise specified are
        at the discretion of the committee.

        Exceptional circumstances will occasionally arise during the
        normal operation of the nominating committee.  This rule is
        intended to foster the continued forward progress of the
        committee.

        Any member of the committee may propose a rule for adoption by
        the committee.  The rule must be approved by both the voting and
        non- voting members of the committee according to its
        established voting mechanism.

        All members of the committee should consider whether the
        exception is worthy of mention in the next revision of this
        document and followup accordingly.

   2.   The Chair must establish and publicize milestones, which must
        include at least a call for nominations.

        There is a defined time period during which the selection and
        confirmation process must be completed.  The Chair must
        establish a set of milestones which, if met in a timely fashion,
        will result in the completion of the process on time.  The Chair
        should allow time for iterating the activities of the committee
        if one or more candidates is not confirmed.

        The milestones must be publicized using at least the same
        mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

   3.   The Chair must establish a voting mechanism.

        The committee must be able to objectively determine when a



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


        decision has been made during its deliberations.  The criteria
        for determining closure must be established and known to all
        members of the nominating committee.

   4.   At least a quorum of committee members must participate in a
        vote.  A quorum comprises at least 7 voting members.

   5.   The Chair may establish a process by which a member of the
        nominating committee may be recalled.

        The process, if established, must be agreed to by a 3/4 majority
        of the members of the nominating committee, including the non-
        voting members since they would be subject to the same process.

   6.   All members of the nominating committee may participate in all
        deliberations.

        The emphasis of this rule is that no member, whether voting or
        non-voting, can be explicitly excluded from any deliberation.
        However, a member may individually choose not to participate in
        a deliberation.

   7.   The Chair announces the open positions to be reviewed and the
        call for nominees.

        The call for nominees must include a request for comments
        regarding the past performance of incumbents, which will be
        considered during the deliberations of the nominating committee.

        The announcements must be publicized using at least the same
        mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its announcements.

   8.   Any member of the IETF community may nominate any member of the
        IETF community for any open position.

        A self-nomination is permitted.

   9.   Nominating committee members must not be nominees.

        To be a nominee is to enter the process of being selected as a
        candidate and confirmed.  Nominating committee members are not
        eligible to be considered for filling any open position.  They
        become ineligible as soon as their role is announced to the IETF
        community and they remain ineligible for the duration of this
        nominating committee's term.

   10.  Members of the IETF community who were recalled from any IESG or
        IAB position during the previous two years must not be nominees.



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


   11.  The nominating committee selects candidates based on its
        understanding of the IETF community's consensus of the
        qualifications required to fill the open positions.

        The intent of this rule is to ensure that the nominating
        committee consults with a broad base of the IETF community for
        input to its deliberations.

        The consultations are permitted to include a slate of nominees,
        if all parties to the consultation agree to observe customary
        and reasonable rules of confidentiality.

        A broad base of the community should include the existing
        members of the IAB and IESG, especially sitting members who
        share responsibilities with open positions, e.g., co-Area
        Directors.

   12.  Nominees should be advised that they are being considered and
        must consent to their nomination prior to being confirmed.

        The nominating committee should help nominees provide
        justification to their employers.

        A nominee's consent must be written (email is acceptable) and
        include a commitment to provide the resources necessary to fill
        the open position and an assurance that the nominee will perform
        the duties of the position for which they are being considered
        in the best interests of the IETF community.

   13.  A candidate may not be confirmed to serve for both an IESG and
        an IAB position concurrently.

        A nominee may be a sitting member of either the IESG or the IAB
        and confirmed for an alternate position in either the IESG or
        the IAB.

        If the term of the sitting role does not end coincident with the
        start of the term of the new role, the confirmed candidate must
        choose exactly one role.

   14.  The nominating committee advises the confirming bodies of their
        candidates, specifying a single candidate for each open position
        and a testament as to how each candidate meets the
        qualifications of an open position.

        The testament may include a brief resume of the candidate and a
        summary of the deliberations of the nominating committee.




Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


   15.  With respect to any action to be taken in the context of
        notifying and announcing confirmed candidates, and notifying
        rejected nominees and candidates, the action must be valid
        according to all of the rules specified below prior to its
        execution.

        1.  Up until a candidate is confirmed, the identity of the
            candidate must be kept confidential.

        2.  The identity of all nominees must be kept confidential
            (except that the nominee may publicize their intentions).

        3.  Rejected nominees may be notified as soon as they are
            rejected.

        4.  Rejected candidates may be notified as soon as they are
            rejected.

        5.  Rejected nominees and candidates must be notified prior to
            announcing confirmed candidates.

        6.  Confirmed candidates may be notified and announced as soon
            as they are confirmed.

            It is consistent with these rules for a nominee to never
            know if they were a candidate or not.

            It is consistent with these rules for some nominees to be
            rejected early in the process and for some nominees to be
            kept as alternates in case a candidate is rejected by a
            confirming body.  In the matter of whether a confirmed
            candidate was a first choice or an alternate, that
            information need not ever be disclosed and, in fact,
            probably never should be.

            It is consistent with these rules for confirmed candidates
            to be notified and announced as quickly as possible instead
            of requiring all confirmed candidates to wait until all open
            positions have been reviewed.

            When consulting with individual members of the IETF
            community, if all parties to the consultation agree to
            observe customary and reasonable rules of confidentiality
            the consultations are permitted to include a slate of
            nominees.

            The announcements must be publicized using at least the same
            mechanism used by the IETF secretariat for its



Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


            announcements.


















































Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


5. Member Recall

   The following rules apply to the recall process.  If necessary, a
   paragraph discussing the interpretation of each rule is included.

   1.  Anyone may request the recall of any sitting IAB or IESG member,
       at any time, upon written (email is acceptable) request with
       justification to the Internet Society President.

   2.  Internet Society President shall appoint a Recall Committee
       Chair.

       The Internet Society President must not evaluate the recall
       request.  It is explicitly the responsibility of the IETF
       community to evaluate the behavior of its leaders.

   3.  The recall committee is created according to the same rules as is
       the nominating committee with the qualifications that the person
       being investigated and the person requesting the recall must not
       be a member of the recall committee in any capacity.

   4.  The recall committee operates according to the same rules as the
       nominating committee with the qualification that there is no
       confirmation process.

   5.  The recall committee investigates the circumstances of the
       justification for the recall and votes on its findings.

       The investigation must include at least both an opportunity for
       the member being recalled to present a written statement and
       consultation with third parties.

   6.  A 3/4 majority of the members who vote on the question is
       required for a recall.

   7.  If a sitting member is recalled the open position is to be filled
       according to the mid-term vacancy rules.














Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


6. Changes From RFC2727

   Editorial changes are not described here, only substantive changes.
   They are listed here in the order in which they appear in the
   document.

   1.  A definition for "sitting member" was added.

   2.  An information retention policy was added requiring the Chair to
       submit a collection of all information related to the operation
       of and execution of the responsibilities of the nominating
       committee to the Internet Society President for long-term
       storage.  Previous Chairs have done this so the addition is just
       a formalization of existing practice.

   3.  A timeframe for the appointment of the Chair was added.  The
       timeframe could always be inferred from the text but to avoid
       confusion it is now explicitly stated.

   4.  Some explicit guidance was added regarding the timeframe for
       volunteering to serve on the nominating committee.

   5.  Some explicit guidance was added to the process of selecting the
       nominating committee members.  Among other things it must be
       possible to iterate the selection method more than just 10 times
       to ensure that unavailable or ineligible volunteers can be
       replaced.

   6.  It is now explicitly stated that no person may serve on both the
       IESG and the IAB concurrently.





















Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


7. Acknowledgements

   There have been a number of people involved with the development of
   this document over the years.  A great deal of credit goes to the
   first three Nominating Committee Chairs:

      1993 - Jeff Case

      1994 - Fred Baker

      1995 - John Curran

   who had the pleasure of operating without the benefit of a documented
   process.  It was their fine work and oral tradition that became the
   first version of this document.  Of course we can not overlook the
   bug discovery burden that each of the Chairs since the first
   publication have had to endure:

      1996 - Guy Almes

      1997 - Geoff Houston

      1998 - Mike St.  Johns

      1999 - Donald Eastlake

      2000 - Avia Doria

      2001 - Ted T'so

   Of course the bulk of the credit goes to the members of the POISSON
   Working Group, previously the POISED Working Group.  The prose here
   would not be what it is were it not for the attentive and insightful
   review of its members.  Specific acknowledgement must be extended to
   Scott Bradner and John Klensin, who have consistently contributed to
   the improvement of this document throughout its evolution.















Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


8. Security Considerations

   Any selection, confirmation, or recall process necessarily involves
   investigation into the qualifications and activities of prospective
   candidates.  The investigation may reveal confidential or otherwise
   private information about candidates to those participating in the
   process.  Each person who participates in any aspect of the process
   has a responsibility to maintain the confidentiality of any and all
   information not explicitly identified as suitable for public
   dissemination.









































Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


References

   [1]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall
        Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees", BCP
        10, RFC 2727, February 2000.

   [2]  Eastlake, D., "Publicly Verifiable Nomcom Random Selection", RFC
        2777, February 2000.


Author's Address

   James M. Galvin
   eList eXpress LLC
   607 Trixsam Road
   Sykesville, MD  21784
   US

   Phone: +1 410-549-4619
   Fax:   +1 410-795-7978
   EMail: galvin+ietf@elistx.com
   URI:   http://www.elistx.com/





























Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           IAB and IESG Selection             January 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Galvin                    Expires July 25, 2002                [Page 21]


