
Internet Engineering Task Force                          Fernando Cuervo
INTERNET DRAFT                                           Nortel Networks
December 25, 1999                                      Christian Huitema
Expires October 16, 1999                          Telcordia Technologies
<draft-ietf-megaco-protocol-02.txt>                          Keith Kelly
                                                                NetSpeak
                                                             Brian Rosen
                                                            FORE Systems
                                                             Paul Sijben
                                                     Lucent Technologies
                                                           Eric Zimmerer
                                                  Level 3 Communications


                            MEGACO Protocol




Status of this document

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
"1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern Europe),
ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

ABSTRACT

IMPORTANT NOTE

In accordance with agreements reached between IETF and ITU, the text of
the protocol, IETF version 02, is found at:
ftp://standards.nortelnetworks.com/megaco/docs/Oslo99/megacoHGCP5.pdf

The source for this document may be found at:



Cuervo, Huitema, Kelly, Rosen, Sijben, Zimmerer                 [Page 1]





Internet draft              MEGACO Protocol                June 25, 1999


ftp://standards.nortelnetworks.com/megaco/docs/Oslo99/megacoHGCP5.pdf


MEGACO/Recommendation H.GCP defines the protocols used between elements
of a physically decomposed multimedia gateway.  There are no functional
differences from a system view between a decomposed gateway, with dis-
tributed sub-components potentially on more than one physical devices,
and a monolithic gateway.

This RFC/recommendation does not define how gateways, multipoint control
units or integrated voice response units (IVRs) work.  Instead it
creates a general framework that is suitable for these applications.

Packet network interfaces may include IP, ATM or possibly others.  The
interfaces will support a variety of SCN signalling systems, including
tone signalling, ISDN, ISUP, QSIG, and GSM.  National variants of these
signaling systems will be supported where applicable.



































Cuervo, Huitema, Kelly, Rosen, Sijben, Zimmerer                 [Page 2]


