





Internet Draft                                             L. Huang
<draft-licanhuang-dnsop-urnresolution-02.txt>        ZST University

Expires   January 2009                                July 20, 2008

Distributed Universal Resource Name Resolution based on Distributed DNS
             <draft-licanhuang-dnsop-urnresolution-02.txt>

Status of this Memo

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This file is a proposal for Universal Resource Name resolution based
   on P2P DNS.















Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 1]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ................................................2
   2. Convention for Universal Resource Name ......................2
   3. Universal Resource Name Resolution framework.................3
      3.1 Universal Resource Name Resolution.......................4
          3.1.1 SQL-like Query language ...........................4
          3.1.2 SQL-like Maintanence Language .....................6
      3.2 Hierarchical Management of global-hier-part .............6
   4. References ..................................................7
      4.1.  Normative References ..................................7
      4.2.  Informative References ................................7


1. Introduction

   This file is a proposal for P2P based Universal Resource Name
   resolution based on Internet draft --Distributed DNS Implementation
   in IpV6[lican].

   In Internet, every resource needs an uniform name. There are RFCs
   URI[RFC2396] ,URL[RFC1738] and URN[RFC2611].  However, when there are
   more and more computers connected in Internet and more and more users
   use Internet, resources in Internet will be more and more. In this
   large, decentralized, distributed resource sharing environments today
   or in the future, the efficient discovery of static and/or dynamic
   resources (the dynamic resources are meant both in dynamic change of
   attributes or dynamic exist in the network) is a big challenge.


   The resource resolution based on Client/Server is not suitable for
   huge amount of resources. Here we argue that the resources can be
   classified as hierarchical Domains. It is nature way to use DNS to
   resolute resources. Although DNS implementation today may be scalable
   for translating Domain Names into IP addresses, it may  encounter
   problem if using it to resolute huge amount resources today and even
   more amount resources in the future. The framework proposed here
   based on  Distributed DNS  Implementation in IpV6[lican] is suitable
   for the huge amount of resources' resolution


2. Convention for Universal Resource Name

   The convention for resource name is formatted as global unique
   hierarchical domains like domain names in DNS, and a local name to
   specify the local attributes of resource name. The format of
   convention of resource names is as follows syntax:




Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 2]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


      functionscheme ":"global-hier-part"/"local-name

      The functionscheme is type or function or schema for the resource;
   the global-hier-part is the global hierarchical name similar as
   domain name and the local-name is the local name for the resource.

      for example,

         blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney

         This is a resource name for a blog article about the story of
   Britney Spears

         song:Britney.popular.music/Lonely

         This is a resource name for the song Lonely by Britney Spears.

         Britney Spears is classified as Britney.popular.music.


3. Universal Resource Name Resolution framework

   We treat global-hier-part in the invention of resource name as domain
   name. We also use the similar concept of DNS zone for DNS server to
   manage the domain names. For example. if a DNS server's zone is
   Science.Biology.Bioinformatics, then this DNS server manages all
   resource information under the catalogue of
   Science.Biology.Bioinformatics. In other case, if a DNS server's zone
   is Science.Biology, then this DNS server manages all resource
   information under the catalogue of Science.Biology, which may
   includes sub domains of BioInformatics , botany, zoology,etc.

   Resource names are published in their authoritative DNS server which
   keeps local domain RRs[RFC1035]. The extension RRs in DNS server
   contains the parts of the functionscheme and local-part of
   conventions of resource name. The local-part of resource can  be a
   URL for the other repository  which contains the resource metadata
   and/or other information.  For example, the location information for
   blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney is stored on the server of
   Britney.popular.music.

   Every DNS server is the same but some coexist in more than one layer.
   Every DNS Server maintains a route table and  RRs related to its
   authoritative domain zone.  Route Tables in servers are the same as
   [lican].


   The DNS servers join virtual groups in VIRGO network as their



Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 3]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


   authoritative domain names. When a DNS server joins, its route table
   will add some other nodes' entities, and some other nodes will update
   their route table by adding the joining node's entity.  The detail of
   the algorithm can be  found in [lican].


3.1 Universal Resource Name Resolution

   For the Universal Resource Name Resolution, we first locate the
   domain name server as[lican]. For example, to resolute resource
   "blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney", we first locate the
   server Britney.popular.music, then in the server
   Britney.popular.music, we check its extension RRs for the resource
   blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney for its location, etc.

   The query process is as the following:

   User program sends QUERY MESSAGE, which contains SQL-like query
   statenment described in section3.1.1, to Local Name Server. If Local
   Name Server is the authoritative Domain Name Server, then the Local
   Name Server will check its extension  RRs to resolve the request
   resource. Otherwise, The Local Name Server will route to the Foreign
   Name Server which is closer to the authoritative Domain Name Server
   by calculating theoretical hops. Then the Foreign Name Server routes
   to the even closer Foreign Domain Name Server. Repeat this process,
   until the authoritative Domain Name Server has been found. Finally,
   the authoritative Domain Name Server resolves  request resource  by
   check its extension RR record, and responses to the Local Name
   Server. The latter will forward the response to the User Program. The
   details of the algorithm can be found [lican].


3.1.1 SQL-like Query Language

   query::=SELECT{SCHEMA|SUBDOMAIN|ENTITY|ATTRIBUTE|*|expr[[AS]c_alias]
           {,expr[[AS]c_alias]...}}
           FROM domainref
           [WHERE search_condition];

   Here, SCHEMA is for querying functionschema for a Domain;  SUBDOMAIN
   is for querying subdomain  for a given super Domain; ENTITY is for
   querying all entities  for a given search condition ; ATTRIBUTE is
   for querying all attributes  for a given search condition ;expr is
   for the property queried, which may be  a set of properties; [AS]
   c_alias is the alias name for expr; domainref is for Domain Name, in
   which we can use * to indicate all sub domains; search_condition is
   similar to SQL statement in Database.




Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 4]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


   In the following, there are several examples of query operations.

   Operation 1

   The form "?:global-hier-part" is to query all functionschema of the
   global-hier-part domain. For example,  "?:Britney.popular.music"
   queries all functionschema of Britney.popular.music.  We can use the
   following  Statement:

         SELECT  SCHEMA FROM Britney.popular.music;

   Operation 2

   The form "functionschema:global-hier-part/?" is to query all
   resources with the functionschema in the global-hier-parts domain.
   For example, "song:Britney.popular.music/?" queries all songs by
   Britney Spears. We can use the following Statement:

         SELECT  * FROM Britney.popular.music WHERE SCHEMA ='song';

   Operation 3

   Suppose that global-hier-part can be expressed as
   leafDomain.superDomain.  The form "functionschema:?.superDomain/"  is
   to query all leafDomains. This is possible because of the
   hierarchical structure and the protocols. For example,
   "song:?.popular.music" queries all popular singers. We can use the
   following Statement:

         SELECT SUBDOMAIN FROM *.popular.music WHERE SCHEMA ='song';

   Operation 4

   The form "functionscheme :global-hier-part/local-name" is to query
   specific resource.  For example, "song:Britney.popular.music/Lonely"
   queries the information of the song-Lonely. We can use the following
   Statement:

         SELECT Lonely FROM Britney.popular.music WHERE SCHEMA ='song';


   Operation 5

   The form "functionscheme :global-hier-part/expression" is to query
   the resources which satisfy the conditions of the expression
   indicated.  Expression  can be scope, maximum, minimum, where
   condition like SQL statements. For example,
   "song:Britney.popular.music/where year between 2006 and 2007" queries



Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 5]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


   all songs by Britney Spears which are produced between 2006 and 2007.
   We can use the following  Statement:

         SELECT * FROM Britney.popular.music WHERE SCHEMA ='song'AND
   Year >=2006 AND Year <=2007;

   Another example,  "hardware:cluster.computer.IT/max(cpu)"  queries a
   cluster  with maximum cpu numbers.  We can use the following
   Statement:

         SELECT max(cpu) FROM cluster.computer.IT WHERE SCHEMA
   ='hardware';





   3.1.2 SQL-like Maintanence Language

    The resources are maintained by the SQL-like maintenance language.
   Insert statement registers new resources into the domain. Delete
   statement drops the resource registration from the domain. Update
   statement changes the information registered in the domain. The
   formats of these statements are as the following:

     DELETE FROM   domainref  [WHERE    search_condition];

     INSERT INTO   domainref[(entity.attribute{,
      entity.attribute...})] {VALUES (expr | NULL {,expr |NULL...}) ;

     UPDATE domainref  SET entity.attribute = expr |NULL{,
        entity.attribute =  expr|NULL ...};


     For example, the following statement deletes all songs by Britney
   Spears which are produced between 2006 and 2007.

       DELETE  FROM Britney.popular.music WHERE SCHEMA ='song'AND
        year > 2006   AND   year < 2007;



   3.2  Hierarchical Management of global-hier-part

   To be a unique resource name for global scope, The Internet
   Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) may govern the
   root of global-hier-part in Universal Resource Name organized by the
   users automatically. For example, in www.Madonna.popular.music, music



Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 6]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


   is managed by music virtual organization, which reports to ICANN to
   approve, popular.music   is controlled by  popular music virtual
   organization,which reports to music virtual organization to approve.
   The request of   www.Madonna.popular.music is sent to virtual
   organization of popular music to be approved. In
   www.Beethoven.classic.music, classic.music   is controlled by classic
   music virtual organization, which reports to music virtual
   organization to approve. The request of www.Beethoven.classic.music
   is managed by virtual organization of classic music.




4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - IMPLEMENTATION AND
              SPECIFICATION",Specification," RFC1035,
              USC/Information Sciences Institute,November, 1987.





4.2.  Informative References


   [RFC2396]  T. Berners-Lee,R. Fielding,U.C. Irvine,L. Masinter,
              "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax",
              RFC 2396, August 1998
   [RFC1738]  T. Berners-Lee, L. Masinter,M. McCahill,
              "Uniform Resource Locators (URL)",RFC 1738, December 1994

   [RFC2611]  L. Daigle,D. van Gulik,R. Iannella,P. Faltstrom,
             "URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms",RFC 2611, June 1999

   [Lican]    Lican Huang, "draft-licanhuang-dnsop-distributeddns-04.txt"
             (work in progress) , June  2008.

   [LicanICCS] Lican Huang, "Resource Discovery Based on VIRGO P2P Distributed DNS Framework",
              ICCS 2008,   LNCS 5103 pp:501-509









Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 7]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


Authors' Addresses


   Lican Huang
   Current Address:
   Institute of Network & Distributed Computing,
   Zhejiang Sci_Tech University,
   Hangzhou, P.R.China
   EMail: licanhuang@zist.edu.cn; huang_lican@yahoo.co.uk










































Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 8]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution    July 20, 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein
   are provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE
   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE
   INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
   FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
   ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT
   INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to
   rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.







Huang, Lican              Expires January 2009          FORMFEED[Page 9]


