



Network Working Group                                     E. Davies, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                          Folly Consulting
Expires: December 15, 2006                                 June 13, 2006


                     Organizing IETF Process Change
                    draft-davies-pesci-next-steps-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 15, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document sets out a strawman proposal for how to organize the
   revision and update of any part of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF) processes including those for developing standards and
   other specifications.  It does not propose specific changes to any of
   these processes, which should be the subject of future documents.
   However, it does propose an initial target area for process change.






Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  About This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  A Template for Process Change Organization  . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Change Process Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Immediate Tasks for the Change Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8






































Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


1.  Introduction

   In a previous document [I-D.davies-pesci-initial-considerations] a
   design team selected by the IETF Chair suggested some goals and
   guidelines that should be followed in setting out to change any of
   the processes used in the IETF.  In the light of the design team's
   experience, this document suggests a possible way of organizing such
   process change work and also identifies a target area as the initial
   focus for process change to address the problems that were summarized
   in [I-D.davies-pesci-initial-considerations].

   [I-D.davies-pesci-initial-considerations] also contains a extensive
   reading list of background material which documents many of the
   processes which might be the subject of change through the process
   suggested in this document.  One problem that has been identified is
   that this material has been built up piecemeal over the lifetime of
   the IETF and it is neither entirely self-consistent nor easy to
   navigate even for experienced IETF participants.  An overview and
   guide to the existing and draft material has been developed
   [I-D.carpenter-procdoc-roadmap] as an interim measure.

1.1.  About This Document

   This document was produced by the PESCI design team selected by the
   IETF Chair and is published here as a record of discussion.  PESCI
   stands for Process Evolution Committee of the IETF and is in the
   IETF's naming tradition as a successor of the earlier POISSON working
   group.  The membership of the design team is listed in the
   Acknowledgements.  PESCI had no special status in the IETF process;
   it was simply the group of people who produced this document under
   the leadership of the IETF Chair.

   Discussion of this draft is welcomed on the pesci-discuss@ietf.org
   list (join via https://www1.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/pesci-discuss).


2.  A Template for Process Change Organization

   The PESCI design team is proposing a process for developing changes
   to the IETF processes especially in the area of developing standards
   documentation and other specifications.  It is intended that this
   should be a template for any future change process that appears to be
   required, but in the best traditions of the IETF the process should
   itself be tested by experiment and modified if it is found wanting.

   This proposed new process





Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


   o  would be used by all individuals, design teams, and working groups
      who wish to propose changes or additions to IETF processes,
   o  should involve consultation with the IESG, the IAB, the IAOC, the
      Working Group chairs, and IETF participants generally, but
   o  must avoid requiring the IESG to develop the new processes or
      micromanage this process of development and approval.

   The new proposals, both for the change process and any resulting
   changed processes, should be implemented as a matter of urgency and
   should be handled expeditiously by the existing approvals and
   publishing process.

2.1.  Change Process Proposal

   We propose that the design team model is the most effective way of
   engineering process changes.  The design team is a tried-and-tested
   IETF methodology especially suitable for creating concrete solutions
   applicable to constrained problems.  Within the context of the
   existing IETF process, the model would be applied by constituting a
   set of design teams with appropriate oversight and the charter of
   carrying out process change.  The design teams would operate within
   these charters: the overseers would invite design team members to
   participate, but alternative teams could offer solutions if they feel
   they have better solutions.

   The teams should function with an open discussion list, in the same
   way that the PESCI team has done.  The output of each team should be
   tested against the IETF consensus in the normal fashion; we believe
   that if there is clear IETF consensus that the proposal makes sense,
   the IESG (and the ISOC Board of Trustees) will respect that consensus
   and approve of it.


3.  Immediate Tasks for the Change Process

   Assuming that the model suggested in Section 2.1 is adopted, the
   following process change task appears to be the most urgent one, and
   a team should start on this as soon as possible.

   The most important single management role in the IETF at the moment
   is that of the IESG, including the role of IETF Chair.  This should
   therefore also receive the most scrutiny.  It's unreasonable to ask
   people to grade their own performance, or to attempt to perform a
   role at full speed while having to review how it could be done
   otherwise.  Therefore, a review of the roles the IESG has should be
   rooted outside the IESG - while asking current and former IESG
   members for information and advice at every opportunity.




Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


   This review should include:

   o  Creating a list of the tasks that currently gate on the IESG
   o  Identifying any additional related tasks that might be appropriate
      to improve efficiency and effectiveness
   o  Making proposals for discarding or restructuring the existing
      tasks in combination with the new tasks
   o  Making a proposal for grouping those tasks into separate task
      groups that can be assigned to different bodies at need.
   o  Developing a proposal for how the standards development work of
      the IETF should be partitioned to provide optimum efficiency while
      allowing the IETF to take on all appropriate work.
   o  Developing a suggestion for an initial set of bodies for handling
      those tasks in the new work partitioning scheme, including, if
      appropriate, a restructuring of the IESG.
   o  Describing the process by which the set of bodies gets modified.
   o  Describing how members of the proposed bodies get selected,
      replaced, and (if needed) removed.
   o  Proposing a structure for the documentation of the IETF process
      that would result from their recommendations


4.  Security Considerations

   This document has no direct impact on the security of the Internet.
   However, a smooth and efficient IETF process is necessary to deal
   rapidly with emerging security threats.  Also, a badly designed
   process may be subject to social denial of service attacks that could
   damage both the IETF and indirectly the Internet itself.  We should
   also note that the change process (and the evaluation of potential
   change) is itself vulnerable to social DoS.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require action by the IANA.  However, IANA
   activities do form part of the IETF process and process changes may
   affect IANA.













Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


6.  Acknowledgements

   The members of the PESCI team at the time this document was written
   were:

      Harald Alvestrand
      Scott Brim
      Brian Carpenter
      Elwyn Davies
      Adrian Farrel
      Michael Richardson

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629] and
   edited with the xxe editor plug-in.

7.  Informative References

   [I-D.carpenter-procdoc-roadmap]
              Carpenter, B., "The IETF Process: a Roadmap",
              draft-carpenter-procdoc-roadmap-04 (work in progress),
              February 2006.

   [I-D.davies-pesci-initial-considerations]
              Davies, E., "Moving Forwards with IETF Process Evolution",
              draft-davies-pesci-initial-considerations-01 (work in
              progress), January 2006.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.






















Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


Author's Address

   Elwyn Davies (editor)
   Folly Consulting
   Soham,
   UK

   Phone: +44 7889 488 335
   Fax:
   Email: elwynd@dial.pipex.com
   URI:








































Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Organizing Process Change              June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Davies                  Expires December 15, 2006               [Page 8]


