

MMUSIC Working Group                                       F. Andreasen
Internet-Draft                                            Cisco Systems
Document: draft-andreasen-mmusic-sdp-simcap-reqts-00.txt  February 2001
Category: Informational


             SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Requirements


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   This document presents a set of requirements for defining Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) attributes that will allow SDP to provide
   a minimal and backwards compatible capability negotiation mechanism.
   The mechanism is intended as a simple and limited solution to the
   general capability negotiation problem being addressed by ongoing
   work on the next generation of SDP, also known as SDPng.


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].


3. Introduction

   The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [3] describes multimedia
   sessions for the purposes of session announcement, session
   invitation, and other forms of multimedia session initiation. SDP
   was not intended to provide capability negotiation, however as the
   need for this has become increasingly important, work has begun on a
   "next generation SDP" (SDPng) [4] that supports both session

Andreasen        Informational - Expires August 2001         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Reqts.  February 2001


   description and capability negotiation. SDPng is not anticipated to
   be backwards compatible with SDP and work on SDPng is currently only
   in the requirements phase. However, several other protocols, e.g.
   SIP [5] and MGCP [6], use SDP, and are likely to continue doing so
   for the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, in many cases these
   protocols have an urgent need for some limited form of capability
   negotiation.

   For example, an endpoint may support G.711 audio (over RTP) as well
   as T.38 fax relay (over UDP or TCP [8]). However, with current SDP,
   this can only be expressed by describing two separate media streams,
   which the endpoint must then support at the same time. Another
   example involves support for multiple codecs. An endpoint indicates
   this by including all the codecs in the "m=" line in the session
   description. However, the endpoint thereby also commits to
   simultaneous support for each of those codecs. In practice, DSP
   memory and processing power limitations may not make this feasible.

   As noted in [4], the problem with SDP is, that media descriptions
   are used to describe session parameters as well as capabilities
   without a clear distinction between the two.

   In this document, we provide a set of requirements for providing a
   minimal and backwards compatible capability negotiation feature in
   SDP. It should be noted, that this mechanism is not intended to
   solve the general capability negotiation problem targeted by SDPng.
   It is only intended as a simple and limited solution to the most
   urgent real world problems facing current users of SDP.


4. Requirements

   In the following sections, we provide requirements for the simple
   capability negotiation mechanism.

4.1 Backwards Compatibility

   The solution must be backwards compatible with SDP. In particular,
   it must adhere to the current SDP grammar. Furthermore,
   implementations that do not support it must be able to ignore and
   skip capability information provided without affecting the semantics
   of the remaining SDP.

4.2 Simplicity and Limited Scope

   The solution must be simple both in terms of syntax and semantics.
   In line with this, the scope of the solution should only be to solve
   the most common and pressing real world capability negotiation
   problems encountered by current users of SDP.

4.3 Capabilities and Capability Set

   The following provides a set of more detailed requirements.

Andreasen        Informational - Expires August 2001         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Reqts.  February 2001



   In order to do capability negotiation, it must be possible to
   provide one or more capabilities. Each capability must be
   independent and the capabilities provided form the capability set.

   It must be possible to provide a capability set at the session-level
   and the media level. A capability set provided at the session-level
   must apply to the entire session where as a capability set provided
   at the media level must only apply to the particular media stream
   within which the capability set was provided.

   Providing a capability must imply a willingness and ability to
   support that capability, but not an actual commitment. In line with
   this principle and for reasons of simplicity, it must be permissible
   to provide a (potentially static) capability set that is independent
   of the actual media stream parameters provided for the session. It
   is thus possible that a subsequent attempt to use a given capability
   can not be honored, e.g. due to a change in available resources.

   A capability set should contain a handle that allows for easy
   referencing of the capability set. Each capability within the
   capability set should similarly contain a handle that allows for
   easy referencing of the capability within that capability set.

   Each capability must at a minimum contain a media description with
   the media type, transport protocol, and media format for the
   capability as defined in [3].

   Furthermore, it must be possible to provide additional capability
   parameters for each capability provided. In particular, it must be
   possible to provide one or more of the following capability
   parameters:
   * Bandwidth information for the capability.
   * Attribute information for the capability.

   For each capability parameter, it must be possible to provide:
   * One or more alternative values for the capability parameter.
   * One or more allowable numerical ranges for capability parameters
   that otherwise contain a single numerical value.

   Finally, the encoding of a capability should be straightforward and
   well-defined based on its encoding in the session description
   itself. Neither the syntax nor semantics of a particular parameter
   should thus affect this encoding, although of course only numerical
   value attributes can use the numerical range description.

4.4 Rejected Requirements

   In addition to the requirements provided above, the following
   requirements were considered and rejected, as they are seen as non-
   essential:
   * Capability interdependence, incl.
        - grouping capabilities,

Andreasen        Informational - Expires August 2001         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Reqts.  February 2001


        - expressing simultaneous capability sets,
        - expressing alternative capability sets
        - constraining the number of uses of a certain capability (set)


5. Security Considerations

   The addition of the simple capability negotiation attributes to SDP
   is not believed to affect security.


6. References

   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
       9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   [3] M. Handley and V. Jacobson, "SDP: session description protocol,"
       Request for Comments (Proposed Standard) 2327, Internet
       Engineering Task Force, Apr.  1998.

   [4] Kutscher, Ott, Bormann, "Requirements for Session Description
       and Capability Negotiation", draft-kutscher-mmusic-sdpng-req-
       00.txt, July 14, 2000

   [5] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
       session initiation protocol," Request for Comments (Proposed
       Standard) 2543, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1999.

   [6] Arango, M., Dugan, A., Elliott, I., Huitema, C. and S. Pickett,
       "Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP) Version 1.0", RFC 2705,
       October 1999.

   [7] J. Ott, J. Kutscher, C. Bormann, "Capability description for
       group cooperation", draft-ott-mmusic-cap-00.txt, June 1999

   [8] PROPOSED T.38 AMENDMENT û REC. T.38 ANNEX D, Geneva, 2-10
       February, 2000, (available from
       ftp://standards.nortelnetworks.com/itu_to_ietf/SG8/February00/Dr
       aft_T38_Annex_D.txt)

   [9] Beser, B., "Codec Capabilities Attribute for SDP", Internet
       Draft, draft-beser-mmusic-capabilities-00.txt, March 2000.









Andreasen        Informational - Expires August 2001         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Reqts.  February 2001



7. Acknowledgments

   This work draws upon the ongoing work on SDPng; in particular [4],
   as well as discussions in the MMUSIC working group. Furthermore,
   this work was inspired by [7] and the CableLabs PacketCable project.
   Related work can be found in [9] as well.



8. Author's Addresses

   Flemming Andreasen
   Cisco Systems
   499 Thornall Street, 8th floor
   Edison, NJ
   Email: fandreas@cisco.com





































Andreasen        Informational - Expires August 2001         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft SDP Simple Capability Negotiation Reqts.  February 2001



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




















Andreasen        Informational - Expires August 2001         [Page 6]
