
Internet Draft                                             A.M.Rutkowski
                                                                NetMagic
                                                           November 1995

   Generic International and Domestic Institutional Considerations
              for DNS Naming and Number Administration          
                <draft-rutkowski-dns-role-00.txt>

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
   Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa),
   nic.nordu.net (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
   ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

ABSTRACT

This document analyzes the surrounding legal jurisdictional, operational, 
and functional requirements and practices in light of potential transitions
of Internet DNS name and numbering responsibilities and administration.  
It notes that although international and domestic bodies like the ITU or 
FCC possess jurisdiction in this area, they are likely to be receptive to 
participating in and sanctioning some form of new adhoc international and
domestic alliances effected by service providers and operations bodies.

Such an approach would also provide a measure of immunity from litigation,
and comport with traditional Internet community preferences for distributed
bottom-up solutions undertaken by existing ISP and operations communities 
whose interests are most affected, rather than top-down single organization 
oversight and control.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

      Status of this Memo.............................................1
      Abstract........................................................1
      1. INTRODUCTION.................................................2
      2. LEGAL JURISDICTION AND EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY.................3
      3. COMITY AMONG INTERESTED PARTIES..............................4
      4. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS......................................9
      5. COMPETENCY..................................................10
      6. PRECEDENTS AND PRACTICE.....................................11
      Security considerations........................................11
      Acknowledgements...............................................11
      Author's address...............................................11


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 1]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


1. INTRODUCTION

This note seeks to outline and discuss the issues 
and factors associated with the administration of 
Internet names and numbers.  It is only a preliminary 
consideration of this matter prepared both for policy
makers and the Internet community, and not represented 
as either exhaustive or complete. 

Citations of authority are not provided.  For the 
purposes of this note, Internet names are those of 
the Domain Name System (DNS) in the style ZZZ.COM, 
and Internet numbers are those for network or host 
addresses of the Internet Protocol (IP), in the 
style 206.5.17.0.  It should be noted that there 
are other Internet numbers involved, but are not 
dealt with here.

These names and numbers arise from the application 
of Internet standards known as Request for Comments 
(RFCs) that have been developed by the Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF).  The IETF is an 
independent, unincorporated association of technical 
experts that voluntarily agrees upon standards that 
are then provided in the public domain on Internet 
servers worldwide.

It is the collective voluntary use and implementation 
of specific names and numbers by Internet Service 
Providers (ISPs) and end users in conjunction with 
the operation of their networks and attached 
computers, and maintenance of DNS servers, on a highly 
distributed basis that actually implements and enforces 
use of the names and numbers.  This usage is presently 
facilitated by:

o Coordination of ISPs among themselves, and via the 
  Commercial Internet Exchange Association (CIX),
  the principal ISP international organization, and
  FARNET, TERENA, and other non-commercial ISP 
  organizations, and the development of the principal 
  implementing implementation standards and software 
  by the Internet Software Consortium;

o A variety of operations coordination bodies, including
  the International Engineering Planning Group (IEPG),
  the Operations Area of the IETF, North American Network
  Operators's Group (NANOG), the European Operators
  Forum, the Asia-Pacific Networking Group (AP NG), the
  FNC created Routing Authorities, the Coordinating 
  Committee for Intercontinental Research Networks 
  (CCIRN), and many national level operators organizations.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


o Global number and name management services 
  provided under a small research programme known 
  as the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) 
  funded by the U.S. government via the National 
  Science Foundation and awarded to the University 
  of Southern California Information Sciences 
  Institute (ISI);

o Global number and name management registration 
  services provided under a research programme 
  known as the Registration InterNIC funded by the 
  U.S. government via the National Science 
  Foundation and awarded to Network Solutions Inc. 
  (NSI);

o Regional number management and name coordination 
  services provided by an unincorporated 
  association maintained and funded by European 
  ISPs known as the Reseaux IP Europeens Network 
  Coordination Centre (RIPE-NCC);

o Regional number management and name coordination 
  services provided by an unincorporated 
  association organized and funded by Asia-Pacific 
  ISPs known as the Asia-Pacific Network 
  Information Centre (AP-NIC);

o National level name registration provided by 
  approximately 140 entities of various kinds - 
  primarily in research and academic establishments 
  known as Top Level Domain Network Information 
  Centres (TLD-NICs); and


2. LEGAL JURISDICTION AND EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY

Legal jurisdiction relates to the acquisition of 
authority, capacity, power or right to act under 
some system of law.  It should be differentiated 
from the exercise of the derived authority.  The 
distinction is particularly important in this 
matter, because under significant applicable 
policies such as the FCC's Computer trilogy, 
jurisdiction has been asserted, but regulatory 
agencies have maintained forbearance in their 
exercise of authority.

In the case of Internet numbering and addressing, 
there are three bases for assertion of legal 
jurisdiction and authority.

Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995

a. Public International Law

For nearly 150 years, the  global numbering and 
addressing associated with virtually all public 
communications infrastructure has been provided for 
by intergovernmental organizations established by 
contract, treaty or other arrangements.  Today, 
these organizations are the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the Universal 
Postal Union (UPU).  Under both its Constitution 
and the International Telecommunication Regulations 
- both signed as treaty instruments by most of the 
world's nations - the ITU has broad jurisdiction 
over virtually all telecommunications, 
telecommunications services, and facilities, as 
well as an explicit to maintain and extend 
international cooperation for "telecommunications 
of all kinds."

The ITU has thus far not exercised this authority 
as it pertains to Internet networks and services 
because of:

o the rapid emergence of Internet networks and 
  services

o provisions of Art. 31 of the ITU Constitution 
  that provide for "the right to make special 
  arrangements on telecommunication matters which 
  do not concern Members in general";

o provisions of Art. 9 of the International 
  Telecommunication Regulations for "special 
  arrangements on telecommunication matters which 
  do not concern Members in general...including, as 
  necessary, those financial, technical, or 
  operating conditions to be observed."  These 
  provisions must be read in conjunction with 
  Opinion No. 1 of the Final Acts of the World 
  Administrative Telegraph and Telephone 
  Conference, Melbourne, 1988 (WATTC-88), which 
  may condition application of the provisions in 
  some countries;

o general regulatory policies, embodied in 
  national and regional law and the World Trade 
  Organization (WTO) General Agreement on Trade in 
  Services (GATS) Telecommunication Annex that 
  encourage minimum regulation of value added 
  services; and

o the inaccessibility of Internet networks and 
  services by the public until comparatively 
  recently.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


However, the emergence of the Internet as a 
principal manifestation of global information 
infrastructure, combined with widespread 
availability to the public and the appearance of 
issues which clearly concern "Members in general," 
produce a basis for exercise of the authority the 
ITU possesses.

These changed circumstances do not imply that the 
ITU should or would necessarily exercise the 
authority, or couldn't effectively delegate the 
authority to a third party such as an alliance or 
confederation of which it was a part, and effected 
the purposes entrusted to the ITU.  The ITU has 
over most of its history been primarily an 
organization of public telecommunication services 
providers and product manufacturers, with efforts 
undertaken in recent years to also embrace users of 
these services.  In this instance, in the so-called 
new telecommunications environment, it should be 
inclined to look to the providers of Internet 
services and products to deal with numbering and 
addressing matters.

b. Domestic Law

Virtually every country has a national agency with 
broad jurisdiction over all forms of 
telecommunication.  In the U.S., the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) has so-called Title 
I statutory authority that encompasses "...all 
interstate and foreign communication by wire or 
radio...."  The Commission's authority has been 
broadly interpreted and upheld by the Court, and 
clearly encompasses Internet networks and services.  
It has, however, under the Computer I, II, and III 
promulgated doctrine of "forbearance" concerning 
the regulatory category into which the Internet 
falls (enhanced networks and services), and sought 
to apply it to U.S. state and local jurisdictions 
as well (with mixed success).

For many of the same reasons enumerated for the 
ITU, above, the FCC has not become previously 
directly involved in Internet related matters - 
even if the Internet arena has been a significant 
indirect beneficiary of it's policies.  However, 
for many of the same reasons as the ITU, the FCC 
is reacting to changing conditions.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 5]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


With the exception of radio station call signs, 
the FCC has not itself administered names and 
address associated with any telecommunication 
service or network.  Where the need has arisen to 
deal with the subject, for example with respect to 
telephony networks, the Commission has looked to 
service provider organizations, while remaining 
responsive to concerns about anti-competitive 
conduct.  It seems likely that the Commission would 
maintain a similar position with respect to the 
provisioning of Internet services to the public and 
behavior among access providers.

It remains an interesting hypothetical question as 
to whether State authorities in the U.S., for 
example the Public Utility Commissions, could or 
would exercise authority over Internet naming 
within their State jurisdictions.  Such a result 
would depend, among other factors, on the outcome 
of the FCC Computer III preemption doctrine.

c. Intellectual Property Rights

A third basis for exercising legal authority over 
Internet naming and addressing encompasses 
intellectual property rights over the related 
standards or databases, as well as trademark issues 
associated with the registration and use of domain 
names.  This is somewhat separate from the matters 
of jurisdiction raised above, but would necessarily 
need to be dealt with by any entity exercising 
authority.

The standards for naming and addressing have long 
been in the public domain, so there seems no basis 
for any kind of remote assertion of ownership by 
anyone associated with their development.  It is 
possible to argue that those who have been engaged 
in the process of registering names and addresses 
have established and allocated a property right.  
The issue has at least been indirectly broached by 
recent trademark controversies where allegations 
have arisen about such registrations amounting to 
an infringement of trademark rights.  However, the 
infringement would arise from use or denial of use 
in commerce, not the mere act of registration.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 6]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


As to acquisition of a property right by virtue of 
database maintenance, one of the interesting 
properties of the Internet is its highly 
distributed configuration.  It is therefore 
primarily Internet Service Providers and their 
larger customers who constitute the preponderance 
of the Domain Name System servers.  As a result, 
under such a database ownership theory, it would 
seem that the DNS server operators of the world who 
would prevail.

The systems of international and domestic 
trademark protection are also implicated in dealing 
with jurisdiction matters.  Thus the World 
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the 
United Nations Education, Scientific, and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and domestic 
trademark organizations have interests that are 
invoked and treaty instruments that may be 
applicable.

3. COMITY AMONG INTERESTED PARTIES

The legal concept of comity seems most applicable 
in dealing with the kind of complex issues that are 
invoked by Internet numbering and addressing.  
Comity implies that you look at the principal 
parties involved, the interests invoked, and the 
requirements necessary, then in a spirit of 
accommodation, craft a result that best balances 
and meets all those factors.

The following attempts to identify principal 
parties, interests, and requirements.

a. Internet service providers and organizations

Internet Service Providers are by far the parties 
most affected by Internet addressing and numbering 
administration and use.  It affects them in their 
ability to attract and support customers, to 
compete against others service providers, and in 
the operation of their networks. ISPs must directly 
bear costs and liabilities of any scheme - more so 
than for almost any other kind of network 
infrastructure.

It is not surprising, therefore, that ISPs have 
funded and helped manage the RIPE NCC and the AP-
NIC encompassing all the world regions except the 
Americas.  It is also the CIX Association which has 
played a leading role in developing meaningful 
solutions and tools to effect a scalable, 
distributed solution.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 7]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


Additionally, it is the industry maintained 
Internet Software Consortium that develops the 
principal implementing standards and software, and 
it is ISPs participating actively in Internet 
standards organizations such as the IETF and the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), and operations 
forums who shape the standards and practices 
whereby the Internet and its applications function.
History has also demonstrated that in reasonably 
competitive environments, it is service providers 
operating through commonly supported dedicated 
organizations - as opposed to third party bodies - 
that are most efficient and effective in developing 
workable solutions that meet common interests.

b. End users and organizations

After ISPs, it is end users who are significantly 
affected by numbering and addressing.  It affects 
their ability to access and use the Internet in a 
timely fashion, their ability to maintain their 
computer hosts and the costs associated with doing 
so.  In the case of domain names, it may also 
affect their commercial identity and ability to 
participate effectively in the marketplace.

It should be noted that more than just public 
Internets are involved here, as the number and name 
resources involved here also encompass "enterprise 
internets" which are actually several times more 
numerous than the networks constituting the global  
public Internet.

Major end user representative organizations like 
the International Telecommunications Users Group 
(INTUG) and the International Communications 
Association (ICA) have long been indirectly 
involved in dealing with enterprise Internet 
issues, and recently begun to focus on emerging 
Internet policy matters.

c. Internet product manufacturers and 
   organizations

Internet product manufacturers are affected by 
numbering and addressing solutions both in terms of 
the robustness and growth of the marketplace and 
users of their products, and by additional features 
that may be potentially required for those 
products.  


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 8]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


d. Intergovernmental organizations

Intergovernmental organizations are affected 
principally in terms of the international public 
trust and other more specific responsibilities for 
which they were created.  Increasingly in the 
international telecommunications field, this has 
also encompassed both the creation of open, 
competitive marketplaces as a means of rapid 
implementation of new technologies and services on 
a widespread basis, as well as the special needs of 
developing countries.

This principally invokes the interests of the ITU, 
WTO, and WIPO/UNESCO for general telecom 
regulatory, open competitive provisioning, and 
trademark  issues, respectively. 

e. Domestic governmental authorities

Analogous to intergovernmental organizations, 
domestic governmental authorities are affected in 
terms of the national public trust and other more 
specific responsibilities for which they were 
created.  In the U.S., on the part of the FCC, that 
definitely encompasses open, competitive issues.  
In addition, a variety of government agencies, 
including legislative and executive branches of 
government have diverse interests in promoting the 
Internet as a national information infrastructure.
In nearly all countries, including the U.S., there 
is also a transitional problem in removing 
government agencies from vestigial numbering and 
addressing roles as a robust Internet Service 
Provider environment emerges.  In the U.S., this 
includes a transition of international 
responsibilities to a suitable international 
alliance.

4. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS

Whatever institutional architectures and bodies 
are created for administering Internet numbering 
and addressing must be able to perform certain 
functions that are a complex mixture of 
operational, technical, public policy, and legal 
requirements.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                    [Page 9]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995

a. Legislative

Administration of numbers and addresses requires 
procedures that in turn produce the equivalent of 
administrative rule making.  It will require notice 
to all the affected parties of proposed rules or 
procedures, receipt of comments, balancing of 
complex issues, decision making, publication, 
appeals, and the establishment of precedents.

b. Executive

Administration of  numbers and address requires an 
ability to execute the procedures in an efficient 
and timely fashion to meet the needs of the ISP 
community served.  Given the distributed 
characteristics and growth rates of the Internet 
and enterprise internets, it seems apparent that 
only a relatively distributed solution is possible.  
Considerable Internet technical and operational 
skills are required here.

c. Quasi-judicial

Administration of numbers and addresses requires 
adjudication of disputes that will inevitably arise 
that are both procedural or substantive in nature.  
There is considerable evidence that these disputes 
may involve very complex trademark or 
anticompetitive issues.  At the global domain name 
level, it will additionally require dealing with 
Conflict of Laws.

5. COMPETENCY

Whatever institutional architectures and bodies 
are created for administering Internet numbering 
and addressing must have certain characteristics 
that encompass competency in its broadest sense.

a. Legal

In any kind of formal Internet administrative 
environment, the entities meeting the above 
functional requirements must have the legal 
authority to do so - either by pre-existing treaty 
or statutory instrument, or by delegation from such 
entities.

b. Functional

Entities performing the legislative, executive, 
and quasi-judicial functions must have the skills 
and facilities to actually accomplish them.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                   [Page 10]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


c. Liabilities

One of the most difficult problems associated with 
Internet numbering and addressing is potential 
exposure to litigation and losses by aggrieved 
parties on a wide variety of legal theories.  The 
entity or entities doing this at international 
levels potentially suffers from even greater 
exposure brought about by the complexities of 
different and often conflicting national law and 
policies.

The problem has usually been dealt with by 
entrusting the responsibility to either a public 
international organization which enjoys significant 
immunities from such litigation, or by establishing 
the organization in a country where immunity is 
provided by either special legislative enactment or 
by the nature of the legal system.  It is no 
coincidence, for example, that Switzerland is host 
to more international organizations than any other 
nation.

In the instant situation, it is worth considering 
whether an alliance than encompassed a public 
international organization that possessed immunity, 
could transfer the immunity to the alliance by 
delegation of administrative authority.
Although liability insurance or some kind of 
litigation fund is a potential alternative, it's 
not clear that everyone should be required to bear 
the costs of such disputes.  In addition, the 
estimation and management of such monies is both 
uncertain and complex.

d. Sustainability

The Internet environment being exponential in its 
growth is unlike almost any other.  It requires 
technical, administrative and payment features that 
can also scale exponentially.  As a general rule, 
this means that central, top-down schemes, or those 
that rely on funding from a single source, will not 
work effectively for very long.

e. Internationalism and heterogeneity
Those entities functioning at the international 
level, must be able to support the diversity of 
languages, currencies, time zones, Internet 
implementations, customs, laws, and cultures 
inherent in this environment.  In the Internet 
arena, this also includes dramatic difference in 
computer networking versus telecommunications, and 
other infrastructure cultures.


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                   [Page 11]

Internet Draft Proposal re: DNS and Number Administration  November 1995


6. PRECEDENTS AND PRACTICE

As noted above, for almost 150 years, it has been 
the practice to administer communication naming and 
addressing requirements through a combination of 
international and domestic organizations of service 
providers.  In many instances, these organizations 
have had the characteristics of intergovernmental 
or governmental bodies, although during the past 
decade, the practice has been increasingly to place 
these functions in private-sector service provider 
organizations with some nominal oversight by a 
public agency, if necessary.

The Internet service provisioning environment 
works effectively through its own ISPs, organizations 
such as the CIX, and a diversity of international 
and regional operations bodies who cooperate on a 
continuing basis.  It is further complicated, 
however, by a rapid transition that has already 
largely occurred from a government funded research 
and academic environment to a preponderantly 
private-sector commercial competitive one, but 
which has left some vestigial and unnecessary 
governmental involvement in place.  


7. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

   None.


8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

   Constructive comments have been received from many members 
   of the Internet and telecommunications policy communities,
   especially during the course of the NSF sponsored workshop 
   of the Kennedy    School of Government at Washington DC, 
   20 Nov 1995, for which this material was originally prepared.


A.M.Rutkowski
Netmagic
Chaos Creations
13102 Weathervane Way
Herndon VA 22071
USA
tel: +1 703 471 0593
fax: +1 703 471 0596
email: amr@chaos.com
www: http://www.wia.org/rutkowski.html


Rutkowski                   Expires Jun 1996                   [Page 12]




