
                                  - 1 -



Network Working Group                                      Y. Rekhter
INTERNET DRAFT                 T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Corp.
                                                          P. Lothberg
                                                             STUPI.AB
                                                              Editors
                                                        February 1995


                 An IPv6 Global Unicast Address Format
              <draft-ietf-ipngwg-unicast-addr-fmt-01.txt>


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
   ``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
   nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
   current status of any Internet Draft.


1   Introduction


   This document defines an IPv6 global unicast address format for use
   in the Internet.  The address format defined in this document is
   consistent with the IPv6 address allocation architecture [1], and is
   intended to facilitate scalable Internet routing.

   The format defined in this document doesn't preclude the use of other
   address formats.


2   Overview of the IPv6 Address


   This section recapitulates essential information from the IPv6
   protocol specifications [2] concerning the basic structure of the
   IPv6 addresses.






Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 1]

                           - 2 -



   The IPv6 protocol [2] defines an IPv6 address as a 16 octets object.
   The high-order bits of an IPv6 address are used to indicate a
   particular type of the address. The variable-length prefix field
   comprising these bits is called the Format Prefix (FP).  This
   document defines an address format for the 010 (binary) Format
   Prefix. The same address format can be used for other FPs, as long as
   these FPs identify IPv6 unicast addresses.


3  IPv6 Global Unicast Address Format for Use in the Internet


   This document defines an address format for the IPv6 unicast address
   assignment. It is expected that the defined format would be widely
   used for systems connected (at IP) to the Internet.

   The address format defined in this document conforms to the
   architecture for IPv6 address allocation [1].  Specifically, the
   format is designed to support aggregation of network layer
   reachability information at multiple levels of routing hierarchy, as
   described in [1].

   For addresses of the format described in this document the address
   administration is organized into a three level hierarchy -- registry,
   provider, and subscriber. The address format defined here allows
   flexible address allocation at each level of the address
   administration hierarchy in such a way as to support a wide spectrum
   of demands for address allocation.

   This document assumes that the Internet routing system doesn't make
   any assumptions about specific structure and semantics of an IPv6
   address, except for the structure and semantics of the Format Prefix
   part of the address, and the use of the "longest prefix match"
   algorithm (on arbitrary bit boundaries) for making a forwarding
   decision.

   The address format defined in this document is intended to facilitate
   scalable Internet-wide routing that doesn't impose any constraints on
   connectivity among the providers, as well as among the providers and
   subscribers.

   The address format defined in this document does not preclude the use
   of other address formats in the Internet.


3.1  Global IPv6 Unicast Addresses Structure


   For the purpose of address allocation, the address format defined in
   this document consists of the following parts:  Format Prefix,
   Registry Identifier, Registry-Specific Component, Provider-Specific





Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 2]

                           - 3 -



   Component, and Subscriber-Specific Component.









     +-------------------------------+
     |        Format Prefix          |
     +-------------------------------+
     | Registry Identifier Component |
     +-------------------------------+
     |  Registry-Specific Component  |
     +-------------------------------+
     |  Provider-Specific Component  |
     +-------------------------------+
     | Subscriber-Specific Component |
     +-------------------------------+




   The following sections suggest some of the alternatives in forming
   each part of the address.  The suggestions are only a small number of
   the technically possible addressing formats and simultaneously
   demonstrate different alternatives at different levels in the
   hierarchy. RFC1219 provides useful information for allocating values
   within individual components. Ultimately it is the joint
   responsibility of the registry, the provider and the subscriber to
   agree on their local addressing structure.


3.2   Registry Identifiers Component (Registry ID)


   With the growth of the Internet and its increasing globalization,
   much thought has been given to the evolution of the Network Layer
   address space allocation and assignment process.  RFC 1466,
   "Guidelines for Management of IP Address Space", proposes a plan that
   defines distributed allocation and assignment of the IPv4 address
   space.

   As the Internet transitions to IPv6, the plan for distributed
   allocation and assignment of the IPv4 address space established in
   RFC1466 forms a base for the distributed allocation and assignment of
   the IPv6 address space.

   The Internet Registry (IR) acts as the principal registry for the





Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 3]

                           - 4 -



   IPv6 address space; however, the IR may allocate blocks of IPv6
   addresses and the assignment of those addresses to qualified Regional
   Registries.  The IR will serve as the default registry in cases where
   no delegated registration authority has been identified.  It is
   expected that the IANA will act as the IR.

   The Registry Identifier (Registry ID) Component of the IPv6 address
   format defined in this document is intended to facilitate a broad
   geographic address allocation and facilitate the operations of the
   distributed Regional Registries.

   The Registry ID Component immediately follows the FP part of an IPv6
   address.

   At present there are three Regional Registries: INTERNIC, RIPE NCC,
   and APNIC.  In addition, address allocation could be done directly by
   the Internet Registry.  Corresponding to this division of address
   allocation, this document defines the following Registry IDs (and
   associated with them address blocks):


      - 0xF8 (5 bits long) - multi-regional (IR)

      - 0xE8 (5 bits long) - RIPE NCC

      - 0xD0 (5 bits long) - INTERNIC

      - 0x90 (5 bits long) - APNIC

   All other values of the Registry ID Component are reserved by the
   IANA.

   Use of the Multi-regional Registry ID permits flexibility in address
   assignments which are outside of the geographical regions already
   allocated. It is expected that the IR would be responsible for
   managing address space registration under the Multi-regional Registry
   ID.

   It is expected that the IR, and any designated Regional Registries,
   allocate addresses in conformance with this overall scheme.  Where
   there are qualifying Regional Registries established, primary
   responsibility for allocation from within that block will be
   delegated to that registry.

   A Regional Registry may have more than one block of addresses
   allocated to it (as a result the Registry would have multiple
   Registry IDs associated with it).









Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 4]

                           - 5 -



3.3 Registry-Specific Component (RSC)


   This document assumes that within each Regional Registry there will
   be a relatively large number of providers that would request
   relatively small blocks of addresses, medium number of providers that
   would request medium blocks of addresses, and relatively small number
   of providers that would request relatively large blocks of addresses.

   To accommodate a potentially wide range of demands for address space
   allocation by individual providers a registry should allow the RSC to
   be of variable length. The length of the RSC associated with the
   address block a registry allocates to a provider determines the size
   of the address block granted to that provider by the registry.

   The value of the RSC associated with an address block a registry
   allocates to a particular provider uniquely identifies this provider
   within the registry. Since RSC is of variable length, the uniqueness
   implies that no two RSC values assigned within a given registry
   should be equal to each other or should exhibit a substring (subset)
   relationship.

   We suggest that within a registry the range of RSC length be limited
   between 1 and 3 octets. Combined with FP and Registry ID, that leaves
   12 to 14 octets for the Provider Specific and Subscriber Specific
   components.

   We further suggest that at the minimum a registry would allow address
   allocation with RSC of the following length:



      RSC Length    Fraction of Registry's Address Space
       (in bits)              (per provider)
      ----------    ------------------------------------
          24                     1/(2^24)
          16                     1/(2^16)
           8                      1/(2^8)




   This document assumes that some subscribers may decide to acquire
   their addresses space directly out of a registry, thus making their
   addresses independent of the provider(s) they directly attached to.
   To accommodate such subscribers we suggest within each registry to
   reserve the portion of the address space that begins with 0xFF for
   address allocation to subscribers that elect to use provider-
   independent addressing (as described in Section 3.6).







Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 5]

                           - 6 -



3.4 Provider-Specific Component (PSC)


   This document assumes that within each provider there will be a
   relatively large number of subscribers that would request relatively
   small blocks of addresses, medium number of subscribers that would
   request medium blocks of addresses, relatively small number of
   subscribers that would request relatively large blocks of addresses
   and very few subscribers that would require very large block of
   addresses.

   To accommodate a potentially wide range of demands for address space
   allocation by individual subscribers a provider should allow the PSC
   to be of variable length. The length of the PSC associated with the
   address block a provider allocates to a subscriber determines the
   size of the address block granted to that subscriber by the provider.

   The value of the PSC associated with an address block a provider
   allocates to a particular subscriber uniquely identifies this
   subscriber within the provider. Since the PSC is of variable length,
   the uniqueness implies no two PSC values assigned within a given
   provider should be equal to each other or should exhibit a substring
   (subset) relationship.

   We suggest that within a provider the range of PSC length be limited
   between 1 and 4 octets.

   We further suggest that at the minimum a provider would allow address
   allocation with PSC of the following length:



     PSC Length        Fraction of Provider's Address Space
     (in bits)                (per subscriber)
     ----------        ------------------------------------
       32                         1/(2^32)
       24                         1/(2^24)
       16                         1/(2^16)
        8                          1/(2^8)



   A (direct) provider may decide to group its subscribers into regions.
   This grouping may be useful when the (direct) provider is attached to
   another (indirect) provider at multiple points, as it allows the
   direct provider to exert a certain degree of control over the
   coupling between the attachment points and flow of the traffic
   destined to a particular subscriber (see Section 5.3.1 of [1]). To
   accommodate such a grouping we suggest that the (direct) provider
   should allocate some small number of high-order bits (e.g. between 2
   and 4 bits) of PSC as a Region Identifier.  The purpose of a Region





Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 6]

                           - 7 -



   Identifier is to identify a group of subscribers that are within a
   close topological proximity to each other (from the provider's point
   of view), and thus could be reachable through a particular attachment
   point between the (direct) provider and other (indirect) provider(s).

   Regardless of whether the Region Identifier is present,  we suggest
   that the total length of the PSC varies from 1 to 4 octets.  Combined
   with FP, Registry ID, and PSC that leaves 8 to 13 octets for the
   Subscriber Specific Component.




3.5 Subscriber-Specific Component (SSC)


   This document leaves the organization of SSC up to individual
   subscribers. However, this document assumes that for all but
   relatively small subscribers, there will be sufficient number of bits
   within the SSC to allow address assignment in such a way as to
   provide hierarchical routing (at least two levels) within a
   subscriber.

   Regardless of how other components are organized, this document
   suggests that for the subscribers that use IPv6 autoconfiguration
   capabilities the minimum number of octets allocated to the SSC should
   be 7. This would allow to embed IEEE 802 MAC addresses as the low
   order 6 octets of an IPv6 address (stored in IEEE 802 canonical bit
   order). Observe, that if allocation of all the other components
   follows recommendations presented in this document, the SSC component
   would have at least 8 octets.


3.6  Provider-independent Address Format


   This section describes one possible address format for subscribers
   that elect to use provider-independent addresses. The format of these
   addresses is similar to the one described in the previous sections,
   but it doesn't include the PSC.

   This document assumes that within each registry there will be a
   medium number of subscribers that would request medium block of
   provider-independent addresses and relatively small number of
   subscribers that would request relatively large block of provider-
   independent addresses.

   Each registry is expected to reserve an address block that begins
   with 0xFF (8 bits) for allocation to subscribers that elect
   provider-independent addresses.  Following this is a variable length
   Subscriber Identifier (S-ID) field.  The length of the S-ID field





Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 7]

                           - 8 -



   associated with the address block a registry allocates to a
   subscriber determines the size of the address block granted to that
   subscriber by the registry.

   The value of the S-ID associated with an address block a registry
   allocates to a particular subscriber uniquely identifies this
   subscriber within the registry. Since S-ID is of variable length, the
   uniqueness implies that no two S-ID values assigned within a given
   registry should be equal to each other or should exhibit a substring
   (subset) relationship.

   We suggest that within a registry the range of S-ID length be limited
   from 12 to 24 bits. We further suggest that at the minimum a registry
   should allow address allocation with S-ID of the length of 12 and 24
   bits.  This would leaves from 12 to 13.5 octets for allocation within
   individual sites (for the SSC).

   One possible use of provider-independent addresses is for multihomed
   sites (as described in Section 5.4.1 of [1]).

   Allocation and use of provider-independent addresses requires careful
   judgement. It is crucial to understand that use of such addresses for
   the purpose of Internet-wide connectivity has negative impact on the
   overall routing system, as the only possible routing information
   abstraction above the subscriber level could occur at the continental
   level (see Section 5.7 of [1]).


4 National Registry


   As a variation of the proposed format, a Regional Registry may
   allocate blocks of address space to several National Registries. A
   National Registry then becomes the entity that allocates address
   space to individual organizations (e.g. providers) within the country
   served by the Registry.

   To support address allocation by National Registries this document
   allows to include the National Registry Id Component as part of the
   address format (see below). The Component is immediately follows the
   Registry Identifier Component and precedes the Registry-Specific
   Component.



     +-------------------------------+
     |        Format Prefix          |
     +-------------------------------+
     | Registry Identifier Component |
     +-------------------------------+
     | National Registry ID Component|





Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 8]

                           - 9 -



     +-------------------------------+
     |  Registry-Specific Component  |
     +-------------------------------+
     |  Provider-Specific Component  |
     +-------------------------------+
     | Subscriber-Specific Component |
     +-------------------------------+




   This document assumes that within each regional registry there will
   be a relatively small number of national registries. However, within
   each national registry there will be a relatively large number of
   providers that would request relatively small blocks of addresses,
   medium number of providers that would request medium blocks of
   addresses, and relatively small number of providers that would
   request relatively large blocks of addresses.

   To accommodate a potentially wide range of demands for address space
   allocation by individual national registries a regional registry
   should allow the National Registry ID to be of variable length. The
   length of the National Registry ID associated with the address block
   a regional registry allocates to a national registry determines the
   size of the address block granted to that provider by the registry.

   The value of the National Registry ID associated with an address
   block a regional registry allocates to a particular national registry
   uniquely identifies this national registry. Since the National
   Registry ID is of variable length, the uniqueness implies that no two
   National Registry ID values assigned within a given regional registry
   should be equal to each other or should exhibit a substring (subset)
   relationship.

   We suggest that within a regional registry the range of the National
   Registry ID length be limited between 1 and 2 octets.  We further
   suggest that within a national registry the range of the RSC length
   be limited between 1 and 2 octets. Combined with FP, Regional
   Registry ID, and National Registry ID, that leaves 12 to 14 octets
   for the Provider Specific and Subscriber Specific components.

   We further suggest that at the minimum a national registry would
   allow address allocation with RSC of the following length:



      RSC Length    Fraction of Registry's Address Space
       (in bits)              (per provider)
      ----------    ------------------------------------
          16                     1/(2^16)
           8                      1/(2^8)





Expiration Date July 1995                                       [Page 9]

                           - 10 -



5   Conclusions


   [TBD]


6   Acknowledgements


   We would like to express our thanks to Jim Bound (DEC), Brian
   Carpenter (CERN), Steve Deering (XEROX), Geoff Huston (AANET), and
   Tony Li (cisco) for their review and constructive comments.


7   References


   [1] Rekhter, Y., Li, T., "An Architecture for IPv6 Unicast Address
   Allocation", Internet Draft

   [2] Hinden, B., "IP Next Generation Addressing Architecture",
   Internet Draft


8  Security Considerations


   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.


9  Authors' Addresses


   Yakov Rekhter
   T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM Corporation
   P.O. Box 704
   Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
   Phone:  (914) 784-7361
   email:  yakov@watson.ibm.com

   Peter Lothberg
   STUPI.AB
   Box 9129
   S-102 72 Stockholm
   Sweden
   Phone:+46 8 6699720
   email:roll@Stupi.SE









Expiration Date August 1995                                  [Page 10]

