
Internet Draft                                             Barbara Fraser
Network Working Group                                             SEI/CMU
Expires in six months                                             Editor
                                                               June 1996


                         Site Security Handbook
                     <draft-ietf-ssh-handbook-03.txt>

Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Table of Contents

1.   Introduction....................................................  2
1.1  Purpose of this Work............................................  2
1.2  Audience........................................................  2
1.3  Definitions.....................................................  3
1.4  Related Work....................................................  3
1.5  Basic Approach..................................................  3
1.6  Risk Assessment.................................................  4
2.   Security Policies...............................................  5
2.1  What is a Computer Security Policy and Why Have One?............  5
2.2  What Makes a Good Computer Security Policy?.....................  7
2.3  Keeping the Policy Flexible.....................................  8
3.   Architecture....................................................  9
3.1  Objectives......................................................  9
3.2  Network and Service Configuration............................... 11
3.3  Firewalls....................................................... 16
4.   Security Services and Procedures................................ 19
4.1  Authentication.................................................. 19
4.2  Confidentiality................................................. 22
4.3  Integrity....................................................... 23
4.4  Authorization................................................... 23
4.5  Access.......................................................... 24
4.6  Auditing........................................................ 27
4.7  Securing Backups................................................ 30
5.   Security Incident Handling...................................... 30
5.1  Preparing and Planning for Incident Handling.................... 32



Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 1]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


5.2  Notification and Points of Contact.............................. 34
5.3  Identifying an Incident......................................... 40
5.4  Handling an Incident............................................ 42
5.5  Aftermath of an Incident........................................ 47
5.6  Responsibilities................................................ 48
6.   Ongoing Activities.............................................. 49
7.   Tools and Locations............................................. 49
8.   Mailing Lists and Other Resources............................... 51
9.   References...................................................... 53
10.  Annotated Bibliography.......................................... 62

1.  INTRODUCTION

   This document provides guidance to system and network administrators
   on how to address security issues within the Internet community.  It
   builds on the foundation provided in RFC 1244 and is the collective
   work of a number of contributing authors. Those authors include:
   Jules P. Aronson, Nevil Brownlee, Frank Byrum, Joao Nuno Ferreira,
   Erik Guttman, Klaus-Peter Kossakowski, Edward.P.Lewis, Gary Malkin,
   Russ Mundy, Philip J. Nesser, and Michael S. Ramsey.

   A special thank you goes to Joyce Reynolds, ISI, and Paul Holbrook,
   CICnet, for their vision, leadership, and effort in the creation of
   the first version of this handbook. It is the working group's sincere
   hope that this version will be as helpful to the community as the
   earlier one was.

1.1  Purpose of this Work

   This handbook is a guide to setting computer security policies and
   procedures for sites that have systems on the Internet.  This guide
   lists issues and factors that a site must consider when setting their
   own policies.  It makes some recommendations and provides discussions
   of relevant areas.

   This guide is only a framework for setting security policies and
   procedures.  In order to have an effective set of policies and
   procedures, a site will have to make many decisions, gain agreement,
   and then communicate and implement the policies.

1.2  Audience

   The audience for this document are system and network administrators,
   and decision makers (typically "middle management") at sites.  For
   brevity, we will use the term "administrator" throughout this
   document to refer to system and network administrators.

   This document is not directed at programmers or those trying to
   create secure programs or systems.  The focus of this document is on
   the policies and procedures that need to be in place to support any
   technical security features that a site may be implementing.

   The primary audience for this work are sites that are members of the
   Internet community.  However, this document should be useful to any



Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 2]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   site that allows communication with other sites.  As a general guide
   to security policies, this document may also be useful to sites with
   isolated systems.

1.3  Definitions

   For the purposes of this guide, a "site" is any organization that
   owns computers or network-related resources.  These resources may
   include host computers that users use, routers, terminal servers,
   PC's or other devices that have access to the Internet.  A site may
   be an end user of Internet services or a service provider such as a
   mid-level network.  However, most of the focus of this guide is on
   those end users of Internet services.  We assume that the site has
   the ability to set policies and procedures for itself with the
   concurrence and support from those who actually own the resources.

   The "Internet" is that set of networks and machines which use the
   TCP/IP protocol suite, connect through gateways, and share common
   name and address spaces [1].

   The term "administrator" is used to cover all those people who are
   responsible for the day-to-day operation of system and network
   resources.  This may be a number of individuals or an organization.

   The term "decision maker" refers to those people at a site who set or
   approve policy.  These are often (but not always) the people who own
   the resources.

1.4  Related Work

   The IETF Guidelines for Security Incident Response Working Group
   (GRIP) is developing a document for security incident response teams.
   That document provides additional guidance to those organizations
   planning to develop their own computer security incident response
   team (CSIRT), including a template that is useful to CSIRTs when
   describing their policies and services.

   The Site Security Handbook Working Group is working on a User's Guide
   to Internet Security. It will provide practical guidance to end users
   to help them protect their information and the resources they use.

1.5  Basic Approach

   This guide is written to provide basic guidance in developing a
   security plan for your site.  One generally accepted approach to
   follow is suggested by Fites, et. al. [ref] and includes the
   following steps:

   (1)  Identify what you are trying to protect
   (2)  Determine what you are trying to protect it from
   (3)  Determine how likely the threats are
   (4)  Implement measures which will protect your assets in a cost-
        effective manner.
   (5)  Review the process continuously and make improvements each time



Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 3]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


        a weakness is found.


   Most of this document is focused on item 4 above, but the other steps
   cannot be avoided if an effective plan is to be established at your
   site.  One old truism in security is that the cost of protecting
   yourself against a threat should be less than the cost of recovering
   if the threat were to strike you.  Without reasonable knowledge of
   what you are protecting and what the likely threats are, following
   this rule could be difficult.

1.6  Risk Assessment

1.6.1  General Discussion

   One of the most important reasons for creating a computer security
   policy is to ensure that efforts spent on security yield cost
   effective benefits.  Although this may seem obvious, it is possible
   to be mislead about where the effort is needed.  As an example, there
   is a great deal of publicity about intruders on computers systems;
   yet most surveys of computer security show that, for most
   organizations, the actual loss from "insiders" is much greater.

   Risk analysis involves determining what you need to protect, what you
   need to protect it from, and how to protect it.  It is the process of
   examining all of your risks, then ranking those risks by level of
   severity.  This process involves making cost-effective decisions on
   what you want to protect.  As mentioned above, you should probably
   not spend more to protect something than it is actually worth.

   A full treatment of risk analysis is outside the scope of this
   document.  [3, FITES] and [16, PFLEEGER] provide introductions to
   this topic.  However, there are two elements of a risk analysis that
   will be briefly covered in the next two sections:

   (1) Identifying the assets
   (2) Identifying the threats

   For each asset, the basic goals of security are availability,
   confidentiality, and integrity.  Each threat should be examined with
   an eye to how the threat could affect these areas.

1.6.2  Identifying the Assets

   One step in a risk analysis is to identify all the things that need
   to be protected.  Some things are obvious, like valuable proprietary
   information, intellectual property, and all the various pieces of
   hardware; but, some are overlooked, such as the people who actually
   use the systems. The essential point is to list all things that could
   be affected by a security problem.

   One list of categories is suggested by Pfleeger [16, PFLEEGER, page
   459]; this list is adapted from that source:




Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 4]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   (1)  Hardware: CPUs, boards, keyboards, terminals,
        workstations, personal computers, printers, disk
        drives, communication lines, terminal servers, routers.

   (2)  Software: source programs, object programs,
        utilities, diagnostic programs, operating systems,
        communication programs.

   (3)  Data: during execution, stored on-line, archived off-line,
        backups, audit logs, databases, in transit over
        communication media.

   (4)  People: users, administrators.

   (5)  Documentation: on programs, hardware, systems, local
        administrative procedures.

   (6)  Supplies: paper, forms, ribbons, magnetic media.

1.6.3  Identifying the Threats

   Once the assets requiring protection are identified, it is necessary
   to identify threats to those assests.  The threats can then be
   examined to determine what potential for loss exists.  It helps to
   consider from what threats you are trying to protect your assets.
   The following are classic threats that should be considered.
   Depending on your site, there will be more specific threats that
   should be identified and addressed.

   (1)  Unauthorized access to resources and/or information
   (2)  Disclosure of information
   (3)  Denial of service

2.   Security Policies

2.1  What is a Computer Security Policy and Why Have One?

   The security-related decisions you make, or fail to make, as network
   administrator largely determines how secure or insecure your network
   is, how much functionality your network offers, and how easy your
   network is to use.  However, you cannot make good decisions about
   security without first determining what your security goals are.
   Until you determine what your security goals are, you cannot make
   effective use of any collection of security tools because you simply
   will not know what to check for and what restrictions to impose.

   For example, your goals will probably be very different from the
   goals of a product vendor.  Vendors are trying to make configuration
   and operation of their products as simple as possible, which implies
   that the default configurations will often be as open (i.e.,
   insecure) as possible.  While this does make it easier to install new
   products, it also leaves access to those systems, and other systems
   through them, open to any user who wanders by.




Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 5]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Your goals will be largely determined by the following key tradeoffs:

   (1)  services offered vs. security provided -
        Each service offered to users carries its own security risks.
        For some services the risk outweighs the benefit of the service
        and the administrator may choose to eliminate the service rather
        than try to secure it.

   (2)  ease of use vs. security -
        The easiest system to use would allow access to any user and requi=
re
        no passwords; that is, there would be no security.  Requiring
        passwords makes the system a little less convenient, but more secu=
re.
        Requiring device-generated one-time passwords makes the system eve=
n
        more difficult to use, but much more secure.

   (3)  cost of security vs. risk of loss -
        There are many different costs to security: monetary (i.e., the
        cost of purchasing security hardware and software like firewalls
        and one-time password generators), performance (i.e., encryption
        and decryption take time), and ease of use (as mentioned above).
        There are also many levels of risk: loss of privacy (i.e., the
        reading of information by unauthorized individuals), loss of
        data (i.e., the corruption or erasure of information), and the
        loss of service (e.g., the filling of data storage space, usage
        of computational resources, and denial of network access).  Each
        type of cost must be weighed against each type of loss.


   Your goals should be communicated to all users, operations staff, and
   managers through a set of security rules, called a "computer security
   policy."

2.1.1  Definition of a Computer Security Policy

   A computer security policy is a formal statement of the rules by
   which people who are given access to an organization's technology and
   information assets must abide.

2.1.2  Purposes of a Computer Security Policy

   The main purpose of a computer security policy is to inform users,
   staff and managers of their obligatory requirements for protecting
   technology and information assets.  The policy should specify the
   mechanisms through which these requirements can be met.  Another
   purpose is to provide a baseline from which to acquire, configure and
   audit computer systems and networks for compliance with the policy.
   Therefore an attempt to use a set of security tools in the absence of
   at least an implied security policy is meaningless.

   An Appropriate Use Policy (AUP) may also be part of a security
   policy.  It should spell out what users may and may not do on the
   various components of the system, including the type of traffic
   allowed on the networks.  The AUP should be as explicit as possible
   to avoid ambiguity or misunderstanding.  For example, an AUP might



Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 6]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   list any prohibited USENET newsgroups.

2.1.3  Who Should be Involved When Forming Policy?

   In order for a security policy to be appropriate and effective, it
   needs to have the acceptance and support of all levels of employees
   within the organization.  The following is a list of individuals who
   should be involved in the creation and review of security policy
   documents:

   (1)  site security administrator
   (2)  legal counsel
   (3)  computing center personnel
   (4)  administrators of large user groups within the organization
        (e.g., business divisions, computer science department within a
        university, etc.)
   (5)  security incident response team
   (6)  representatives of the user groups affected by the security policy

   The list of above is representative of many organizations, but is not
   necessarily comprehensive.  The idea is to bring in representation
   from key stakeholders, management who have budget and policy
   authority, technical staff who know what can and cannot be supported,
   and legal counsel who know the legal ramifications of various policy
   choices.  In some organizations, it may be appropriate to include
   audit personnel.  Involving this group is important if resulting
   policy statements are to reach the broadest possible acceptance.

2.2  What Makes a Good Computer Security Policy?

   The characteristics of a good security policy are:

   (1)  It must be implementable through system administration
        procedures, publishing of acceptable use guidelines, or other
        appropriate methods.

   (2)  It must be enforcible with security tools, where appropriate,
        and with sanctions, where actual prevention is not technically
        feasible.

   (3)  It must clearly define the areas of responsibility for the
        users, staff, and administrators.

   The components of a good security policy include:

   (1)  Computer Technology Purchasing Guidelines which specify required,
        or preferred, security features.  These should supplement existing
        purchasing policies and guidelines.

   (2)  A Privacy Policy which defines reasonable expectations of privacy
        regarding such issues as monitoring of electronic mail, logging of
        keystrokes, and access to users' files.

   (3)  An Access Policy which defines access rights and privileges to



Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 7]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


        protect assets from loss or disclosure by specifying acceptable us=
e
        guidelines for users, operations staff, and management.  It should
        provide guidelines for external connections, data communications,
        connecting devices to a network, and adding new software to
        systems.  It should also specify any required notification message=
s
        (e.g., connect messages should provide warnings about authorized
        usage and line monitoring, and not simply say "Welcome").

   (4)  An Accountability Policy which defines the responsibilities of use=
rs,
        operations staff, and management.  It should specify an audit
        capability, and provide incident handling guidelines (i.e., what t=
o
        do and who to contact if a possible intrusion is detected).

   (5)  An Authentication Policy which establishes trust through an effect=
ive
        password policy, and by setting guidelines for remote location
        authentication and the use of authentication devices (e.g., one-ti=
me
        passwords and the devices that generate them).

   (6)  An Availability statement which sets users' expectations for the
        availability of resources.  It should address redundancy and recov=
ery
        issues, as well as specify operating hours and maintenance down-ti=
me
        periods.  It should also include contact information for reporting
        system and network failures.

   (7)  A Violations Reporting Policy that indicates which types of
        violations (e.g., privacy and security, internal and external)
        must be reported and to whom the reports are made.  A
        non-threatening atmosphere and the possibility of anonymous report=
ing
        will result in a greater probability that a violation will be
        reported if it is detected.

   (8)  Supporting Information which provides users, staff, and management
        with contact information for each type of policy violation;
        guidelines on how to handle outside queries about a security incid=
ent,
        or information which may be considered confidential or proprietary=
;
        and cross-references to security procedures and related informatio=
n,
        such as company policies and regulatory requirements (federal, sta=
te,
        and local).

   There may be regulatory requirements that affect some aspects of your
   security policy (e.g., line monitoring).  The creators of the
   security policy should consider seeking legal assistance in the
   creation of the policy.  At a minimum, the policy should be reviewed
   by legal counsel.

   Once your computer security policy has been established it should be
   clearly communicated to users, staff, and management.  Having all
   personnel sign a statement indicating that they have read,
   understood, and agreed to abide by the policy is an important part of
   the process.  Finally, your policy should be reviewed on a regular
   basis to see if it is successfully supporting your security needs.

2.3  Keeping the Policy Flexible




Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 8]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   In order for a security policy to be viable for the long term, it
   requires a lot of flexibility.  The mechanisms for updating the
   policy should be clearly spelled out.  This includes the process, the
   people involved, and the people who must sign-off on the changes.

   It is also important to recognize that there are exceptions to every
   rule.  Whenever possible, the policy should spell out what exceptions
   to the general policy exist.  For example, under what conditions is a
   system administrator allowed to go through a user's files.  Also,
   there may be some cases when multiple users will have access to the
   same userid.  For example, on systems with a "root" user, multiple
   system administrators may know the password and use the root account.

   Another consideration is called the "Garbage Truck Syndrome."  This
   refers to what would happen to a site if a key person was suddenly
   unavailable for his/her job function (e.g., was suddenly ill or left
   the company unexpectedly).  While the greatest security resides in
   the minimum dissemination of information, the risk of losing critical
   information increases when that information is not shared.  It is
   necessary to determine what the proper balance is for your site.

3.  Architecture

3.1  Objectives

3.1.1  Completely defined security plans

   Defining a comprehensive security plan should be done by all sites.
   This plan should be at a higher level than the specific policies
   discussed in section 2.  It should be crafted as a framework of broad
   guidelines into which specific policies will fit.

   It is important to have this framework in place so that individual
   policies can be consistant with the overall site security
   architecture.  For example, having a strong policy with regard to
   Internet access and having weak restrictions on modem usage is
   inconsistent with an overall philosophy of strong security
   restrictions on external access.

   A security policy should contain, at a minimum: a list of services
   which are currently, or will be, provided; who will have access to
   those services; how access will be provided; who will administer
   those services; etc.  It is also important to define any limitations
   on which portions of an organization can provide certain services.

   Another aspect of the plan should concern incident handling.  Chapter
   5 provides an in-depth discussion of responses to incidents, but it
   is important to define classes of incidents and define responses to
   each class of incident.  For sites with firewalls, how many attempts
   to foil the firewall will trigger a response?  Are there levels of
   escallation in both attacks and responses?  For sites without
   firewalls, does a single attempt to connect constitute an incident?
   How about a systematic scan of machines?




Site Security Working Group                                     [Page 9]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   For sites connected to the Internet, the rampant media glorification
   of Internet related security incidents can overshadow a (potentially)
   more serious internal security problem.  Likewise, companies who have
   never been on the Internet before, may have strong, well defined,
   internal policies but fail to adequately address an external
   connection policy.

3.1.2  Separation of Services

   There are many services which a site may wish to provide for its
   users, some of which may be external.  There are a variety of
   security reasons to attempt to isolate services onto dedicated
   machines.  There are also performance reasons in most cases, but a
   detailed discussion is beyond to scope of this document.

   The services which a site may provide will, in most cases, have
   different levels of access needs and models of trust.  Services which
   are essential to the security or smooth operation of a site would be
   better off being placed on a dedicated machine with very limited
   access (see Section 3.1.3 "deny all" model), rather than on a machine
   which provides a service (or services) which has traditionally been
   less secure, or requires greater accessability by users who may
   accidentally suborn security.

   It is also important to distinguish between machines which operate
   within different models of trust, i.e., all the machines inside of a
   firewall and any machines on an exposed network.

   Some of the services which should be examined for potential
   separation are outlined in section 3.2.3. It is important to try to
   understand that security is only as strong as the weakest link in the
   chain.  Several of the most publicized penetrations in recent years
   has been through the electronic mail systems of machines.  The
   intruders were not trying to steal electronic mail, but they used the
   vulnerability in that system to gain access to other systems.

   If possible, each service should be running on a different machine
   whose only duty is to provide a specific service.  This helps to
   isolate intruders and limit potential harm.

3.1.3  Deny all/ Allow all

   There are two diametrically opposed underlying philosophies which can
   be adopted in defining a security plan.  Both alternatives are
   legitimate models to adopt, depending on the site and its needs for
   security.

   The first option is to turn off all services and then selectively
   enable services on a case by case basis, be it at the machine or
   network level, as they are needed.  This model, which will here after
   be referred to as the "deny all" model, is generally more secure.
   More work is required to successfully implement a "deny all"
   configuration and usually a better understanding of services. Only
   allowing known services allows a better analysis of a particular



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 10]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   service/protocol and the design of a security mechanism suited to the
   security level of the site.

   The other model, which will here after be referred to as the "allow
   all" model, is much easier to implement, but is generally less secure
   than the "deny all" model.  Simply turn on all services, usually the
   default at the host level, and allow all protocols to travel across
   network boundaries, usually the default at the router level.  As
   security holes become apparent, they are patched at either the host
   or network level.

   Each of these models can be applied to different portions of the
   site, depending on functionality requirements, administrative
   control, site policy, etc.  For example, the policy may be to use the
   "allow all" model when setting up workstations for general use, but
   adopt a "deny all" model when setting up information servers, like an
   email hub.  Likewise, an "allow all" policy may be adopted for
   traffic between LAN's internal to the site, but a "deny all" policy
   can be adopted between the site and the Internet.

   Be careful when mixing philosophies as in the examples above.  Many
   sites adopt the M & M theory of a hard "crunchy" shell and a soft
   "squishy" middle.  They are willing to pay the cost of security for
   their external traffic and require strong security measures, but are
   unwilling or unable to provide similar protections internally.  This
   works fine as long as the outer defenses are never breached and the
   internal users can be trusted.  Once the outer shell (firewall) is
   breached, subverting the internal network is trivial.

3.1.4  Identify real needs for services

   There is a large variety of services which may be provided, both
   internally and on the Internet at large.  Managing security is, in
   many ways, managing access to services internal to the site and
   managing how internal users access information at remote sites.

   Services tend to rush like waves over the Internet.  Over the years
   many sites have established anonymous FTP servers, gopher servers,
   wais servers, WWW servers, etc. as they became popular, but not
   particularly needed, at all sites.  Evaluate all new services that
   are established with a skeptical attitude to determine if they are
   actually needed or just the current fad sweeping the Internet.

   Bear in mind that security complexity can grow exponentially with the
   number of services provided.  Filtering routers need to be modified
   to support the new protocols.  Some protocols are inherently
   difficult to filter safely (e.g., RPC and UDP services), thus
   providing more openings to the internal network.  Services provided
   on the same machine can interact in catastrophic ways.  For example,
   allowing anonymous FTP on the same machine as the WWW server may
   allow an intruder to place a file in the anonymous FTP area and cause
   the HTTP server to execute it.

3.2  Network and Service Configuration



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 11]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


3.2.1  Protecting the Infrastructure

   Many network administrators go to great lengths to protect the hosts
   on their networks.  Few administrators make any effort to protect the
   networks themselves.  There is some rationale to this.  For example,
   it is far easier to protect a host than a network.  Also, intruders
   are likely to be after data on the hosts; damaging the network would
   not serve their purposes.  That said, there are still reasons to
   protect the networks.  For example, an intruder might divert network
   traffic through an outside host in order to examine the data (i.e.,
   to search for passwords).  Also, infrastructure includes more than
   the networks and the routers which interconnect them.  Infrastructure
   also includes network management (e.g., SNMP), services (e.g., DNS,
   NFS, NTP, WWW), and security (i.e., user authentication and access
   restrictions).

   The infrastructure also needs protection against human error.  When
   an administrator misconfigures a host, that host may offer degraded
   service.  This only affects users who require that host and, unless
   that host is a primary server, the number of affected users will
   therefore be limited.  However, if a router is misconfigured, all
   users who require the network will be affected.  Obviously, this is a
   far larger number of users than those depending on any one host.

3.2.2  Protecting the Network

   There are several problems to which networks are vulnerable.  The
   classic is a "denial of service" attack.  In this case, the network
   is brought to a state in which it can no longer carry legitimate
   users' data.  There are two common ways this can be done: by
   attacking the routers and by flooding the network with extraneous
   traffic.  An attack on the router is designed to cause it to stop
   forwarding packets, or to forward them improperly.  The former case
   may be due to a misconfiguration, the injection of a spurious routing
   update, or a "flood attack" (i.e., the router is bombarded with
   unroutable packets, causing its performance to degrade).  A flood
   attack on a network is similar to a flood attack on a router, except
   that the flood packets are usually broadcast.  An ideal flood attack
   would be the injection of a single packet which exploits some known
   flaw in the network nodes and causes them to retransmit the packet,
   or generate error packets, each of which is picked up and repeated by
   another host.  A well chosen attack packet can even generate an
   exponential explosion of transmissions.

   Another classic problem is "spoofing."  In this case, spurious
   routing updates are sent to one or more routers causing them to
   misroute packets.  This differs from a denial of service attack only
   in the purpose behind the spurious route.  In denial of service, the
   object is to make the router unusable; a state which will be quickly
   detected by network users.  In spoofing, the spurious route will
   cause packets to be routed to a host from which an intruder may
   monitor the data in the packets.  These packets are then re-routed to
   their correct destinations.  However, the intruder may or may not
   have altered the contents of the packets.



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 12]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   The solution to most of these problems is to protect the routing
   update packets sent by the routing protocols in use (e.g., RIP-2,
   OSPF).  There are three levels of protection: clear-text password,
   cryptographic checksum, and encryption.  Passwords offer only minimal
   protection against intruders who do not have direct access to the
   physical networks.  Passwords also offer some protection against
   misconfigured routers (i.e, routers which, out of the box, attempt to
   route packets).  The advantage of passwords is that they have a very
   low overhead, in both bandwidth and CPU consumption.  Checksums
   protect against the injection of spurious packets, even if the
   intruder has direct access to the physical network.  Combined with a
   sequence number, or other unique identifier, a checksum can also
   protect again "replay" attacks, wherein an old (but valid at the
   time) routing update is retransmitted by either an intruder or a
   misbehaving router.  The most security is provided by complete
   encryption of sequenced, or uniquely identified, routing updates.
   This prevents an intruder from determining the topology of the
   network.  The disadvantage to encryption is the overhead involved in
   processing the updates.

   RIP-2 (RFC 1723) and OSPF (RFC 1583) both support clear-text
   passwords in their base design specifications.  In addition, there
   are extensions to each base protocol to support MD5 encryption.

   Unfortunately, there is no adequate protection against a flooding
   attack, or a misbehaving host or router which is flooding the
   network.  Fortunately, this type of attack is obvious when it occurs
   and can usually be terminated relatively simply.

3.2.3  Protecting the Services

   There are many types of services and each has its own security
   requirements.  These requirements will vary based on the intended use
   of the service.  For example, a service which should only be usable
   within a site (e.g., NFS) may require different protection mechanisms
   than a service provided for external use. It may be sufficient to
   protect the internal server from external access.  However, a WWW
   server, which provides a home page intended for viewing by users
   anywhere on the Internet, requires built-in protection.  That is, the
   service/protocol/server must provide whatever security may be
   required to prevent unauthorized access and modification of the Web
   database.

   Internal services (i.e., services meant to be used only by users
   within a site) and external services (i.e., services deliberately
   made available to users outside a site) will, in general, have
   protection requirements which differ as previously described.  It is
   therefore wise to isolate the internal services to one set of server
   machines and the external services to another set of server machines.
   That is, internal and external servers should not be co-located.  In
   fact, many sites go so far as to have one set of subnets (or even
   different networks) which are accessible from the outside and another
   set which may be accessed only within the site.  Of course, there is
   usually a firewall which connects these partitions.  Great care must



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 13]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   be taken to ensure that such a firewall is operating properly.

   One form of external service deserves some special consideration, and
   that is anonymous, or guest, access.  This may be either anonymous
   FTP or guest (unauthenticated) login.  It is extremely important to
   ensure that anonymous FTP servers and guest login userids are
   carefully isolated from any hosts and file systems from which outside
   users should be kept.  Another area to which special attention must
   be paid concerns anonymous, writable access.  A site may be legally
   responsible for the content of publicly available information, so
   careful monitoring of the information deposited by anonymous users is
   advised.

   Now we shall consider some of the most popular services: name
   service, password/key service, authentication/proxy service,
   electronic mail, WWW, file transfer, and NFS.  Since these are the
   most frequently used services, they are the most obvious points of
   attack.  Also, a successful attack on one of these services can
   produce disaster all out of proportion to the innocence of the basic
   service.

3.2.3.1 Name Servers (DNS and NIS(+))

   The Internet uses the Domain Name System (DNS) to perform address
   resolution for host and network names.  The Network Information
   Service (NIS) and NIS+ are not used on the global Internet, but are
   subject to the same risks as a DNS server.  Name-to-address
   resolution is critical to the secure operation of any network.  An
   attacker who can successfully control or impersonate a DNS server can
   re-route traffic to subvert security protections.  For example,
   routine traffic can be diverted to a compromised system to be
   monitored; or, users can be tricked into providing authentication
   secrets.  An organization should create well known, protected sites
   to act as secondary name servers and protect their DNS masters from
   denial of service attacks using filtering routers.

3.2.3.2 Password/Key Servers (NIS(+) and KDC)

   Password and key servers generally protect their vital information
   (i.e., the passwords and keys) with encryption algorithms.  However,
   even a one-way encrypted password can be determined by a dictionary
   attack (wherein common words are encrypted to see if they match the
   stored encryption).  It is therefore necessary to ensure that these
   servers are not accessable by hosts which do not plan to use them for
   the service, and even those hosts should only be able to access the
   service (i.e., general services, such as Telnet and FTP, should not
   be allowed by anyone other than administrators).

3.2.3.3 Authentication/Proxy Servers (SOCKS, FWTK)

   A proxy server provides a number of security enhancements.  It allows
   sites to concentrate services through a specific host to allow
   monitoring, hiding of internal structure, etc.  This funnelling of
   services creates an attractive target for a potential intruder.  The



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 14]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   type of protection required for a proxy server depends greatly on the
   proxy protocol in use and the services being proxied.  The general
   rule of limiting access only to those hosts which need the services,
   and limiting access by those hosts to only those services, is a good
   starting point.

3.2.3.4 Electronic Mail

   Electronic mail (email) systems have long been a source for intruder
   break-ins because email protocols are among the oldest and most
   widely deployed services.  Also, by it's very nature, an email server
   requires access to the outside world; most email servers accept input
   from any source.  An email server generally consists of two parts: a
   receiving/sending agent and a processing agent.  Since email is
   delivered to all users, and is usually private, the processing agent
   typically requires system (root) privileges to deliver the mail.
   Most email implementations perform both portions of the service,
   which means the receiving agent also has system privileges.  This
   opens several security holes which this document will not describe.
   There are some implementations available which allow a separation of
   the two agents.  Such implementations are generally considered more
   secure, but still require careful installation to avoid creating a
   security problem.

3.2.3.5 World Wide Web (WWW)

   The Web is growing in popularity exponentially because of its ease of
   use and the powerful abilities to concentrate information services.
   Most WWW servers take some directions and actions from the persons
   accessing their services.  The most common example is taking a
   request from a remote user and passing the provided information to a
   program running on the server to process the request.  Some of these
   programs are not written with security in mind and can create
   security holes.  If a Web server is available to the Internet
   community, it is especially important that confidential information
   not be co-located on the same host as the server.  In fact, it is
   recommended that the server have a dedicated host which is not
   "trusted" by other internal hosts.  It may be co-located with an
   anonymous FTP server, since both protocols share common security
   considerations.

3.2.3.6 File Transfer (FTP, TFTP)

   FTP and TFTP both allow users to receive and send electronic files in
   a point-to-point manner.  However, FTP requires authentication while
   TFTP requires none. For this reason, TFTP should be avoided as much
   as possible.

   Improperly configured FTP servers can allow intruders to copy,
   replace and delete files at will, anywhere on a host, so it is very
   important to configure this service correctly.   Access to encrypted
   passwords and proprietary data, and the introduction of trojan horses
   are just a few of the potential security holes that can occur when
   the service is configured incorrectly. FTP servers should reside on



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 15]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   their own host, or perhaps be co-located with a Web server, since the
   two protocols share common security considerations. As mentioned in
   the opening paragraphs of section 3.2.3, services offered internally
   to your site should not be co-located with services offered
   externally. Each should have its own host.

   TFTP does not support the same range of functions and has no security
   whatsoever.  This service should only be considered for internal use,
   and then it should be configured in a restricted way so that the
   server only has access to a set of predetermined files (instead of
   every world-readable file on the system).  Probably the most common
   usage of TFTP is for downloading router configuration files to a
   router.  TFTP should reside on its own host, and should not be
   installed on hosts supporting external FTP or Web access.

3.2.3.7 NFS

   The Network File Service allows hosts to share common disks.  NFS is
   most frequently used by diskless hosts who depend on a disk server
   for all of their storage needs.  Unfortunately, NFS has no built-in
   security.  It is therefore necessary that the NFS server be
   accessable only by those hosts which are using it for service.  It is
   especially important that external hosts be unable to reach the NFS
   host by any means.  Ideally, such access attempts would be stopped by
   a firewall.

3.2.4  Protecting the Protection

   It is amazing how often a site will overlook the most obvious
   weakness in its security by leaving the security server itself open
   to attack.  Based on considerations previously discussed, it should
   be clear that:  the security server should not be accessible from
   off-site; should offer minimum access, except for the authentication
   function, to users on-site; and should not be co-located with any
   other servers.  Further, all access to the node, including access to
   the service itself, should be logged to provide a "paper trail" in
   the event of a security breach.

3.3  Firewalls

   One of the most widely deployed and publicized security measures in
   use on the Internet is a "firewall."  Firewalls have been given the
   reputation of a general panacea for many, if not all, of the Internet
   security issues.  They are not.  Firewalls are just another tool in
   the quest for system security.  They provide a certain level of
   protection and are, in general, a way of implementing security policy
   at the network level.  The level of security that a firewall provides
   can vary as much as the level of security on a particular machine.
   There are the traditional trade-offs between security, ease of use,
   cost, complexity, etc.

   A firewall is any one of several mechanisms used to control and watch
   access to and from a network for the purpose of protecting it.  A
   firewall acts as a gateway through which all traffic to and from the



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 16]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   protected network or machines passes.  Firewalls help to place
   limitations on the amount and type of communication that takes place
   between the protected network and the another network (e.g., the
   Internet, or another piece of the site's network).

   A firewall is generally a way to build a wall between one part of a
   network, a company=D5s internal network, for example, and another part,
   the global Internet, for example.  The unique feature about this wall
   is that there needs to be ways for some traffic with particular
   characteristics to pass through carefully monitored doors
   ("gateways").  The difficult part is to establish the criteria by
   which the packets are allowed or denied access through the doors.
   Different books written on firewalls use different terminology to
   describe the various forms of firewalls. This can be confusing to
   system administrators who are not familiar with firewalls. The thing
   to note here is that there is no fixed terminology for the
   description of firewalls.

   Firewalls are not always, or even typically, a single machine, but in
   general are a combination of routers, networks, and host machines, so
   for the purposes of this discussion, the term "firewall" can consist
   of more than one physical device.  Firewalls are typically built
   using two different components, filtering routers and proxy servers.

   Filtering routers are the easiest component to conceptualize in a
   firewall.  A router moves data back and forth between two (or more)
   different networks.  A "normal" router takes a packet from network A
   and "routes" it to its destination on network B.  A filtering router
   does the same thing but decides not only how to route the packet, but
   should it route the packet.  This is done by installing a series of
   filters by which the router decides what to do with any given packet
   of data.

   A discussion concerning capabilities of a particular brand of router,
   running a particular software version is outside the scope of this
   document.  However, when evaluating a router to be used for filtering
   packets, the following criteria can be important when implementing a
   filtering policy:  source and destination IP address, source and
   destination TCP port numbers, state of the TCP "ack" bit, UDP source
   and destination port numbers, and direction of packet flow (i.e.. A-
   >B or B->A).  Other information necessary to construct a secure
   filtering scheme are whether the router reorders filter instructions
   (designed to optimize filters, this can sometimes change the meaning
   and cause unintended access), and whether it is possible to apply
   filters for inbound and outbound packets on each interface (if the
   router filters only outbound packets then the router is "outside" of
   its filters and may be more vulnerable to attack).  In addition to
   the router being vulnerable, this distinction between applying
   filters on inbound or outbound packets is especially relevant for
   routers with more than 2 interfaces.  Other important issues are the
   ability to create filters based on IP header options and the fragment
   state of a packet.  Building a good filter can be very difficult and
   requires a good understanding of the type of services (protocols)
   that will be filtered.



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 17]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   For better security, the filters usually restrict access between the
   two connected nets to just one host, the bastion host.  It is only
   possible to access the other network via this bastion host.  As only
   this host, rather than a few hundred hosts, can get attacked, it is
   easier to maintain a certain level of security because only this host
   has to be protected very carefully.  To make resources available to
   legitimate users across this firewall, services have to be forwarded
   by the bastion host.  Some servers have forwarding built in (like
   DNS-servers or SMTP-servers), for other services (e.g., Telnet, FTP,
   etc.), proxy servers can be used to allow access to the resources
   across the firewall in a secure way.

   A proxy server is way to concentrate application services through a
   single machine.  There is typically a single machine (the bastion
   host) that acts as a proxy server for a variety of protocols (Telnet,
   SMTP, FTP, HTTP, etc.) but there can be individual machines for each
   service.  Instead of connecting directly to an external server, the
   client connects to the proxy server which in turn initiates a
   connection to the requested external server.  Depending on the type
   of proxy server used, it is possible to configure internal clients to
   perform this redirection automatically, without knowledge to the
   user, others might require that the user connect directly to the
   proxy server and then initiate the connection through a specified
   format.

   There are significant security benefits which can be derived from
   using proxy servers.  It is possible to add access control lists to
   protocols, requiring users or machines to provide some level of
   authentication before access is granted.  Smarter proxy servers,
   sometimes called Application Layer Gateways (ALGs), can be written
   which understand specific protocols and can be configured to block
   only subsections of the protocol.  For example, an ALG for FTP can
   tell the difference between the "put" command and the "get" command;
   an organization may wish to allow users to "get" files from the
   Internet, but not be able to "put" internal files on a remote server.
   By contrast, a filtering router could either block all FTP access, or
   none, but not a subset.

   Proxy servers can also be configured to encrypt data streams based on
   a variety of parameters.  An organization might use this feature to
   allow encrypted connections between two locations whose sole access
   points are on the Internet.

   Firewalls are typically thought of as a way to keep intruders out,
   but they are also often used as a way to let legitimate users into a
   site.  There are many examples where a valid user might need to
   regularly access the "home" site while on travel to trade shows and
   conferences, etc.  Access to the Internet is often available but may
   be through an untrusted machine or network.  A correctly configured
   proxy server can allow the correct users into the site while still
   denying access to other users.

   The current best effort in firewall techniques is found using a
   combination of a pair of screening routers with one or more proxy



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 18]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   servers on a network between the two routers.  This setup allows the
   external router to block off any attempts to use the underlying IP
   layer to break security (IP spoofing, source routing, packet
   fragments), while allowing the proxy server to handle potential
   security holes in the higher layer protocols.  The internal router's
   purpose is to block all traffic except to the proxy server.  If this
   setup is rigidly implemented, a high level of security can be
   achieved.

   Most firewalls provide logging which can be tuned to make security
   administration of the network more convenient.  Logging may be
   centralized and the system may be configured to send out alerts for
   abnormal conditions.  It is important to regularly monitor these logs
   for any signs of intrusions or break-in attempts.  Since some
   intruders will attempt to cover their tracks by editing logs, it is
   desirable to protect these logs.  A variety of methods is available,
   including: write once, read many (WORM) drives; papers logs; and
   centralized logging via the "syslog" utility.  Another technique is
   to use a "fake" serial printer, but have the serial port connected to
   an isolated machine or PC which keeps the logs.

   Firewalls are available in a wide range of quality and strengths.
   Commercial packages start at approximately $10,000US and go up to
   over $250,000US.  "Home grown" firewalls can be built for smaller
   amounts of capital.  It should be remembered that the correct setup
   of a firewall (commercial or homegrown) requires a significant amount
   of skill and knowledge of TCP/IP.  Both types require regular
   maintenance, installation of software patches and updates, and
   regular monitoring.  When budgeting for a firewall, these additional
   costs should be considered in addition to the cost of the physical
   elements of the firewall.

   As an aside, building a "home grown" firewall requires a significant
   amount of skill and knowledge of TCP/IP.  It should not be trivially
   attempted because a perceived sense of security is worse in the long
   run than knowing that there is no security.  As with all security
   measures, it is important to decide on the threat, the value of the
   assets to be protected, and the costs to implement security.

   A final note about firewalls.  They can be a great aid when
   implementing security for a site and they protect against a large
   variety of attacks.  But it is important to keep in mind that they
   are only one part of the solution.  They cannot protect your site
   against all types of attack.

4.  Security Services and Procedures

   This chapter guides the reader through a number of topics that should
   be addressed when securing a site.  Each section touches on a
   security service or capability that may be required to protect the
   information and systems at a site.  These are presented at a fairly
   high-level to introduce the reader to the concepts.

   Throughout the chapter, you will find considerable mention of



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 19]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   cryptography.  It is outside the scope of this document to delve into
   details concerning cryptography, but the interested reader can obtain
   more information from books and articles listed in the reference
   section of this document.

4.1  Authentication

   For many years, the prescribed method for authenticating users has
   been through the use of standard, reusable passwords.  Originally,
   these passwords were used by users at terminals to authenticate
   themselves to a central computer.  At the time, there were no
   networks (internally or externally), so the risk of disclosure of the
   clear text password was minimal.  Today, systems are connected
   together through local networks, and these local networks are further
   connected together and to the Internet.  Users are logging in from
   all over the globe; their reusable passwords are often transmitted
   across those same networks in clear text, ripe for anyone in-between
   to capture.  And indeed, the CERT Coordination Center and other
   response teams are seeing a tremendous number of incidents involving
   packet sniffers which are capturing the clear text passwords.  To
   address this threat, we are including sections on better
   technologies, like one-time passwords and Kerberos.

   With the advent of newer technologies like one-time passwords (e.g.,
   S/Key), PGP, and token-based authentication devices, people are using
   password-like strings as secret tokens and pins. We are including a
   discussion on these since they are the foundation upon which stronger
   authentication techniques are based.  If these secret tokens and pins
   are not properly selected and protected, the authentication will be
   easily subverted.

4.1.1  One-Time passwords

   As mentioned above, given today's networked environments, it is
   recommended that sites concerned about the security and integrity of
   their systems and networks consider moving away from standard,
   reusable passwords.  There have been many incidents involving Trojan
   network programs (e.g., telnet and rlogin) and network packet
   sniffing programs.  These programs capture clear text
   hostname/account name/password triplets.  Intruders can use the
   captured information for subsequent access to those hosts and
   accounts.  This is possible because 1) the password is used over and
   over (hence the term "reusable"), and 2) the password passes across
   the network in clear text.

   Several authentication techniques have been developed that address
   this problem.  Among these techniques are challenge-response
   technologies that provide passwords that are only used once (commonly
   called one-time passwords).  This document provides a list of sources
   for products that provide this capability.  The decision to use a
   product is the responsibility of each organization, and each
   organization should perform its own evaluation and selection.

4.1.2  Kerberos



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 20]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Kerberos is a distributed network security system which provides for
   authentication across unsecured networks.  If requested by the
   application, integrity and encryption can also be provided.  Kerberos
   was originally developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
   (MIT) in the late 1980's.  There are two major releases of Kerberos,
   version 4 and 5, which are for practical purposes, incompatible.

   Kerberos relies on a symmetric key database using a key distribution
   center (KDC) which is known as the Kerberos server.  A user or
   service (known as "principals") are granted electronic "tickets"
   after properly communicating with the KDC.  These tickets are used
   for authentication between principals.  All tickets include a time
   stamp which limits the time period for which the ticket is valid.
   Therefore, Kerberos clients and server must have a secure time
   source, and be able to keep time accurately.

   The practical side of Kerberos is its integration with the
   application level.  Typical applications like FTP, telnet, POP, and
   NFS have been integrated with the Kerberos system.  There are a
   variety of implementations which have varying levels of integration.
   Please see the Kerberos FAQ available at http://www.ov.com/misc/krb-
   faq.html for the latest information.

4.1.3  Choosing and Protecting Secret Tokens and PINs

   When selecting secret tokens, take care to choose them carefully.
   Like the selection of passwords, they should be robust against brute
   force efforts to guess them.  That is, they should not be single
   words in any language, any common, industry, or cultural acronyms,
   etc.  Ideally, they will be longer rather than shorter and consist of
   pass phrases that combine upper and lower case character, digits, and
   other characters.

   Once chosen, the protection of these secret tokens is very important.
   Some are used as pins to hardware devices (like token cards) and
   these should not be written down and placed in the same location as
   the device with which they are associated.  Others, such as a secret
   PGP key, should be protected from unauthorized access.

   One final word on this subject.  When using cryptography products,
   like PGP, take care to determine the proper key length and ensure
   that your users are trained to do likewise.  As technology advances,
   the minimum safe key length continues to grow.  Make sure your site
   keeps up with the current state of knowledge on the subject so that
   you can ensure any cryptography used will be providing you the
   protection you are assuming it is.

4.1.4  Password Assurance

   While the need to eliminate the use of standard, reusable passwords
   cannot be overstated, it is recognized that some organizations may
   have to transition to the use of better technology.  Given that
   situation, we have included the following advice to help with the
   selection and maintenance of traditional passwords.  But remember,



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 21]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   none of these measures provides protection against disclosure due to
   sniffer programs.

   (1)  The importance of robust passwords - In many (if not most) cases o=
f
        system penetration, the intruder needs to gain access to an accoun=
t
        on the system. One way that goal is typically accomplished is
        through guessing the password of a legitimate user.  This is often
        accomplished by running an automated password cracking program,
        which utilizes a very large dictionary, against the system's passw=
ord
        file.  The only way to guard against passwords being disclosed in =
this
        manner is through the careful selection of passwords which cannot =
be
        easily guessed (i.e., combinations of numbers, letters, and punctu=
ation
        characters).

   (2)  Changing default passwords - Many operating systems and applicatio=
n
        programs are installed with default accounts and passwords.  These
        must be changed immediately to something that cannot be guessed or
        cracked.

   (3)  Restricting access to the password file - In particular, a site
        wants to protect the encrypted password portion of the file so tha=
t
        would-be intruders don't have them available for cracking.  One
        effective technique is to use shadow passwords where the password
        field of the standard file contains a dummy or false password.  Th=
e
        file containing the legitimate passwords are protected elsewhere o=
n
        the system.

   (4)  Password aging - When and how to expire passwords is still a subje=
ct
        of controversy among the security community.  It is generally acce=
pted
        that a password should not be maintained once an account is no lon=
ger in
        use, but it is hotly debated whether a user should be forced to ch=
ange a
        good password that's in active use.  The arguments for changing
        passwords relate to the prevention of the continued use of penetra=
ted
        accounts.  However, the opposition claims that frequent password
        changes lead to users writing down their passwords in visible area=
s
        (such as pasting them to a terminal), or to users selecting very s=
imple
        passwords that are easy to guess.  It should also be stated that a=
n
        intruder will probably use a captured or guessed password sooner r=
ather
        than later, in which case password aging provides little if any
        protection.

        While there is no definitive answer to this dilemma, a password po=
licy
        should directly address the issue and provide guidelines for how o=
ften
        a user should change the password.  It is recommended that passwor=
ds
        be changed whenever root is penetrated, there is a critical change=
 in
        personnel (especially if it is the system administrator!), or when=
 an
        account has been compromised.  In particular, if the root password=
 is
        compromised, all passwords on the system should be changed.  In
        addition, an annual change in their password is usually not diffic=
ult
        for most users, and you should consider requiring it.

4.2  Confidentiality

   There will be information assets that your site will want to protect



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 22]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   from disclosure to unauthorized entities.  Operating systems often
   have built-in file protection mechanisms that allow an administrator
   to control who on the system can access, or "see," the contents of a
   given file.  A stronger way to provide confidentiality is through
   encryption.  Encryption is accomplished by scrambling data so that it
   is very difficult and time consuming for anyone other than the
   authorized recipients or owners to obtain the plain text.  Authorized
   recipients and the owner of the information will possess the
   corresponding decryption keys that allow them to easily unscramble
   the text to a readable (clear text) form.  We recommend that sites
   use encryption to provide confidentiality and protect valuable
   information.

   The use of encryption is sometimes controlled by governmental and
   site regulations, so we encourage administrators to become informed
   of laws or policies that regulate its use before employing it.  It is
   outside the scope of this document to discuss the various algorithms
   and programs available for this purpose, but we do caution against
   the casual use of the UNIX crypt program as it has been found to be
   easily broken.  We also encourage you to take time to understand the
   strength of the encryption in any given algorithm/product before
   using it.  Most well-known products are well-documented in the
   literature, so this should be a fairly easy task.

4.3  Integrity

   As an administrator, you will want to make sure that information
   (e.g., operating system files, company data, etc.) has not been
   altered in an unauthorized fashion.  This means you will want to
   provide some assurance as to the integrity of the information on your
   systems.  One way to provide this is to produce a checksum of the
   unaltered file, store that checksum offline, and periodically (or
   when desired) check to make sure the checksum of the online file
   hasn't changed (which would indicate the data has been modified).

   Some operating systems come with checksumming programs, such as the
   UNIX sum program.  However, these may not provide the protection you
   actually need.  Files can be modified in such a way as to preserve
   the result of the UNIX sum program!  Therefore, we suggest that you
   use a cryptographically strong program, such as the message digesting
   program MD5 [ref], to produce the checksums you will be using to
   assure integrity.

   There are other applications when integrity will want to be assured,
   such as when transmitting an email message between two parties. There
   are products available that can provide this capability.  The purpose
   of this section is to acquaint you with this concept so that you can
   apply it where needed.  Once you identify that this is a capability
   you need, you can go about identifying technologies that will provide
   it.

4.4  Authorization

   Authorization refers to the process of granting privileges to



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 23]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   processes and, ultimately, users.  This differs from authentication
   in that authentication is what occurs to identify a user.  Once
   identified (reliably), the privileges, rights, property, and
   permissible actions of the user are determined by authorization.

   Explicitly listing the authorized activities of each user (and user
   process) with respect to all resources (objects) is impossible in a
   reasonable system.  In a real system certain techniques are used to
   simplify the process of granting and checking authorization(s).

   One approach, popularized in UNIX systems, is to assign to each
   object three classes of user: owner, group and world.  The owner is
   either the creator of the object or the user assigned as owner by the
   super-user.  The owner permissions (read, write and execute) apply
   only to the owner.  A group is a collection of users which share
   access rights to an object.  The group permissions (read, write and
   execute) apply to all users in the group (except the owner).  The
   world refers to everybody else with access to the system.  The world
   permissions (read, write and execute) apply to all users (except the
   owner and members of the group).

   Another approach is to attach to an object a list which explicitly
   contains the identity of all permitted users (or groups).  This is an
   Access Control List.  The advantage of these are that they are easily
   maintained (one central list per object).

4.5  Access

4.5.1  Physical Access

   Restrict physical access to areas containing hosts to people who are
   supposed to use the hosts.  Hosts include "trusted" terminals (such
   as system consoles, operator terminals and terminals dedicated to
   special tasks), and individual microcomputers and workstations,
   especially those connected to your network.  Make sure access
   restrictions mesh well with people's work patterns; otherwise they
   will find ways to circumvent your physical security (e.g., jamming
   doors open).

   Keep original and backup copies of data and programs safe.  Apart
   from keeping them in good condition for backup purposes, they must be
   protected from theft.

   Portable hosts are a particular risk.  Make sure it won't cause
   problems if one of your staff's portable computer is stolen.
   Consider developing guidelines for the kinds of data that should be
   allowed to reside on the disks of portable computers as well as how
   the data should be protected (e.g., encryption) when it is on a
   portable computer.

   Other areas where physical access should be restricted is the wiring
   closets and important network elements like file servers, name server
   hosts, and routers.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 24]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


4.5.2  Walk-up Network Connections

   By "walk-up" connections, we mean sockets located so as to provide a
   convenient way for users to connect a portable host to your network.

   Consider whether you need to provide this service, bearing in mind
   that it allows any user to attach an unauthorized host to your
   network.  This increases the risk of attacks via techniques such as
   IP address spoofing, packet sniffing, etc.  Users and site management
   must appreciate the risks involved.  If you decide to provide walk-up
   connections, plan the service carefully and define precisely where
   you will provide it so that you can provide the necessary physical
   access security.

   A walk-up host should be authenticated before its user is permitted
   to access resources on your network.  As an alternative, it may be
   possible to control physical access. For example, if the service is
   to be used by students, you might only provide walk-up connection
   sockets in student laboratories.

   Keep an eye on empty offices.  It may be sensible to disconnect
   connections to unused offices at the wiring closet.  Consider using
   secure hubs and monitoring attempts to connect unauthorized hosts.

4.5.3  Other Network Technologies

   Technologies considered here include X.25, ISDN, SMDS, DDS and Frame
   Relay.  All are provided via physical links which go through
   telephone exchanges, providing the potential for them to be diverted.
   Crackers are certainly interested in telephone switches as well as in
   data networks!

   With switched technologies, use Permanent Virtual Circuits or Closed
   User Groups whenever this is possible.  Technologies which provide
   authentication and/or encryption (such as IPv6) are evolving rapidly;
   consider using them on links where security is important.

4.5.4  Modems

4.5.4.1  Modem lines must be managed

   Although they provide convenient access to a site for its users, they
   can also provide an effective detour around the site's firewalls.
   For this reason it is essential to maintain proper control of modems.

   Don't allow users to install a modem line without proper
   authorization.  This includes temporary installations (e.g., plugging
   a modem into a facsimile or telephone line overnight).

   Maintain a register of all your modem lines and keep your register up
   to date.  Conduct regular site checks for unauthorized modems.

4.5.4.2  Dial-in users must be authenticated




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 25]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   A username and password check should be completed before a user can
   access anything on your network.  Normal password security
   considerations are particularly important (see section 4.1.1).

   Remember that telephone lines can be tapped, and that it is quite
   easy to intercept messages to cellular phones.  Modern high-speed
   modems use more sophisticated modulation techniques, which makes them
   somewhat more difficult to monitor, but it is prudent to assume that
   hackers know how to eavesdrop on your lines.  For this reason, you
   should use one-shot passwords if at all possible.

   It is helpful to have a single dial-in point (e.g., a single large
   modem pool) so that all users are authenticated in the same way.

   Users will occasionally mis-type a password.  Set a short delay - say
   two seconds - after the first and second failed logins, and force a
   disconnect after the third.  This will slow down automated password
   attacks.  Don't tell the user whether the username, the password, or
   both, were incorrect.

4.5.4.3  All logins (successful and unsuccessful) should be logged

   Don't keep correct passwords in the log, but consider keeping
   incorrect passwords to aid in detecting password attacks.  However,
   most incorrect passwords are correct passwords with one character
   mistyped and may suggest the real password.  If you can't keep this
   information secure, don't log it at all.

   If Calling Line Identification is available, take advantage of it by
   recording the calling number for each login attempt.  Be sensitive to
   the privacy issues raised by Calling Line Identification.  Also be
   aware that Calling Line Identification is not to be trusted; use the
   data for informational purposes only, not for authentication.

4.5.4.4  Minimize the amount of information given in your opening banner

   In particular, don't announce the type of host hardware or operating
   system - this encourages specialist hackers.

   Display a short banner, but don't offer an "inviting" name (e.g.,
   University of XYZ, Student Records System).  Instead, give your site
   name, a short warning that sessions may be monitored, and a
   username/password prompt.  Get your site's lawyers to check your
   banner to make sure it states your legal position correctly.

   For high-security applications, consider using a "blind" password
   (i.e., give no response to an incoming call until the user has typed
   in a password).  This effectively simulates a dead modem.

4.5.4.5  Call-back Capability

   Some dial-in servers offer call-back facilities (i.e., the user dials
   in and is authenticated, then the system disconnects the call and
   calls back on a specified number).  You will probably have to pay the



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 26]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   charges for such calls.

   This feature should be used with caution; it can easily be bypassed.
   At a minimum, make sure that the return call is never made from the
   same modem as the incoming one.  Overall, although call-back can
   improve modem security, you should not depend on it alone.

4.5.4.6  Dial-out authentication

   Dial-out users should also be authenticated, particularly since your
   site will have to pay their telephone charges.

   Never allow dial-out from an unauthenticated dial-in call, and
   consider whether you will allow it from an authenticated one.  The
   goal here is to prevent callers using your modem pool as part of a
   chain of logins.  This can be hard to detect, particularly if a
   hacker sets up a path through several hosts on your site.

   At a minimum, don't allow the same modems and phone lines to be used
   for both dial-in and dial-out.  This can be implemented easily if you
   run separate dial-in and dial-out modem pools.

4.5.4.7  Make your modem programming as "bullet-proof" as possible

   Be sure modems can't be reprogrammed while they're in service.  At a
   minimum, make sure that three plus signs won't put your dial-in
   modems into command mode!

   Program your modems to reset to your standard configuration at the
   start of each new call.  Failing this, make them reset at the end of
   each call.  This precaution will protect you against accidental
   reprogramming of your modems.

   Check that your modems terminate calls cleanly.  When a user logs out
   from an access server, verify that the server hangs up the phone line
   properly.  It is equally important that the server forces logouts
   from whatever sessions were active if the user hangs up unexpectedly.

4.6  Auditing

   This section covers the procedures for collecting data generated by
   network activity, which may be useful in analyzing the security of a
   network and responding to security incidents.

4.6.1  What to collect

   Audit data should include any attempt to achieve a different security
   level by any person, process, or other entity in the network.  This
   includes login and logout, su (or the non-UNIX equivalent), ticket
   generation (for Kerberos, for example), and any other change of
   access or status.  It is especially important to note "anonymous" or
   "guest" access to public servers.

   The actual data to collect will differ for different sites and for



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 27]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   different types of access changes within a site.  In general, the
   information you want to collect includes: username and hostname, for
   login and logout; previous and new access rights, for a change of
   access rights; and a timestamp.  Of course, there is much more
   information which might be gathered, depending on what the system
   makes available and how much space is available to store that
   information.

   One very important note: do not gather passwords.  This creates an
   enormous potential security breach if the audit records should be
   improperly accessed.  Do not gather incorrect passwords either, as
   they often differ from valid passwords by only a single character or
   transposition.

4.6.2  Collection Process

   The collection process should be enacted by the host or resource
   being accessed.  Depending on the importance of the data and the need
   to have it local in instances in which services are being denied,
   data could be kept local to the resource until needed or be
   transmitted to storage after each event.

   There are basically three ways to store audit records: in a
   read/write file on a host, on a write-once/read-many device (e.g., a
   CD-ROM or a specially configured tape drive), or on a write-only
   device (e.g., a line printer).  Each method has advantages and
   disadvantages.

   File system logging is the least resource intensive of the three
   methods and the easiest to configure.  It allows instant access to
   the records for analysis, which may be important if an attack is in
   progress.  File system logging is also the least reliable method.  If
   the logging host has been compromised, the file system is usually the
   first thing to go; an intruder could easily cover up traces of the
   intrusion.

   Collecting audit data on a write-once device is slightly more effort
   to configure than a simple file, but it has the significant advantage
   of greatly increased security because an intruder could not alter the
   data showing that an intrusion has occurred.  The disadvantage of
   this method is the need to maintain a supply of storage media and the
   cost of that media.  Also, the data may not be instantly available.

   Line printer logging is useful in system where permanent and
   immediate logs are required.  A real time system is an example of
   this, where the exact point of a failure or attack must be recorded.
   A laser printer, or other device which buffers data (e.g., a print
   server), may suffer from lost data if buffers contain the needed data
   at a critical instant.  The disadvantage of, literally, "paper
   trails" is the need to keep the printer fed and the need to scan
   records by hand.  There is also the issue of where to store the,
   potentially, enormous volume of paper which may be generated.

   For each of the logging methods described, there is also the issue of



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 28]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   securing the path between the device generating the log and actual
   logging device (i.e., the file server, tape/CD-ROM drive, printer).
   If that path is compromised, logging can be stopped or spoofed or
   both.  In an ideal world, the logging device would be directly
   attached by a single, simple, point-to-point cable.  Since that is
   usually impractical, the path should pass through the minimum number
   of networks and routers.  Even if logs can be blocked, spoofing can
   be prevented with cryptographic checksums (it probably isn't
   necessary to encrypt the logs because they should not contain
   sensitive information in the first place).

4.6.3  Collection Load

   Collecting audit data may result in a rapid accumulation of bytes so
   storage availability for this information must be considered in
   advance.  There are a few ways to reduce the required storage space.
   First, data can be compressed, using one of many methods. Or, the
   required space can be minimized by keeping data for a shorter period
   of time with only summaries of that data kept in long-term archives.
   One major drawback to the latter method involves incident response.
   Often, an incident has been ongoing for some period of time when a
   site notices it and begins to investigate. At that point in time,
   it's very helpful to have detailed audit logs available. If these are
   just summaries, there may not be sufficient detail to fully handle
   the incident.

4.6.4  Handling and Preserving Audit Data

   Audit data should be some of the most carefully secured data at the
   site and in the backups.  If an intruder were to gain access to audit
   logs, the systems themselves, in addition to the data, would be at
   risk.

   Audit data may also become key to the investigation, apprehension,
   and prosecution of the perpetrator of an incident.  For this reason,
   it is advisable to seek the advice of legal council when deciding how
   audit data should be treated.  This should happen before an incident
   occurs.

   If a data handling plan is not adequately defined prior to an
   incident, it may mean that there is no recourse in the aftermath of
   an event, and it may create liability resulting from improper
   treatment of the data.

4.6.5  Legal Considerations

   Due to the content of audit data, there are a number of legal
   questions that arise which need to be addressed by your legal
   counsel. If you collect and save audit data, you need to be prepared
   for consequences resulting both from its existence and its content.

   One area concerns the privacy of individuals.  In certain instances,
   audit data may contain personal information.  Searching through the
   data, even for a routine check of the system's security, could



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 29]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   represent an invasion of privacy.

   A second area of concern involves knowledge of intrusive behavior
   originating from your site.  If an organization keeps audit data, is
   it responsible for examining it to search for incidents?  If a host
   in one organization is used as a launching point for an attack
   against another organization, can the second organization use the
   audit data of the first organization to prove negligence on the part
   of that organization?

   The above examples are meant to be comprehensive, but should motivate
   your organization to consider the legal issues involved with audit
   data.

4.7  Securing Backups

   The procedure of creating backups is a classic part of operating a
   computer system.  Within the context of this document, backups are
   addressed as part of the overall security plan of a site.  There are
   several aspects to backups that are important within this context:

   (1)  Make sure your site is creating backups
   (2)  Make sure your site is using offsite storage for backups. The
        storage site should be carefully selected for both its security an=
d
        its availability.
   (3)  Consider encrypting your backups to provide additional protection =
of
        the information once it is off-site.  However, be aware that you w=
ill
        need a good key management scheme so that you'll be able to recove=
r
        data at any point in the future.  Also, make sure you will have
        access to the necessary decryption programs at such time in the
        future as you need to perform the decryption.
   (4)  Don't always assume that your backups are good.  There have been
        many instances of computer security incidents that have gone on fo=
r
        long periods of time before a site has noticed the incident.  In s=
uch
        cases, backups of the affected systems are also tainted.
   (5)  Periodically check your backups.

5.  Security Incident Handling

   This section of the document will supply guidance to be applied
   before, during, and after a computer security incident occurs on a
   machine, network, site, or multi-site environment.  The operative
   philosophy in the event of a breach of computer security is to react
   according to a plan.  This is true whether the breach is the result
   of an external intruder attack, unintentional damage, a student
   testing some new program to exploit a software vulnerability, or a
   disgruntled employee.  Each of the possible types of events, such as
   those just listed, should be addressed in advance by adequate
   contingency plans.

   Traditional computer security, while quite important in the overall
   site security plan, usually pays little attention to how to actually
   handle the attack once it occurs.  The result is that when an attack
   is in progress, many decisions are made in haste and can be damaging



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 30]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   to tracking down the source of the incident, collecting evidence to
   be used in prosecution efforts, preparing for the recovery of the
   system, and protecting the valuable data contained on the system.

   One of the most important, but often overlooked, benefits for
   efficient incident handling is an economic one.  Having both
   technical and managerial personnel respond to an incident requires
   considerable resources.  If trained to handle incidents efficiently,
   less staff time is required when one occurs.

   Due to the world-wide network most incidents are not restricted to a
   single site.  Operating systems vulnerabilities apply (in some cases)
   to several millions of systems, and many vulnerabilities are
   exploited within the network itself.  Therefore, it is vital for all
   sites with involved parties are informed as soon as possible.

   Another benefit is related to public relations.  News about computer
   security incidents tends to be damaging to an organization's stature
   among current or potential clients.  Efficient incident handling
   minimizes the potential for negative exposure.

   A final benefit of efficient incident handling is related to legal
   issues.  It is possible that in the near future organizations may be
   sued because one of their nodes was used to launch a network attack.
   In a similar vein, people who develop patches or workarounds may be
   sued if the patches or workarounds are ineffective, resulting in
   compromise of the systems, or, if the patches or workarounds
   themselves damage systems.  Knowing about operating system
   vulnerabilities and patterns of attacks, and then taking appropriate
   measures to counter these potential threats, is critical to
   circumventing possible legal problems.

   The sections in this chapter provide an outline and starting point
   for creating your site's policy for handling security incidents.  The
   sections are:

   (1)  Preparing and planning (what are the goals and objectives in
        handling an incident).
   (2)  Notification (who should be contacted in the case of an incident).
   (3)  Evaluation (how serious is the incident).
   (4)  Handling (what should be done when an incident occurs).
          - Notification (who should be notified about the incident).
          - Containment (how can the damage be limited).
          - Eradication (how to eliminate the reasons for the incident).
          - Recovery (how to reestablish service and systems).
          - Follow Up (what actions should be taken after the incident).
          - Legal/Investigative implications (what are the legal and
            prosecutorial implications of the incident).
          - Documentation Logs (what records should be kept from
            before, during, and after the incident).
   (5)  Aftermath (what are the implications of past incidents).
   (6)  Responsibilities (how to handle an incident responsibly).

   The remainder of this chapter will detail the issues involved in each



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 31]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   of the important topics listed above, and provide some guidance as to
   what should be included in a site policy for handling incidents.

5.1  Preparing and Planning for Incident Handling

   Part of handling an incident is being prepared to respond to an
   incident before the incident occurs in the first place.  This
   includes establishing a suitable level of protections as explained in
   the preceding chapters.  Doing this should help your site prevent
   incidents as well as limit potential damage resulting from them when
   they do occur.  Protection also includes preparing incident handling
   guidelines as part of a contingency plan for your organization or
   site.  Having written plans eliminates much of the ambiguity which
   occurs during an incident, and will lead to a more appropriate and
   thorough set of responses.  It is vitally important to test the
   proposed plan before an incident occurs through "dry runs".  A team
   might even consider hiring a tiger team to act in parallel with the
   dry run.

   Learning to respond efficiently to an incident is important for a
   number of reasons:

   (1)  protecting the assets which could be compromised
   (2)  protecting resources which could be utilized more
        profitably if an incident did not require their services
   (3)  complying with (government or other) regulations
   (4)  preventing the use of your systems in attacks against other
        systems (which could cause you to incur legal liability)
   (5)  minimizing the potential for negative exposure

   As in any set of pre-planned procedures, attention must be paid to a
   set of goals for handling an incident.  These goals will be
   prioritized differently depending on the site.  A specific set of
   objectives can be identified for dealing with incidents:

   (1)  Figure out how it happened.
   (2)  Find out how to avoid further exploitation of the same
          vulnerability.
   (3)  Avoid escalation and further incidents.
   (4)  Recover from the incident.
   (5)  Find out who did it.

   Due to the nature of the incident, there might be a conflict between
   analyzing the original source of a problem and restoring systems and
   services.  Overall goals (like assuring the integrity of critical
   systems) might be the reason for not analyzing an incident.  Of
   course, this is an important management decision; but all involved
   parties must be aware that without analysis the same incident may
   happen again.

   It is also important to prioritize the actions to be taken during an
   incident well in advance of the time an incident occurs.  Sometimes
   an incident may be so complex that it is impossible to do everything
   at once to respond to it; priorities are essential.  Although



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 32]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   priorities will vary from institution to institution, the following
   suggested priorities may serve as a starting point for defining your
   organization's response:

   (1)  Priority one -- protect human life and people's
        safety; human life always has precedence over all
        other considerations.

   (2)  Priority two -- protect classified and/or sensitive
        data.  Prevent exploitation of classified and/or
        sensitive systems, networks or sites.  Inform affected
        classified and/or sensitive systems, networks or sites
        about already occurred penetrations.
        (Be aware of regulations by your site or by government)

   (3)  Priority three -- protect other data, including
        proprietary, scientific, managerial and other data,
        because loss of data is costly in terms of resources.
        Prevent exploitations of other systems, networks or
        sites and inform already affected systems, networks or
        sites about successful penetrations.

   (4)  Priority four -- prevent damage to systems (e.g., loss
        or alteration of system files, damage to disk drives,
        etc.).  Damage to systems can result in costly down
        time and recovery.

   (5)  Priority five -- minimize disruption of computing
        resources.  It is better in many cases to shut a system
        down or disconnect from a network than to risk damage
        to data or systems.

   An important implication for defining priorities is that once human
   life and national security considerations have been addressed, it is
   generally more important to save data than system software and
   hardware.  Although it is undesirable to have any damage or loss
   during an incident, systems can be replaced. However, the loss or
   compromise of data (especially classified or proprietary data) is
   usually not an acceptable outcome under any circumstances.

   Another important concern is the effect on others, beyond the systems
   and networks where the incident occurs.  Within the limits imposed by
   government regulations it is always important to inform affected
   parties as soon as possible.  Due to the legal implications of this
   topic, it should be included in the planned procedures to avoid
   further delays and uncertainties for the administrators.

   Any plan for responding to security incidents should be guided by
   local policies and regulations.  Government and private sites that
   deal with classified material have specific rules that they must
   follow.

   The policies chosen by your site on how it reacts to incidents will
   shape your response.  For example, it may make little sense to create



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 33]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   mechanisms to monitor and trace intruders if your site does not plan
   to take action against the intruders if they are caught.  Other
   organizations may have policies that affect your plans.  Telephone
   companies often release information about telephone traces only to
   law enforcement agencies.

5.2  Notification and Points of Contact

   It is important to establish contacts with various personnel before a
   real incident occurs.  These contacts are either local, other system
   responsible or administrative contacts administrators elsewhere on
   the Internet or are investigative agencies.  Working with these
   contacts appropriately will help to make your incident handling
   process more efficient.

   Communication may need to be established with various "Points of
   Contact" (POC).  These may be technical or administrative in nature
   and may include legal or investigative agencies as well as Service
   Providers and vendors.  It is important to decide how much
   information will be shared, especially with the wider community of
   users at a site, with the public (the press) and with other sites.

   Settling these issues are especially important for the local person
   responsible for handling the incident, since that is the person
   responsible for the actual notification of others.  A list of
   contacts in each of these categories is an important time saver for
   this person during an incident.  It can be quite difficult to find an
   appropriate person during an incident when many urgent events are
   ongoing.  Including relevant telephone numbers (also electronic mail
   addresses and fax numbers) in the site security policy is strongly
   recommended.  It is especially important to know how to contact
   individuals who will be directly involved in handling a security
   incident.

5.2.1  Local Managers and Personnel

   When an incident is under way, a major issue is deciding who is in
   charge of coordinating the activity of the multitude of players.  A
   major mistake that can be made is to have a number of POCs who are
   not pulling their efforts together.  This will only add to the
   confusion of the event and will probably lead to wasted or
   ineffective effort.

   The single POC may or may not be the person responsible for handling
   the incident.  There are two distinct roles to fill when deciding who
   shall be the POC and who will be the person in charge of the
   incident.  The person in charge of the incident will make decisions
   as to the interpretation of policy applied to the event.  In
   contrast, the POC must coordinate the effort of all the parties
   involved with handling the event.

   The POC must be a person with the technical expertise to successfully
   coordinate the effort of the system managers and users involved in
   monitoring and reacting to the attack.  Often the management



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 34]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   structure of a site is such that the administrator of a set of
   resources is not a technically competent person with regard to
   handling the details of the operations of the computers, but is
   ultimately responsible for the use of these resources.

   Another important function of the POC is to maintain contact with law
   enforcement and other external agencies to assure that multi-agency
   involvement occurs.  The level of involvement will be determined by
   management decisions as well as legal constraints.

   Finally, if legal action in the form of prosecution is involved, the
   POC may be asked to speak for the site in court.  The alternative is
   to have multiple witnesses whose input may be hard to coordinate in a
   legal sense.  This may lead to a weakening of any case against the
   attackers.  A single POC may also be the single person in charge of
   collecting evidence, which will keep the number of people accounting
   for evidence to a minimum.  As a rule of thumb, the more people that
   touch a potential piece of evidence, the greater the possibility that
   it will be inadmissible in court.

   One of the most critical tasks for the POC is the coordination of all
   relevant processes.  As responsibilities might be distributed over
   the whole site, which may well consist of multiple independent
   departments or groups, a well coordinate effort is crucial for
   overall success.  The situation get even worse if multiple sites are
   involved.  In many cases, no single POC in one site can coordinate
   the handling of an entire incident.  The appropriate incident
   response teams are more suitable, if multiple sites are involved.

   The incident handling process should provide some escalation
   mechanisms.  The POC might change; the impact of the incident force
   the management to take the lead instead of giving the technical
   administrator the responsibility.  Other reasons for changing the POC
   are the emergence of conflicts of interest, or changing priorities or
   responsibilities.  Regardless of why the POC is changed, all involved
   parties must be informed.  Arrangements should be made to allow the
   new POC to contact the old one, to ensure an adequate briefing of
   background information.

5.2.2  Law Enforcement and Investigative Agencies

   In the event of an incident that has legal consequences, it is
   important to establish contact with investigative agencies (e.g, the
   FBI and Secret Service in the U.S.) as soon as possible.  Local law
   enforcement, local security offices, and campus police departments
   should also be informed as appropriate.

   A primary reason is that once a major attack is in progress, there is
   little time to call these agencies to determine exactly who the
   correct point of contact is.  Another reason is that it is important
   to cooperate with these agencies in a manner that will foster a good
   working relationship, and that will be in accordance with the working
   procedures of these agencies.  Knowing the working procedures in
   advance and the expectations of your point of contact is a big step



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 35]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   in this direction.  For example, it is important to gather evidence
   that will be admissible in a court of law, requiring prior knowledge
   of how to gather such evidence.  A final reason for establishing
   contacts as soon as possible is that it is impossible to know the
   particular agency that will assume jurisdiction in any given
   incident.  Making contacts and finding the proper channels early will
   make responding to an incident go considerably more smoothly.

   If your organization or site has a legal counsel, you need to notify
   this office soon after you learn that an incident is in progress.  At
   a minimum, your legal counsel needs to be involved to protect the
   legal and financial interests of your site or organization.  There
   are many legal and practical issues, a few of which are:

   (1)  Whether your site or organization is willing to risk negative
        publicity or exposure to cooperate with legal prosecution efforts.

   (2)  Downstream liability--if you leave a compromised system as is so
        it can be monitored and another computer is damaged because the
        attack originated from your system, your site or organization
        may be liable for damages incurred.

   (3)  Distribution of information--if your site or organization distribu=
tes
        information about an attack in which another site or organization =
may
        be involved or the vulnerability in a product that may affect abil=
ity
        to market that product, your site or organization may again be lia=
ble
        for any damages (including damage of reputation).

   (4)  Liabilities due to monitoring--your site or organization may be su=
ed
        if users at your site or elsewhere discover that your site is
        monitoring account activity without informing users.

   Unfortunately, there are no clear precedents yet on the liabilities
   or responsibilities of organizations involved in a security incident
   or who might be involved in supporting an investigative effort.
   Investigators will often encourage organizations to help trace and
   monitor intruders.  Indeed, most investigators cannot pursue computer
   intrusions without extensive support from the organizations involved.
   However, investigators cannot provide protection from liability
   claims, and these kinds of efforts may drag out for months and may
   take a lot of effort.

   On the other hand, an organization's legal council may advise extreme
   caution and suggest that tracing activities be halted and an intruder
   shut out of the system.  This, in itself, may not provide protection
   from liability, and may prevent investigators from identifying the
   perpetrator.

   The balance between supporting investigative activity and limiting
   liability is tricky. You'll need to consider the advice of your legal
   counsel and the damage the intruder is causing (if any) when making
   your decision about what to do during any particular incident.

   Your legal counsel should also be involved in any decision to contact



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 36]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   investigative agencies when an incident occurs at your site.  The
   decision to coordinate efforts with investigative agencies is most
   properly that of your site or organization.  Involving your legal
   counsel will also foster the multi-level coordination between your
   site and the particular investigative agency involved, which in turn
   results in an efficient division of labor.  Another result is that
   you are likely to obtain guidance that will help you avoid future
   legal mistakes.

   Finally, your legal counsel should evaluate your site's written
   procedures for responding to incidents.  It is essential to obtain a
   "clean bill of health" from a legal perspective before you actually
   carry out these procedures.

   It is vital, when dealing with investigative agencies, to verify that
   the person who calls asking for information is a legitimate
   representative from the agency in question.  Unfortunately, many well
   intentioned people have unknowingly leaked sensitive details about
   incidents, allowed unauthorized people into their systems, etc.,
   because a caller has masqueraded as a representative of a government
   agency.

   A similar consideration is using a secure means of communication.
   Because many network attackers can easily re-route electronic mail,
   avoid using electronic mail to communicate with other agencies (as
   well as others dealing with the incident at hand). Non-secured phone
   lines (the phones normally used in the business world) are also
   frequent targets for tapping by network intruders, so be careful!

   There is no established set of rules for responding to an incident
   when the local government becomes involved.  Normally, except by
   court order, no agency can force you to monitor, to disconnect from
   the network, to avoid telephone contact with the suspected attackers,
   etc.  As discussed before, you should consult the matter with your
   legal counsel, especially before taking an action that your
   organization has never taken.

   The particular agency involved may ask you to leave an attacked
   machine on and to monitor activity.  Complying with this request will
   ensure continued cooperation of the agency.  This is usually the best
   route towards finding the source of the network attacks and,
   ultimately, terminating the attacks.  Additionally, you may need
   information or a favor from the agency involved.  You are likely to
   get what you need only if you have been cooperative.  It is
   particularly important to avoid unnecessary or unauthorized
   disclosure of information about the incident, including any
   information furnished by the agency involved.  In other words, don't
   compromise the case the agency is trying to build.  And remember, if
   you do not cooperate with an agency, you will be less likely to
   receive help from that agency in the future.

   Sometimes your needs and the needs of an investigative agency will
   differ.  Your site may want to get back to normal business by closing
   an attack route, but the investigative agency may want you to keep



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 37]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   this route open.  Similarly, your site may want to close a
   compromised system down to avoid the possibility of negative
   publicity, but again the investigative agency may want you to
   continue monitoring.  When there is such a conflict, there may be a
   complex set of tradeoffs (e.g., interests of your site's management,
   amount of resources you can devote to the problem, jurisdictional
   boundaries, etc.).  An important guiding principle is related to what
   might be called "Internet citizenship" and its responsibilities.  See
   section 5.6.

5.2.3  Computer Security Incident Handling Teams

   There now exists a number of Computer Security Incident Response
   teams (CSIRTs) such as the CERT Coordination Center and the CIAC or
   other teams around the globe.  Teams exist for many major government
   agencies and large corporations.  If such a team is available,
   notifying it should be of primary importance during the early stages
   of an incident.  These teams are responsible for coordinating
   computer security incidents over a range of sites and larger
   entities.  Even if the incident is believed to be contained within a
   single site, it is possible that the information available through a
   response team could help in closing out the incident.

   If it is determined that the breach occurred due to a flaw in the
   system's hardware or software, the vendor (or supplier) and a
   Computer Security Incident Handling team should be notified as soon
   as possible.  This is especially important because many other systems
   are vulnerable, too.

   In setting up a site policy for incident handling, it may be
   desirable to create a subgroup, much like those teams that already
   exist, that will be responsible for handling computer security
   incidents for the site (or organization).  If such a team is created,
   it is essential that communication lines be opened between this team
   and other teams.  Once an incident is under way, it is difficult to
   open a trusted dialogue between other teams if none has existed
   before.

5.2.4  Affected and Involved Sites

   If an incident has an impact on other sites, it is good practice to
   inform them.  It may be obvious from the beginning that the incident
   is not limited to the local site, or it may emerge only after further
   analysis.

   Each site might choose to contact other sites directly or they can
   pass the information to an appropriate incident response team, to
   which the involved site belongs.  As it is often very difficult to
   find the responsible POC at remote sites, the involvement of an
   incident response team will facilitate contact by making use of
   already established channels.

   The legal and liability issues arising from a security incident may
   differ from site to site.  It is important to define a policy for the



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 38]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   sharing and logging of information about other sites before an
   incident occurs.  This policy should be crafted in consultation with
   legal counsel.

   Information about specific people is especially sensitive, and may be
   subject to privacy laws.  To avoid problems in this area, irrelevant
   information should be deleted and a statement of how to handle the
   remaining information should be included.  A clear statement of how
   this information is to be used is essential.  No one who informs a
   site of a security incident wants to read about it in the public
   press.  Incident response teams are valuable in this respect.  When
   they pass information to responsible POCs, they are able to protect
   the anonymity of the original source. But, be aware that, in many
   cases, the analysis of logs and information at other sites will
   reveal addresses of your site.

   All the problems discussed above should be not taken as reasons not
   to involve other sites.  In fact, the experiences of existing teams
   reveal that most sites informed about security problems are not even
   aware that their site had been compromised.  Without timely
   information, other sites are often unable to take action against
   intruders.

5.2.5  Public Relations - Press Releases

   One of the most important issues to consider is when, who, and how
   much to release to the general public through the press.  There are
   many issues to consider when deciding this particular issue.  First
   and foremost, if a public relations office exists for the site, it is
   important to use this office as liaison to the press.  The public
   relations office is trained in the type and wording of information
   released, and will help to assure that the image of the site is
   protected during and after the incident (if possible).  A public
   relations office has the advantage that you can communicate candidly
   with them, and provide a buffer between the constant press attention
   and the need of the POC to maintain control over the incident.

   If a public relations office is not available, the information
   released to the press must be carefully considered.  If the
   information is sensitive, it may be advantageous to provide only
   minimal or overview information to the press.  It is quite possible
   that any information provided to the press will be quickly reviewed
   by the perpetrator of the incident.  Also note that misleading the
   press can often backfire and cause more damage than releasing
   sensitive information.

   While it is difficult to determine in advance what level of detail to
   provide to the press, some guidelines to keep in mind are:

   (1)  Keep the technical level of detail low.  Detailed
        information about the incident may provide enough
        information for copy-cat events or even damage the
        site's ability to prosecute once the event is over.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 39]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   (2)  Keep the speculation out of press statements.
        Speculation of who is causing the incident or the
        motives are very likely to be in error and may cause
        an inflamed view of the incident.

   (3)  Work with law enforcement professionals to assure that
        evidence is protected.  If prosecution is involved,
        assure that the evidence collected is not divulged to
        the press.

   (4)  Try not to be forced into a press interview before you are
        prepared.  The popular press is famous for the "2 am"
        interview, where the hope is to catch the interviewee off
        guard and obtain information otherwise not available.

   (5)  Do not allow the press attention to detract from the
        handling of the event.  Always remember that the successful
        closure of an incident is of primary importance.

5.3  Identifying an Incident

5.3.1  Is it real?

   This stage involves determining if a problem really exists.  Of
   course many if not most signs often associated with virus infection,
   system intrusions, malicious users, etc., are simply anomalies such
   as hardware failures or suspicious system/user behavior.  To assist
   in identifying whether there really is an incident, it is usually
   helpful to obtain and use any detection software which may be
   available.  Audit information is also extremely useful, especially in
   determining whether there is a network attack.  It is extremely
   important to obtain a system snapshot as soon as one suspects that
   something is wrong.  Many incidents cause a dynamic chain of events
   to occur, and an initial system snapshot may be the most valuable
   tool for identifying the problem and any source of attack.  Finally,
   it is important to start a log book.  Recording system events,
   telephone conversations, time stamps, etc., can lead to a more rapid
   and systematic identification of the problem, and is the basis for
   subsequent stages of incident handling.

   There are certain indications or "symptoms" of an incident which
   deserve special attention:

   (1)   System crashes.
   (2)   New user accounts (the account RUMPLESTILTSKIN has been
         unexpectedly created), or high activity on a previously
         low usage account.
   (3)   New files (usually with novel or strange file names,
         such as data.xx or k or .xx ).
   (4)   Accounting discrepancies (in a UNIX system you might
         notice the shrinking of an accounting file called
         /usr/admin/lastlog, something that should make you very
         suspicious that there may be an intruder).
   (5)   Changes in file lengths or dates (a user should be



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 40]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


         suspicious if .EXE files in an MS DOS computer have
         unexplainedly grown by over 1800 bytes).
   (6)   Attempts to write to system (a system manager notices
         that a privileged user in a VMS system is attempting to
         alter RIGHTSLIST.DAT).
   (7)   Data modification or deletion (files start to disappear).
   (8)   Denial of service (a system manager and all other users
         become locked out of a UNIX system, now in single user mode).
   (9)   Unexplained, poor system performance
   (10)  Anomalies ("GOTCHA" is displayed on the console or there
         are frequent unexplained "beeps").
   (11)  Suspicious probes (there are numerous unsuccessful login
         attempts from another node).
   (12)  Suspicious browsing (someone becomes a root user on a UNIX
         system and accesses file after file on many user accounts.)

   By no means is this list comprehensive; we have just listed a number
   of common indicators.  It is best to collaborate with other technical
   and computer security personnel to make a decision as a group about
   whether an incident is occurring.

5.3.2  Types and Scope of Incidents

   Along with the identification of the incident is the evaluation of
   the scope and impact of the problem.  It is important to correctly
   identify the boundaries of the incident in order to effectively deal
   with it and prioritize responses.

   In order to identify the scope and impact a set of criteria should be
   defined which is appropriate to the site and to the type of
   connections available.  Some of the issues include:

   (1)  Is this a multi-site incident?
   (2)  Are many computers at your site affected by this incident?
   (3)  Is sensitive information involved?
   (4)  What is the entry point of the incident (network,
        phone line, local terminal, etc.)?
   (5)  Is the press involved?
   (6)  What is the potential damage of the incident?
   (7)  What is the estimated time to close out the incident?
   (8)  What resources could be required to handle the incident?
   (9)  Is law enforcement involved?

5.3.3  Assessing the Damage and Extent

   The analysis of the damage and extent of the incident can be quite
   time consuming, but should lead to some insight into the nature of
   the incident, and aid investigation and prosecution.  As soon as the
   breach has occurred, the entire system and all of its components
   should be considered suspect.  System software is the most probable
   target.  Preparation is key to be able to detect all changes for a
   possibly tainted system.  This includes checksumming all tapes from
   the vendor using a algorithm which is resistant to tampering.  (See
   sections 4.3)



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 41]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Assuming original vendor distribution tapes are available, an
   analysis of all system files should commence, and any irregularities
   should be noted and referred to all parties involved in handling the
   incident.  It can be very difficult, in some cases, to decide which
   backup tapes are showing a correct system status. Consider, for
   example, that the incident may have continued for months or years
   before discovery, and the suspect may be an employee of the site, or
   otherwise have intimate knowledge or access to the systems.  In all
   cases, the pre-incident preparation will determine what recovery is
   possible.

   If the system supports centralized logging (most do), go back over
   the logs and look for abnormalities.  If process accounting and
   connect time accounting is enabled, look for patterns of system
   usage.  To a lesser extent, disk usage may shed light on the
   incident.  Accounting can provide much helpful information in an
   analysis of an incident and subsequent prosecution.  Your ability to
   address all aspects of a specific incident strongly depends on the
   success of this analysis.

5.4  Handling an Incident

   Certain steps are necessary to take during the handling of an
   incident.  In all security related activities, the most important
   point to be made is:  One should have policies in place.  Without
   defined goals, activities undertaken will remain without focus. The
   goals should be defined by management and legal counsel in advance.

   One of the most fundamental objectives is to restore control of the
   affected systems and to limit the impact and damage.  In the worst
   case scenario, shutting down the system, or disconnecting the system
   from the network, may the only practical solution.

   As the activities involved are complex, try to get as much help as
   necessary.  While trying to solve the problem alone, real damage
   might occur due to delays or missing information.  Most system
   administrators take the discovery of an intruder as personal
   challenge.  By proceeding this way, other objectives as outlined in
   the local policies may not always be considered.  Trying to catch
   intruders may be a very low priority, compared to system integrity,
   for example.  Monitoring a hacker's activity is useful, but it might
   not be considered worth the risk to allow continued access.

5.4.1  Types of notification, Exchange of information

   When you have confirmed that an incident is occurring, the
   appropriate personnel must be notified.  How this notification is
   achieved is very important to keeping the event under control both
   from a technical and emotional standpoint. The circumstances should
   be described in as much detail as possible, in order to aid prompt
   acknowledgment and understanding of the problem.  Great care should
   be taken when determining to which groups detailed technical
   information is given during the notification.  For example, it is
   helpful to pass this kind of information to an incident handling team



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 42]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   as they can assist you by providing helpful hints for eradicating the
   vulnerabilities involved in an incident.  On the other hand, putting
   the critical knowledge into the public domain (e.g., via USENET
   newsgroups or mailing lists) may potentially put a large number of
   systems at risk of intrusion.  It is invalid to assume that all
   administrators reading a particular newsgroup have access to
   operating system source code, or can even understand an advisory well
   enough to take adequate steps.

   First of all, any notification to either local or off-site personnel
   must be explicit.  This requires that any statement (be it an
   electronic mail message, phone call, or fax) providing information
   about the incident be clear, concise, and fully qualified.  When you
   are notifying others that will help you handle an event, a "smoke
   screen" will only divide the effort and create confusion.  If a
   division of labor is suggested, it is helpful to provide information
   to each participant about what is being accomplished in other
   efforts.  This will not only reduce duplication of effort, but allow
   people working on parts of the problem to know where to obtain
   information relevant to their part of the incident.

   Another important consideration when communicating about the incident
   is to be factual.  Attempting to hide aspects of the incident by
   providing false or incomplete information may not only prevent a
   successful resolution to the incident, but may even worsen the
   situation.

   The choice of language used when notifying people about the incident
   can have a profound effect on the way that information is received.
   When you use emotional or inflammatory terms, you raise the potential
   for damage and negative outcomes of the incident.  It is important to
   remain calm both in written and spoken communications.

   Another consideration is that not all people speak the same language.
   Due to this fact, misunderstandings and delay may arise, especially
   if it is a multi-national incident. Other international concerns
   include differing legal implications of a security incident and
   cultural differences.  However, cultural differences do not only
   exist between countries.  They even exist within countries, between
   different social or user groups.  For example, an administrator of a
   university system might be very relaxed about attempts to connect to
   the system via telnet, but the administrator of a military system is
   likely to consider the same action as a possible attack.

   Another issue associated with the choice of language is the
   notification of non-technical or off-site personnel.  It is important
   to accurately describe the incident without generating undue alarm or
   confusion.  While it is more difficult to describe the incident to a
   non-technical audience, it is often more important.  A non-technical
   description may be required for upper-level management, the press, or
   law enforcement liaisons.  The importance of these communications
   cannot be underestimated and may make the difference between
   resolving the incident properly and escalating to some higher level
   of damage.



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 43]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   If an incident response team becomes involved, it might be necessary
   to fill out a template for the information exchange.  Although this
   may seem to be an additional burden and adds a certain delay, it
   helps the team to act on this minimum set of information.  The
   response team may be able to respond to aspects of the incident of
   which the local administrator is unaware. If information is given out
   to someone else, the following minimum information should be
   provided:

   (1)  timezone of logs, ... in GMT or local time
   (2)  information about the remote system, including host names,
        IP addresses and (perhaps) user IDs
   (3)  all log entries relevant for the remote site
   (4)  type of incident (what happened, why should you care)

   If local information (i.e., local user IDs) is included in the log
   entries, it might be necessary to sanitize the entries beforehand to
   avoid privacy issues.  In general, all information which might assist
   a remote site in resolving an incident should be given out, unless
   local policies prohibit this.

5.4.2  Protecting Evidence and Activity Logs

   When you respond to an incident, document all details related to the
   incident.  This will provide valuable information to yourself and
   others as you try to unravel the course of events.  Documenting all
   details will ultimately save you time.  If you don't document every
   relevant phone call, for example, you are likely to forget a
   significant portion of information you obtain, requiring you to
   contact the source of information again.  At the same time, recording
   details will provide evidence for prosecution efforts, providing the
   case moves in that direction.  Documenting an incident will also help
   you perform a final assessment of damage (something your management,
   as well as law enforcement officers, will want to know), and will
   provide the basis for later phases of the handling process:
   eradication, recovery, and follow-up "lessons learned."

   During the initial stages of an incident, it is often infeasible to
   determine whether prosecution is viable, so you should document as if
   you are gathering evidence for a court case.  At a minimum, you
   should record:

   (1)  all system events (audit records)
   (2)  all actions you take (time tagged)
   (3)  all phone conversations (including the person with whom
        you talked, the date and time, and the content of the
        conversation)

   The most straightforward way to maintain documentation is keeping a
   log book.  This allows you to go to a centralized, chronological
   source of information when you need it, instead of requiring you to
   page through individual sheets of paper.  Much of this information is
   potential evidence in a court of law.  Thus, when you initially
   suspect that an incident will result in prosecution or when an



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 44]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   investigative agency becomes involved, you need to:

   (1)  Regularly (e.g., every day) turn in photocopied, signed
        copies of your logbook (as well as media you use to record
        system events) to a document custodian.
   (2)  The custodian should store these copied pages in a secure
        place (e.g., a safe).
   (3)  When you submit information for storage, you should
        receive a signed, dated receipt from the document
        custodian.

   Failure to observe these procedures can result in invalidation of any
   evidence you obtain in a court of law.

5.4.3  Containment

   The purpose of containment is to limit the extent of an attack.  An
   essential part of containment is decision making (e.g., determining
   whether to shut a system down, disconnect from a network, monitor
   system or network activity, set traps, disable functions such as
   remote file transfer, etc.).

   Sometimes this decision is trivial; shut the system down if the
   information is classified, sensitive, or proprietary.  Bear in mind
   that removing all access while an incident is in progress obviously
   notifies all users, including the alleged problem users, that the
   administrators are aware of a problem; this may have a deleterious
   effect on an investigation.  In some cases, it is prudent to remove
   all access or functionality as soon as possible, then restore normal
   operation in limited stages.  In other cases, it is worthwhile to
   risk some damage to the system if keeping the system up might enable
   you to identify an intruder.

   This stage should involve carrying out predetermined procedures.
   Your organization or site should, for example, define acceptable
   risks in dealing with an incident, and should prescribe specific
   actions and strategies accordingly.  This is especially important
   when a quick decision is necessary and it is not possible to first
   contact all involved parties to discuss the decision.  In the absence
   of predefined procedures, the person in charge of the incident will
   often not have the power to make difficult management decisions (like
   to lose the results of a costly experiment by shutting down a
   system).  A final activity that should occur during this stage of
   incident handling is the notification of appropriate authorities.

5.4.4  Eradication

   Once the incident has been contained, it is time to eradicate the
   cause.  But before eradicating the cause, great care should be taken
   to collect all necessary information about the compromised system(s)
   and the cause of the incident as they will likely be lost when
   cleaning up the system.

   Software may be available to help you in the eradication process,



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 45]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   such as anti-virus software for small systems.  If any bogus files
   have been created archive them before deleting them.  In the case of
   virus infections, it is important to clean and reformat any disks
   containing infected files.  Finally, ensure that all backups are
   clean.  Many systems infected with viruses become periodically re-
   infected simply because people do not systematically eradicate the
   virus from backups.  After eradication, a new backup should be taken.

   Removing all vulnerabilities once an incident has occurred is
   difficult.  The key to removing vulnerabilities is knowledge and
   understanding of the breach.

   It may be necessary to go back to the original distribution tapes and
   re-customize the system.  To facilitate this worst case scenario, a
   record of the original system setup and each customization change
   should be maintained.  In the case of a network-based attack, it is
   important to install patches for each operating system vulnerability
   which was exploited.

   As discussed in section 5.4.2, a security log can be most valuable
   during this phase of removing vulnerabilities. The logs showing how
   the incident was discovered and contained can be used later to help
   determine how extensive the damage was from a given incident.  The
   steps taken can be used in the future to make sure the problem does
   not resurface.  Ideally, one should automate and regularly apply the
   same test as was used to detect the security incident.

   If a particular vulnerability is isolated as having been exploited,
   the next step is to find a mechanism to protect your system.  The
   security mailing lists and bulletins would be a good place to search
   for this information, and you can get advice from incident response
   teams.

5.4.5  Recovery

   Once the cause of an incident has been eradicated, the recovery phase
   defines the next stage of action.  The goal of recovery is to return
   the system to normal.  In general, bringing up services in the order
   of demand to allow a minimum of user inconvenience is the best
   practice.  Understand that the proper recovery procedures for the
   system are extremely important and should be specific to the site.

5.4.6  Follow-Up

   Once you believe that a system has been restored to a "safe" state,
   it is still possible that holes, and even traps, could be lurking in
   the system.  One of the most important stages of responding to
   incidents is also the most often omitted, the follow-up stage.  In
   the follow-up stage, the system should be monitored for items that
   may have been missed during the cleanup stage.  It would be prudent
   to utilize some of the tools mentioned in section xxx (e.g., xxx) as
   a start.  Remember, these tools don't replace continual system
   monitoring and good systems administration practices.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 46]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   The most important element of the follow-up stage is performing a
   postmortem analysis.  Exactly what happened, and at what times?  How
   well did the staff involved with the incident perform?  What kind of
   information did the staff need quickly, and how could they have
   gotten that information as soon as possible?  What would the staff do
   differently next time?

   After an incident, it is prudent to write a report describing the
   exact sequence of events: the method of discovery, correction
   procedure, monitoring procedure, and a summary of lesson learned.
   This will aid in the clear understanding of the problem.  Creating a
   formal chronology of events (including time stamps) is also important
   for legal reasons.

   A follow-up report is valuable for many reasons.  It provides a
   reference to be used in case of other similar incidents.  It is also
   important to, as quickly as possible obtain a monetary estimate of
   the amount of damage the incident caused. This estimate should
   include costs associated with any loss of software and files
   (especially the value of proprietary data that may have been
   disclosed), hardware damage, and manpower costs to restore altered
   files, reconfigure affected systems, and so forth.  This estimate may
   become the basis for subsequent prosecution activity.  The report can
   also help justify an organization's computer security effort to
   management.

5.5  Aftermath of an Incident

   In the wake of an incident, several actions should take place.  These
   actions can be summarized as follows:

   (1)  An inventory should be taken of the systems' assets,
        (i.e., a careful examination should determine how the
        system was affected by the incident).

   (2)  The lessons learned as a result of the incident
        should be included in revised security plan to
        prevent the incident from re-occurring.

   (3)  A new risk analysis should be developed in light of the
        incident.

   (4)  An investigation and prosecution of the individuals
        who caused the incident should commence, if it is
        deemed desirable.

   If an incident is based on poor policy, and unless the policy is
   changed, then one is doomed to repeat the past.  Once a site has
   recovered from and incident, site policy and procedures should be
   reviewed to encompass changes to prevent similar incidents.  Even
   without an incident, it would be prudent to review policies and
   procedures on a regular basis.  Reviews are imperative due to today's
   changing computing environments.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 47]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   The whole purpose of this post mortem process is to improve all
   security measures to protect the site against future attacks.  As a
   result of an incident, a site or organization should gain practical
   knowledge from the experience.  A concrete goal of the post mortem is
   to develop new proactive methods.  Another important facet of the
   aftermath may be end user and administrator education to prevent a
   reoccurrence of the security problem.

5.6  Responsibilities

5.6.1  Not crossing the line

   It is one thing to protect one's own network, but quite another to
   assume that one should protect other networks.  During the handling
   of an incident, certain system vulnerabilities of one's own systems
   and the systems of others become apparent.  It is quite easy and may
   even be tempting to pursue the intruders in order to track them.
   Keep in mind that at a certain point it is possible to "cross the
   line," and, with the best of intentions, become no better than the
   intruder.

   The best rule when it comes to propriety is to not use any facility
   of remote sites which is not public.  This clearly excludes any entry
   onto a system (such as a remote shell or login session) which is not
   expressly permitted.  This may be very tempting; after a breach of
   security is detected, a system administrator may have the means to
   "follow it up," to ascertain what damage is being done to the remote
   site.  Don't do it!  Instead, attempt to reach the appropriate point
   of contact for the affected site.

5.6.2  Good Internet Citizenship

   During a security incident there are two choices one can make.
   First, a site can choose to watch the intruder in the hopes of
   catching him; or, the site can go about cleaning up after the
   incident and shut the intruder out of the systems.  This is a
   decision that must be made very thoughtfully, as there may be legal
   liabilities if you choose to leave your site open, knowing that an
   intruder is using your site as a launching pad to reach out to other
   sites.  Being a good Internet citizen means that you should try to
   alert other sites that may have been impacted by the intruder.  These
   affected sites may be readily apparent after a thorough review of
   your log files.

5.6.3  Administrative Response to Incidents

   When a security incident involves a user, the site's security policy
   should describe what action is to be taken.  The transgression should
   be taken seriously, but it is very important to be sure of the role
   the user played.  Was the user naive?  Could there be a mistake in
   attributing the security breach to the user?  Applying administrative
   action that assumes the user intentionally caused the incident may
   not be appropriate for a user who simply made a mistake.  It may be
   appropriate to include sanctions more suitable for such a situation



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 48]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   in your policies (e.g., education or reprimand of a user) in addition
   to more stern measures for intentional acts of intrusion and system
   misuse.

6.  Ongoing Activities

   At this point in time, your site has hopefully developed a complete
   security policy and developed procedures to assist in the
   configuration and management of your technology in support of those
   policies.  How nice it would be if you could sit back and relax at
   this point and know that you were finished with the job of security.
   Unfortunately, that isn't the case.  Your systems and networks are
   not a static environment, so you will need to review policies and
   procedures on a regular basis.  There are a number of steps you can
   take to help you keep up with the changes around you so that you can
   initiate corresponding actions to address those changes.  The
   following is a starter set and you may add others as appropriate for
   your site.

   (1)  Subscribe to advisories that are issued by various security incide=
nt
        response teams, like those of the CERT Coordination Center [ref], =
and
        update your systems against those threats that apply to your site'=
s
        technology.

   (2)  Monitor security patches that are produced by the vendors of your
        equipment, and obtain and install all that apply.

   (3)  Actively watch the configurations of your systems to identify any
        changes that may have occurred, then investigate all anomalies.

   (4)  Review all security policies and procedures annually (at a minimum=
)

   (5)  Read appropriate mailing lists and USENET newsgroups to keep up to
        date with the latest information being shared by fellow
        administrators.

   (6)  Regularly check for compliance to policies and procedures.  This
        audit should be performed by someone other than the people who
        define or implement the policies and procedures.

7.  Tools and Locations

   This section provides a brief overview of publicly available security
   technology which can be downloaded from the Internet.  Many of the
   items described below will undoubtedly be surpassed or made obsolete
   before this document is published.  This section is divided into two
   major subsections, applications and tools.  The applications heading
   will include all end user programs (clients) and their supporting
   system infrastructure (servers).  The tools heading will deal with
   the tools that a general user will never see or need to use, but
   which may be part of or used by applications, used to troubleshoot
   security problems or guard against intruders by system and network
   administrators.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 49]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   The emphasis will be on UNIX applications and tools, but other
   platforms, particularly PC's and Macintoshes, will be mentioned where
   information is available.

   Most of the tools and applications described below can be found in
   one of the following two archive sites:

   (1)  CERT Coordination Center
        ftp://info.cert.org:/pub/tools
   (2)  DFN-CERT
        ftp://ftp.cert.dfn.de/pub/tools/
   (3)  Computer Operations, Audit, and Security Tools (COAST)
        coast.cs.purdue.edu:/pub/tools

   Any references to CERT or COAST will refer to these two locations.
   These two sites act as repositories for most tools, exceptions will
   be noted in the text.  *** It is important to note that many sites,
   including CERT and COAST are mirrored throughout the Internet.  Be
   careful to use a "well known" mirror site to retrieve software and to
   use whatever verification tools possible, checksums, md5 checksums,
   etc... to validate that software.  A clever cracker might advertise
   security software with designed flaws in order to gain access to data
   or machines. ***

Applications

   The sad truth is that there are very few security conscious
   applications currently available.  The real reason is the need for a
   security infrastructure which must be first put into place for most
   applications to operate securely.  There is considerable effort
   currently taking place to place this infrastructure so that
   applications can take advantage of secure communications.

Unix based applications

   COPS
   DES
   Drawbridge
   identd (not really a security tool)
   ISS
   Kerberos
   logdaemon
   lsof
   MD5
   PEM
   PGP
   rpcbind/portmapper replacement
   SATAN
   sfingerd
   S/KEY
   smrsh
   ssh
   swatch
   TCP-Wrapper



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 50]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   tiger
   Tripwire
   TROJAN.PL

8.  Mailing Lists and Other Resources

   It would be impossible to list all of the mail-lists and other
   resources dealing with site security. However, these are some "jump-
   points"  from which the reader can begin. All of these references are
   for the "INTERNET" constituency. More specific (vendor and
   geographical) resources can be found through these references.

   Mailing Lists

   (1)  CERT Advisory
        Send mail to:  cert-advisory-request@cert.org
        Message Body:  subscribe cert <FIRST NAME> <LAST NAME>

        A CERT advisory provides information on how to obtain a patch or
        details of a workaround for a known computer security problem.
        The CERT Coordination Center works with vendors to produce a
        workaround or a patch for a problem, and does not publish
        vulnerability information until a workaround or a patch is
        available. A CERT advisory may also be a warning to our
        constituency about ongoing attacks (e.g.,
        "CA-91:18.Active.Internet.tftp.Attacks").


        CERT advisories are also published on the USENET newsgroup:
                     comp.security.announce

        CERT advisory archives are available via anonymous FTP from
        info.cert.org in the /pub/cert_advisories directory.

   (2)  CERT Tools Mailing List
        Send mail to:  cert-tools-request@cert.sei.cmu.edu
        Message Body:  subscribe cert-tools FIRSTNAME LASTNAME

        The purpose of this moderated mailing list is to
        encourage the exchange of information on security
        tools and techniques.  The list should not be used
        for security problem reports.

   (3)  VIRUS-L List
        Send mail to:  listserv%lehiibm1.bitnet@mitvma.mit.edu
        Message Body:  subscribe virus-L FIRSTNAME LASTNAME

        VIRUS-L is a moderated mailing list with a focus
        on computer virus issues.  For more information,
        including a copy of the posting guidelines, see
        the file "virus-l.README", available by anonymous
        FTP from cs.ucr.edu.

   (4)  Academic Firewalls



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 51]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


        Send mail to:  majordomo@greatcircle.com
        Message Body:  subscribe firewalls user@host

        The Firewalls mailing list is a discussion forum for
        firewall administrators and implementors.

   USENET newsgroups

   (1)  comp.security.announce
        The comp.security.announce newsgroup is moderated
        and is used solely for the distribution of CERT
        advisories.

   (2)  comp.security.misc
        The comp.security.misc is a forum for the
        discussion of computer security, especially as it
        relates to the UNIX(r) Operating System.

   (3)  alt.security
        The alt.security newsgroup is also a forum for the
        discussion of computer security, as well as other
        issues such as car locks and alarm systems.

   (4)  comp.virus
        The comp.virus newsgroup is a moderated newsgroup
        with a focus on computer virus issues.  For more
        information, including a copy of the posting
        guidelines, see the file "virus-l.README",
        available via anonymous FTP on info.cert.org
        in the /pub/virus-l directory.

   (5)  comp.risks
        The comp.risks newsgroup is a moderated forum on
        the risks to the public in computers and related
        systems.

   World-Wide Web Pages

   (1)  http://www.first.org/

        Computer Security Resource Clearinghouse. The main focus is on
        crisis response information; information on computer
        security-related threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions. At the
        same time, the Clearinghouse strives to be a general index to
        computer security information on a broad variety of subjects,
        including general risks, privacy, legal issues, viruses,
        assurance, policy, and training.

   (2)  http://www.telstra.com.au/info/security.html

        This Reference Index contains a list of links to information
        sources on Network and Computer Security. There is no implied
        fitness to the Tools, Techniques and Documents contained within th=
is
        archive. Many if not all of these items work well, but we do



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 52]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


        not guarantee that this will be so. This information is for the
        education and legitimate use of computer security techniques only.

   (3)  http://www.alw.nih.gov/Security/security.html

        This page features general information about computer security.
        Information is organized by source and each section is organized
        by topic. Recent modifications are noted in What's New page.


9.  References

   [Appelman, et. al., 1995] Appelman, Heller, Ehrman, White, and
   McAuliffe, "The Law and The Internet", USENIX 1995 Technical
   Conference on UNIX and Advanced Computing, New Orleans, LA, January
   16-20, 1995.

   [ABA, 1989] American Bar Association, Section of Science and
   Technology, "Guide to the Prosecution of Telecommunication Fraud by
   the Use of Computer Crime Statutes", American Bar Association, 1989.

   [Aucoin, 1989] R. Aucoin, "Computer Viruses: Checklist for Recovery",
   Computers in  Libraries, Vol. 9, No. 2, Pg. 4, February 1989.

   [Barrett, 1996] D. Barrett, "Bandits on the Information
   Superhighway", O'Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1996.

   [Bates, 1992] R. Bates, "Disaster Recovery Planning: Networks,
   Telecommunications and Data Communications", McGraw-Hill, 1992.

   [Bellovin, 1989] S. Bellovin, "Security Problems in the TCP/IP
   Protocol Suite", Computer Communication Review, Vol 19, 2, pp. 32-48,
   April 1989.

   [Bellovin, 1990] S. Bellovin, and M. Merritt, "Limitations of the
   Kerberos Authentication System", Computer Communications Review,
   October 1990.

   [Bellovin, 1992] S. Bellovin, "There Be Dragon", USENIX: Proceedings
   of the Third Usenix Security Symposium, Baltimore, MD. September,
   1992.

   [Bender, 1894] D. Bender, "Computer Law: Evidence and Procedure", M.
   Bender, New York, NY, 1978-present.

   [Bloombecker, 1990] B. Bloombecker, "Spectacular Computer Crimes",
   Dow Jones- Irwin, Homewood, IL. 1990.

   [Brand, 1990] R. Brand, "Coping with the Threat of Computer Security
   Incidents: A Primer from Prevention through Recovery", R. Brand, 8
   June 1990.

   [Brock, 1989] J. Brock, "November 1988 Internet Computer Virus and
   the Vulnerability of National Telecommunications Networks to Computer



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 53]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Viruses", GAO/T-IMTEC-89-10, Washington, DC, 20 July 1989.

   [BS 7799] British Standard, BS Tech Cttee BSFD/12, Info. Sec. Mgmt,
   "BS 7799 : 1995 Code of Practice for Information Security
   Management", British Standards Institution, London, 54, Effective 15
   February 1995.

   [Caelli, 1988] W. Caelli, Editor, "Computer Security in the Age of
   Information", Proceedings of the Fifth IFIP International Conference
   on Computer Security, IFIP/Sec '88.

   [Carroll, 1987] J. Carroll, "Computer Security", 2nd Edition,
   Butterworth Publishers, Stoneham, MA, 1987.

   [Cavazos and Morin, 1995] E. Cavazos and G. Morin, "Cyber-Space and
   The Law", MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.

   [CCH, 1989] Commerce Clearing House, "Guide to Computer Law",
   (Topical Law Reports), Chicago, IL., 1989.

   [Chapman, 1992] B. Chapman, "Network(In) Security Through IP Packet
   Filtering", USSENIX: Proceedings of the Thrid UNIX Security
   Symposium, Baltimore, MD, September 1992.

   [Chapman and Zwicky, 1995] B. Chapman and E. Zwicky, "Building
   Internet Firewalls", O'Reilly and Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1995.

   [Cheswick, 1990] B. Cheswick, "The Design of a Secure Internet
   Gateway", Proceedings of the Summer Usenix Conference, Anaheim, CA,
   June 1990.

   [Cheswick1] W. Cheswick, "An Evening with Berferd In Which a Cracker
   is Lured, Endured, and Studied", AT&T Bell Laboratories.

   [Cheswick and Bellovin, 1994] W. Cheswick and S. Bellovin, "Firewalls
   and Internet Security:  Repelling the Wily Hacker", Addison-Wesley,
   Reading, MA, 1994.

   [Conly, 1989] C. Conly, "Organizing for Computer Crime Investigation
   and Prosecution", U.S. Dept. of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,
   Under Contract  Number OJP-86-C-002, National Institute of Justice,
   Washington, DC, July 1989.

   [Cooper, 1989] J. Cooper, "Computer and Communications Security:
   Strategies for the 1990s", McGraw-Hill, 1989.

   [CPSR, 1989] Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, "CPSR
   Statement on the Computer Virus", CPSR, Communications of the ACM,
   Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg. 699, June 1989.

   [CSC-STD-002-85, 1985] Department of Defense, "Password Management
   Guideline", CSC-STD-002-85, 12 April 1985, 31 pages.

   [Curry, 1990] D. Curry, "Improving the Security of Your UNIX System",



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 54]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   SRI International Report ITSTD-721-FR-90-21, April 1990.

   [Curry, 1992] D. Curry, "UNIX System Security: A Guide for Users and
   Systems Administrators", Addision-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1992.

   [DDN88] Defense Data Network, "BSD 4.2 and 4.3 Software Problem
   Resolution", DDN MGT Bulletin #43, DDN Network Information Center, 3
   November 1988.

   [DDN89] DCA DDN Defense Communications System, "DDN Security Bulletin
   03", DDN Security Coordination Center, 17 October 1989.

   [Denning, 1990] P. Denning, Editor, "Computers Under Attack:
   Intruders, Worms, and Viruses", ACM Press, 1990.

   [Eichin and Rochlis, 1989] M. Eichin, and J. Rochlis, "With
   Microscope and Tweezers:  An Analysis of the Internet Virus of
   November 1988", Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February 1989.

   [Eisenberg, et. al., 89] T. Eisenberg, D. Gries, J. Hartmanis, D.
   Holcomb, M. Lynn, and T. Santoro, "The Computer Worm", Cornell
   University, 6 February 1989.

   [Ermann, Willians, and Gutierrez, 1990] D. Ermann, M. Williams, and
   C. Gutierrez, Editors, "Computers, Ethics, and Society", Oxford
   University Press, NY, 1990.  (376 pages, includes bibliographical
   references).

   [Farmer and Spafford, 1990] D. Farmer and E. Spafford, "The COPS
   Security Checker System", Proceedings of the Summer 1990 USENIX
   Conference, Anaheim, CA, Pgs. 165-170, June 1990.

   [Farrow, 1991] Rik Farrow, "UNIX Systems Security", Addison-Wesley,
   Reading, MA, 1991.

   [Fenwick, 1985] W. Fenwick, Chair, "Computer Litigation, 1985: Trial
   Tactics and Techniques", Litigation Course Handbook Series No. 280,
   Prepared for distribution at the Computer Litigation, 1985: Trial
   Tactics and Techniques Program, February-March 1985.

   [Fites, Kratz, and Brebner, 1989] M. Fites, P. Kratz, and A. Brebner,
   "Control and Security of Computer Information Systems", Computer
   Science Press, 1989.

   [Fites, Johnson, and Kratz, 1992] Fites, Johnson, and Kratz, "The
   Computer Virus Crisis", Van Hostrand Reinhold, 2nd edition, 1992.

   [Forester and Morrison, 1990] T. Forester, and P. Morrison, "Computer
   Ethics: Tales and Ethical Dilemmas in Computing", MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA, 1990.

   [Foster and Morrision, 1990] T. Forester, and P. Morrison, "Computer
   Ethics: Tales and Ethical Dilemmas in Computing", MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA, 1990.  (192 pages including index.)



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 55]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [GAO/IMTEX-89-57, 1989] U.S. General Accounting Office, "Computer
   Security - Virus Highlights Need for Improved Internet Management",
   United States General Accounting Office, Washington, DC, 1989.

   [Garfinkel and Spafford, 1991] S. Garfinkel, and E. Spafford,
   "Practical Unix Security", O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 0-937175-72-2,
   May 1991.

   [Garfinkel, 1995] S. Garfinkel, "PGP:Pretty Good Privacy", O'Reilly &
   Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1996.

   [Garfinkel and Spafford, 1996] S. Garfinkel and E. Spafford,
   "Practical UNIX and Internet Security", O'Reilly & Associates,
   Sebastopol, CA, 1996.

   [Gemignani, 1989] M. Gemignani, "Viruses and Criminal Law",
   Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pgs. 669-671, June 1989.

   [Goodell, 1996] J. Goodell, "The Cyberthief and the Samurai: The True
   Story of Kevin Mitnick-And The Man Who Hunted Him Down", Dell
   Publishing, 328pp, 1996.

   [Gould, 1989] C. Gould, Editor, "The Information Web: Ethical and
   Social Implications of Computer Networking", Westview Press, Boulder,
   CO, 1989.

   [Greenia, 1989] M. Greenia, "Computer Security Information
   Sourcebook", Lexikon Services, Sacramento, CA, 1989.

   [Hafner and Markoff, 1991] K. Hafner and J. Markoff, "Cyberpunk:
   Outlaws and Hackers on the Computer Frontier", Touchstone, Simon &
   Schuster, 1991.

   [Hess, Safford, and Pooch] D. Hess, D. Safford, and U. Pooch, "A Unix
   Network Protocol Security Study: Network Information Service", Texas
   A&M University.

   [Hoffman, 1990] L. Hoffman, "Rogue Programs: Viruses, Worms, and
   Trojan Horses", Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, 1990.  (384 pages,
   includes bibliographical references and index.)

   [Howard, 1995] G. Howard, "Introduction to Internet Security: From
   Basics to Beyond", Prima Publishing, Rocklin, CA, 1995.

   [Huband and Shelton, 1986] F. Huband, and R. Shelton, Editors,
   "Protection of Computer Systems and Software: New Approaches for
   Combating Theft of Software and Unauthorized Intrusion", Papers
   presented at a workshop sponsored by the National Science Foundation,
   1986.

   [Hughes, 1995] L. Hughes Jr., "Actually Useful: Internet Security
   Techniques", New Riders Publishing, Indianapolis, IN, 1995.

   [IAB-RFC1087, 89] Internet Activities Board, "Ethics and the



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 56]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Internet", RFC 1087, IAB, January 1989.  Also appears in the
   Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg. 710, June 1989.

   [Icove, Seger, and VonStorch, 1995] D. Icove, K. Seger, and W.
   VonStorch, "Computer Crime: A Crimefighter's Handbook", O'Reilly &
   Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1995.

   [IVPC, 1996] IVPC, "International Virus Prevention Conference '96
   Proceedings", NCSA, 1996.

   [Johnson and Podesta] D. Johnson, and J. Podesta, "Formulating A
   Company Policy on Access to and Use and Disclosure of Electronic Mail
   on Company Computer Systems".

   [Kane, 1994] P. Kane, "PC Security and Virus Protection Handbook: The
   Ongoing War Against Information Sabotage", M&T Books, 1994.

   [Kaufman, Perlman, and Speciner, 1995] C. Kaufman, R. Perlman, and M.
   Speciner, "Network Security:  PRIVATE Communication in a PUBLIC
   World", Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995.

   [Kent, 1990] S. Kent, "E-Mail Privacy for the Internet: New Software
   and Strict Registration Procedures will be Implemented this Year",
   Business Communications Review, Vol. 20, No. 1, Pg. 55, 1 January
   1990.

   [Levy, 1984] S. Levy, "Hacker: Heroes of the Computer Revolution",
   Delta, 1984.

   [Lewis, 1996] S. Lewis, "Disaster Recovery Yellow Pages", The Systems
   Audit Group, 1996.

   [Littleman, 1996] J. Littleman, "The Fugitive Game: Online with Kevin
   Mitnick", Little, Brown, Boston, MA. 333p, 1996.

   [Lu and Sundareshan, 1989] W. Lu and M. Sundareshan, "Secure
   Communication in Internet Environments: A Hierarchical Key Management
   Scheme for End-to-End Encryption", IEEE Transactions on
   Communications, Vol. 37, No. 10, Pg. 1014, 1 October 1989.

   [Lu and Sundareshan, 1990] W. Lu and M. Sundareshan, "A Model for
   Multilevel Security in Computer Networks", IEEE Transactions on
   Software Engineering, Vol. 16, No. 6, Page 647, 1 June 1990.

   [Martin and Schinzinger, 1989] M. Martin, and R. Schinzinger, "Ethics
   in Engineering", McGraw Hill, 2nd Edition, 1989.

   [Merkle] R. Merkle, "A Fast Software One Way Hash Function", Journal
   of Cryptology, Vol. 3, No. 1.

   [McEwen, 1989] J. McEwen, "Dedicated Computer Crime Units", Report
   Contributors: D. Fester and H. Nugent, Prepared for the National
   Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Justice, by Institute for
   Law and Justice, Inc., under contract number OJP-85-C-006,



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 57]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Washington, DC, 1989.

   [MIT, 1989] Massachusetts Institute of Technology, "Teaching Students
   About Responsible Use of Computers", MIT, 1985-1986.  Also reprinted
   in the Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg. 704, Athena
   Project, MIT, June 1989.

   [Mogel, 1989] Mogul, J., "Simple and Flexible Datagram Access
   Controls for UNIX-based Gateways", Digital Western Research
   Laboratory Research Report 89/4, March 1989.

   [Muffett, 1992] A. Muffett, "Crack Version 4.1: A Sensible Password
   Checker for Unix"

   [NCSA1, 1995] NCSA, "NCSA Firewall Policy Guide", 1995.

   [NCSA2, 1995] NCSA, "NCSA's Corporate Computer Virus Prevention
   Policy Model", NCSA, 1995.

   [NCSA, 1996] NCSA, "Firewalls & Internet Security Conference '96
   Proceedings", 1996.

   [NCSC-89-660-P, 1990] National Computer Security Center, "Guidelines
   for Formal Verification Systems", Shipping list no.: 89-660-P, The
   Center, Fort George G. Meade, MD, 1 April 1990.

   [NCSC-89-254-P, 1988] National Computer Security Center, "Glossary of
   Computer Security Terms", Shipping list no.: 89-254-P, The Center,
   Fort George G. Meade, MD, 21 October 1988.

   [NCSC-C1-001-89, 1989] Tinto, M., "Computer Viruses: Prevention,
   Detection, and Treatment", National Computer Security Center C1
   Technical Report C1-001-89, June 1989.

   [NCSC Conference, 1989] National Computer Security Conference, "12th
   National Computer Security Conference: Baltimore Convention Center,
   Baltimore, MD, 10-13 October, 1989: Information Systems Security,
   Solutions for Today - Concepts for Tomorrow", National Institute of
   Standards and National Computer Security Center, 1989.

   [NCSC-CSC-STD-003-85, 1985] National Computer Security Center,
   "Guidance for Applying the Department of Defense Trusted Computer
   System Evaluation Criteria in Specific Environments", CSC-STD-003-85,
   NCSC, 25 June 1985.

   [NCSC-STD-004-85, 1985] National Computer Security Center, "Technical
   Rationale Behind CSC-STD-003-85: Computer Security Requirements",
   CSC-STD-004-85, NCSC, 25 June 1985.

   [NCSC-STD-005-85, 1985] National Computer Security Center, "Magnetic
   Remanence Security Guideline", CSC-STD-005-85, NCSC, 15 November
   1985.

   [NCSC-TCSEC, 1985] National Computer Security Center, "Trusted



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 58]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Computer System Evaluation Criteria", DoD 5200.28-STD, CSC-STD-001-
   83, NCSC, December 1985.

   [NCSC-TG-003, 1987] NCSC, "A Guide to Understanding DISCRETIONARY
   ACCESS CONTROL in Trusted Systems", NCSC-TG-003, Version-1, 30
   September 1987, 29 pages.

   [NCSC-TG-001, 1988] NCSC, "A Guide to Understanding AUDIT in Trusted
   Systems", NCSC-TG-001, Version-2, 1 June 1988, 25 pages.

   [NCSC-TG-004, 1988] National Computer Security Center, "Glossary of
   Computer Security Terms", NCSC-TG-004, NCSC, 21 October 1988.

   [NCSC-TG-005, 1987] National Computer Security Center, "Trusted
   Network Interpretation", NCSC-TG-005, NCSC, 31 July 1987.

   [NCSC-TG-006, 1988] NCSC, "A Guide to Understanding CONFIGURATION
   MANAGEMENT in Trusted Systems", NCSC-TG-006, Version-1, 28 March
   1988, 31 pages.

   [NCSC-TRUSIX, 1990] National Computer Security Center, "Trusted UNIX
   Working Group (TRUSIX) rationale for selecting access control list
   features for the UNIX system", Shipping list no.:  90-076-P, The
   Center, Fort George G. Meade, MD, 1990.

   [NRC, 1991] National Research Council, "Computers at Risk: Safe
   Computing in the Information Age", National Academy Press, 1991.

   [Nemeth, et. al, 1995] E. Nemeth, G. Snyder, S. Seebass, and T. Hein,
   "UNIX Systems Administration Handbook", Prentice Hall PTR, Englewood
   Cliffs, NJ, 2ed. 1995.

   [NIST, 1989] National Institute of Standards and Technology,
   "Computer Viruses and Related Threats: A Management Guide", NIST
   Special Publication 500-166, August 1989.

   [NSA] National Security Agency, "Information Systems Security
   Products and Services Catalog", NSA, Quarterly Publication.

   [NSF, 1988] National Science Foundation, "NSF Poses Code of
   Networking Ethics", Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg.
   688, June 1989.  Also appears in the minutes of the regular meeting
   of the Division Advisory Panel for Networking and Communications
   Research and Infrastructure, Dave Farber, Chair, November 29-30,
   1988.

   [NTISSAM, 1987] NTISS, "Advisory Memorandum on Office Automation
   Security Guideline", NTISSAM CONPUSEC/1-87, 16 January 1987, 58
   pages.

   [OTA-CIT-310, 1987] United States Congress, Office of Technology
   Assessment, "Defending Secrets, Sharing Data: New Locks and Keys for
   Electronic Information", OTA-CIT-310, October 1987.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 59]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [OTA-TCT-606] Congress of the United States, Office of Technology
   Assessment, "Information Security and Privacy in Network
   Environments", OTA-TCT-606, September 1994.

   [Palmer and Potter, 1989] I. Palmer, and G. Potter, "Computer
   Security Risk Management", Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, 1989.

   [Parker, 1989] D. Parker, "Computer Crime: Criminal Justice Resource
   Manual", U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, Office
   of Justice Programs, Under Contract Number OJP-86-C-002, Washington,
   D.C., August 1989.

   [Parker, Swope, and Baker, 1990] D. Parker, S. Swope, and B. Baker,
   "Ethical Conflicts:  Information and Computer Science, Technology and
   Business", QED Information Sciences, Inc., Wellesley, MA. (245
   pages).

   [Pfleeger, 1989] C. Pfleeger, "Security in Computing", Prentice-Hall,
   Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

   [Quarterman, 1990] J. Quarterman, J., "The Matrix: Computer Networks
   and Conferencing Systems Worldwide", Digital Press, Bedford, MA,
   1990.

   [Ranum1, 1992] M. Ranum, "An Internet Firwall", Proceedings of World
   Conference on Systems Management and Security, 1992.

   [Ranum2, 1992] M. Ranum, "A Network Firewall", Digital Equipment
   Corporation Washington Open Systems Resource Center, June 12, 1992.

   [Ranum, 1993] M. Ranum, "Thinking About Firewalls", 1993.

   [Ranum and Avolio, 1994] M. Ranum and F. Avolio, "A Toolkit and
   Methods for Internet Firewalls", Trustest Information Systems, 1994.

   [Reinhardt, 1992] R. Reinhardt, "An Architectural Overview of UNIX
   Network Security"

   [Reinhardt, 1993] R. Reinhardt, "An Architectural Overview of UNIX
   Network Security", ARINC Research Corporation, February 18, 1993.

   [Reynolds-RFC1135, 1989] The Helminthiasis of the Internet, RFC 1135,
   USC/Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, December
   1989.

   [Russell and Gangemi, 1991] D. Russell and G. Gangemi, "Computer
   Security Basics" O'Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1991.

   [Schneier 1996] B. Schneier, "Applied Cryptography: Protocols,
   Algorithms, and Source Code in C", John Wiley & Sons, New York,
   second edition, 1996.

   [Seeley, 1989] D. Seeley, "A Tour of the Worm", Proceedings of 1989
   Winter USENIX Conference, Usenix Association, San Diego, CA, February



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 60]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   1989.

   [Shaw, 1986] E. Shaw Jr., "Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986",
   Congressional Record (3 June 1986), Washington, D.C., 3 June 1986.

   [Shimomura, 1996] T. Shimomura with J. Markoff, "Takedown:The Pursuit
   and Capture of Kevin Mitnick, America's Most Wanted Comptuer Outlaw-
   by the Man Who Did It", Hyperion, 324p, 1996.

   [Shirey, 1990] R. Shirey, "Defense Data Network Security
   Architecture", Computer Communication Review, Vol. 20, No. 2, Page
   66, 1 April 1990.

   [Slatalla and Quittner, 1995] M. Slatalla and J. Quittner, "Masters
   of Deception: The Gang that Ruled Cyberspace", Harper Collins
   Publishers, 1995.

   [Smith, 1989] M. Smith, "Commonsense Computer Security: Your
   Practical Guide to Preventing Accidental and Deliberate Electronic
   Data Loss", McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1989.

   [Smith, 1995] D. Smith, "Forming an Incident Response Team", Sixth
   Annual Computer Security Incident Handling Workshop, Boston, MA, July
   25-29, 1995.

   [Spafford, 1988] E. Spafford, "The Internet Worm Program: An
   Analysis", Computer Communication Review, Vol. 19, No. 1, ACM SIGCOM,
   January 1989.  Also issued as Purdue CS Technical Report CSD-TR-823,
   28 November 1988.

   [Spafford, 1989] G. Spafford, "An Analysis of the Internet Worm",
   Proceedings of the European Software Engineering Conference 1989,
   Warwick England, September 1989.  Proceedings published by Springer-
   Verlag as: Lecture Notes in Computer Science #387.  Also issued as
   Purdue Technical Report #CSD-TR-933.

   [Spafford, Keaphy, and Ferbrache, 1989] E. Spafford, K. Heaphy, and
   D. Ferbrache, "Computer Viruses: Dealing with Electronic Vandalism
   and Programmed Threats", ADAPSO, 1989. (109 pages.)

   [Stallings1, 1995] W. Stallings, "Internet Security Handbook", IDG
   Books, Foster City CA, 1995.

   [Stallings2, 1995] W. Stallings, "Network and InterNetwork Security",
   Prentice Hall, , 1995.

   [Stallings3, 1995] W. Stallings, "Protect Your Privacy: A Guide for
   PGP Users"  PTR Prentice Hall, 1995.

   [Stoll, 1988] C. Stoll, "Stalking the Wily Hacker", Communications of
   the ACM, Vol. 31, No. 5, Pgs. 484-497, ACM, New York, NY, May 1988.

   [Stoll, 1989] C. Stoll, "The Cuckoo's Egg", ISBN 00385-24946-2,
   Doubleday, 1989.



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 61]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [Treese and Wolman, 1993] G. Treese and A. Wolman, "X Through the
   Firewall, and Other Applications Relays", Digital Equipment
   Corporation, Cambridge Research Laboratory, CRL 93/10, May 3, 1993.

   [Trible, 1986] P. Trible, "The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986",
   U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 1986.

   [Venema] W. Venema, "TCP WRAPPER: Network monitoring, access control,
   and booby traps", Mathematics and Computing Science, Eindhoven
   University of Technology, The Netherlands.

   [USENIX, 1988] USENIX, "USENIX Proceedings: UNIX Security Workshop",
   Portland, OR, August 29-30, 1988.

   [USENIX, 1990] USENIX, "USENIX Proceedings: UNIX Security II
   Workshop", Portland, OR, August 27-28, 1990.

   [USENIX, 1992] USENIX, "USENIX Symposium Proceedings: UNIX Security
   III", Baltimore, MD, September 14-16, 1992.

   [USENIX, 1993] USENIX, "USENIX Symposium Proceedings: UNIX Security
   IV", Santa Clara, CA, October 4-6, 1993.

   [USENIX, 1995] USENIX, "The Fifth USENIX UNIX Security Symposium",
   Salt Lake City, UT, June 5-7, 1995.

   [Wood, et.al., 1987] C. Wood, W. Banks, S. Guarro, A. Garcia, V.
   Hampel, and H. Sartorio, "Computer Security:  A Comprehensive
   Controls Checklist", John Wiley and Sons, Interscience Publication,
   1987.

   [Wrobel, 1993] L. Wrobel, "Writing Disaster Recovery Plans for
   Telecommunications Networks and LANS", Artech House, 1993.

   [Vallabhaneni, 1989] S. Vallabhaneni, "Auditing Computer Security: A
   Manual with Case Studies", Wiley, New York, NY, 1989.

10.  Annotated Bibliography

   The intent of this annotated bibliography is to offer a
   representative collection of resources of information that will help
   the user of this handbook.  It is meant provide a starting point for
   further research in the security area.  Included are references to
   other sources of information for those who wish to pursue issues of
   the computer security environment.

10.1  Computer Law

   [Appelman, et. al., 1995] Appelman, Heller, Ehrman, White, and
   McAuliffe, "The Law and The Internet", USENIX 1995 Technical
   Conference on UNIX and Advanced Computing, New Orleans, LA, January
   16-20, 1995.

   [ABA, 1989] American Bar Association, Section of Science and



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 62]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Technology, "Guide to the Prosecution of Telecommunication Fraud by
   the Use of Computer Crime Statutes", American Bar Association, 1989.

   [Bender, 1894] D. Bender, "Computer Law: Evidence and Procedure", M.
   Bender, New York, NY, 1978-present.

   Kept up to date with supplements.  Years covering 1978-1984 focuses
   on: Computer law, evidence and procedures.  The years 1984 to the
   current focus on general computer law.  Bibliographical references
   and index included.

   [Bloombecker, 1990] B. Bloombecker, "Spectacular Computer Crimes",
   Dow Jones- Irwin, Homewood, IL. 1990.

   [Cavazos and Morin, 1995] E. Cavazos and G. Morin, "Cyber-Space and
   The Law", MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.

   [CCH, 1989] Commerce Clearing House, "Guide to Computer Law",
   (Topical Law Reports), Chicago, IL., 1989.

   Court cases and decisions rendered by federal and state courts
   throughout the United States on federal and state computer law.
   Includes Case Table and Topical Index.

   [Conly, 1989] C. Conly, "Organizing for Computer Crime Investigation
   and Prosecution", U.S. Dept. of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,
   Under Contract  Number OJP-86-C-002, National Institute of Justice,
   Washington, DC, July 1989.

   [Fenwick, 1985] W. Fenwick, Chair, "Computer Litigation, 1985: Trial
   Tactics and Techniques", Litigation Course Handbook Series No. 280,
   Prepared for distribution at the Computer Litigation, 1985: Trial
   Tactics and Techniques Program, February-March 1985.

   [Gemignani, 1989] M. Gemignani, "Viruses and Criminal Law",
   Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pgs. 669-671, June 1989.

   [Huband and Shelton, 1986] F. Huband, and R. Shelton, Editors,
   "Protection of Computer Systems and Software: New Approaches for
   Combating Theft of Software and Unauthorized Intrusion", Papers
   presented at a workshop sponsored by the National Science Foundation,
   1986.

   [McEwen, 1989] J. McEwen, "Dedicated Computer Crime Units", Report
   Contributors: D. Fester and H. Nugent, Prepared for the National
   Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Justice, by Institute for
   Law and Justice, Inc., under contract number OJP-85-C-006,
   Washington, DC, 1989.

   [Parker, 1989] D. Parker, "Computer Crime: Criminal Justice Resource
   Manual", U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, Office
   of Justice Programs, Under Contract Number OJP-86-C-002, Washington,
   D.C., August 1989.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 63]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [Shaw, 1986] E. Shaw Jr., "Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986,
   Congressional Record (3 June 1986), Washington, D.C., 3 June 1986.

   [Trible, 1986] P. Trible, "The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986",
   U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 1986.


10.2  Computer and Network Security

   [Brand, 1990] Brand, R., "Coping with the Threat of Computer Security
   Incidents: A Primer from Prevention through Recovery", R. Brand,
   available on-line from: cert.sei.cmu.edu:/pub/info/primer, 8 June
   1990.

   [Bellovin, 1989] S. Bellovin, "Security Problems in the TCP/IP
   Protocol Suite", Computer Communication Review, Vol 19, 2, pp. 32-48,
   April 1989.

   [Bellovin, 1990] S. Bellovin, and M. Merritt, "Limitations of the
   Kerberos Authentication System", Computer Communications Review,
   October 1990.

   [BS 7799] British Standard, BS Tech Cttee BSFD/12, Info. Sec. Mgmt,
   "BS 7799 : 1995 Code of Practice for Information Security
   Management", British Standards Institution, London, 54, Effective 15
   February 1995.

   Based on PD 0003:  Price c. GBP 35

   The code is divided into 10 sections: security policy, security
   organization, assets classification and control, personnel security,
   physical and environmental security, computer and network management,
   system and access control, system development and maintenance,
   business continuity planning, and compliance.

   [Caelli, 1988] W. Caelli, Editor, "Computer Security in the Age of
   Information", Proceedings of the Fifth IFIP International Conference
   on Computer Security, IFIP/Sec '88.

   [Carroll, 1987] J. Carroll, "Computer Security", 2nd Edition,
   Butterworth Publishers, Stoneham, MA, 1987.

   [Cooper, 1989] J. Cooper, "Computer and Communications Security:
   Strategies for the 1990s", McGraw-Hill, 1989.

   [Brand, 1990] R. Brand, "Coping with the Threat of Computer Security
   Incidents: A Primer from Prevention through Recovery", R. Brand, 8
   June 1990.

   As computer security becomes a more important issue in modern
   society, it begins to warrant a systematic approach.  The vast
   majority of the computer security problems and the costs associated
   with them can be prevented with simple inexpensive measures.  The
   most important and cost effective of these measures are available in



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 64]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   the prevention and planning phases.  These methods are presented in
   this paper, followed by a simplified guide to incident handling and
   recovery.  Available on-line from:
   cert.sei.cmu.edu:/pub/info/primer.

   [Cheswick, 1990] B. Cheswick, "The Design of a Secure Internet
   Gateway", Proceedings of the Summer Usenix Conference, Anaheim, CA,
   June 1990.

   Brief abstract (slight paraphrase from the original abstract): AT&T
   maintains a large internal Internet that needs to be protected from
   outside attacks, while providing useful services between the two.
   This paper describes AT&T's Internet gateway.  This gateway passes
   mail and many of the common Internet services between AT&T internal
   machines and the Internet.  This is accomplished without IP
   connectivity using a pair of machines: a trusted internal machine and
   an untrusted external gateway.  These are connected by a private
   link.  The internal machine provides a few carefully-guarded services
   to the external gateway.  This configuration helps protect the
   internal internet even if the external machine is fully compromised.

   This is a very useful and interesting design.  Most firewall gateway
   systems rely on a system that, if compromised, could allow access to
   the machines behind the firewall.  Also, most firewall systems
   require users who want access to Internet services to have accounts
   on the firewall machine.  AT&T's design allows AT&T internal internet
   users access to the standard services of TELNET and FTP from their
   own workstations without accounts on the firewall machine.  A very
   useful paper that shows how to maintain some of the benefits of
   Internet connectivity while still maintaining strong security.

   [Curry, 1992] D. Curry, "UNIX System Security: A Guide for Users and
   Systems Administrators", Addision-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1992.

   [Curry, 1990] D. Curry, "Improving the Security of Your UNIX System",
   SRI International Report ITSTD-721-FR-90-21, April 1990.

   This paper describes measures that you, as a system administrator can
   take to make your UNIX system(s) more secure.  Oriented primarily at
   SunOS 4.x, most of the information covered applies equally well to
   any Berkeley UNIX system with or without NFS and/or Yellow Pages
   (NIS).  Some of the information can also be applied to System V,
   although this is not a primary focus of the paper.  A very useful
   reference, this is also available on the Internet in various
   locations, including the directory cert.sei.cmu.edu:/pub/info.

   [Farmer and Spafford, 1990] D. Farmer and E. Spafford, "The COPS
   Security Checker System", Proceedings of the Summer 1990 USENIX
   Conference, Anaheim, CA, Pgs. 165-170, June 1990.

   [Farrow, 1991] Rik Farrow, "UNIX Systems Security", Addison-Wesley,
   Reading, MA, 1991.

   [Fites, Kratz, and Brebner, 1989] M. Fites, P. Kratz, and A. Brebner,



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 65]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   "Control and Security of Computer Information Systems", Computer
   Science Press, 1989.

   This book serves as a good guide to the issues encountered in forming
   computer security policies and procedures.  The book is designed as a
   textbook for an introductory course in information systems security.

   The book is divided into five sections: Risk Management (I),
   Safeguards: security and control measures, organizational and
   administrative (II), Safeguards: Security and Control Measures,
   Technical (III), Legal Environment and Professionalism (IV), and CICA
   Computer Control Guidelines (V).

   The book is particularly notable for its straight-forward approach to
   security, emphasizing that common sense is the first consideration in
   designing a security program.  The authors note that there is a
   tendency to look to more technical solutions to security problems
   while overlooking organizational controls which are often cheaper and
   much more effective.  298 pages, including references and index.

   [Forester and Morrison, 1990] T. Forester, and P. Morrison, "Computer
   Ethics: Tales and Ethical Dilemmas in Computing", MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA, 1990.

   [Garfinkel and Spafford, 1991] S. Garfinkel, and E. Spafford,
   "Practical Unix Security", O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 0-937175-72-2,
   May 1991.

   Approx 450 pages, $29.95.  Orders: 1-800-338-6887 (US & Canada),
   1-707-829-0515 (Europe), email: nuts@ora.com

   This is one of the most useful books available on Unix security.  The
   first part of the book covers standard Unix and Unix security basics,
   with particular emphasis on passwords.  The second section covers
   enforcing security on the system.  Of particular interest to the
   Internet user are the sections on network security, which address
   many of the common security problems that afflict Internet Unix
   users.  Four chapters deal with handling security incidents, and the
   book concludes with discussions of encryption, physical security, and
   useful checklists and lists of resources.  The book lives up to its
   name; it is filled with specific references to possible security
   holes, files to check, and things to do to improve security.  This
   book is an excellent complement to this handbook.

   [Garfinkel, 1995] S. Garfinkel, "PGP:Pretty Good Privacy", O'Reilly &
   Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1996.

   [Garfinkel and Spafford, 1996] S. Garfinkel and E. Spafford,
   "Practical UNIX and Internet Security", O'Reilly & Associates,
   Sebastopol, CA, 1996.

   If you thought that the first edition was good, well this is better.

   [Greenia, 1989] M. Greenia, "Computer Security Information



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 66]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Sourcebook", Lexikon Services, Sacramento, CA, 1989.

   A manager's guide to computer security.  Contains a sourcebook of key
   reference materials including access control and computer crimes
   bibliographies.

   [Hess, Safford, and Pooch] D. Hess, D. Safford, and U. Pooch, "A Unix
   Network Protocol Security Study: Network Information Service", Texas
   A&M University.

   [Hoffman, 1990] L. Hoffman, "Rogue Programs: Viruses, Worms, and
   Trojan Horses", Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, 1990.  (384 pages,
   includes bibliographical references and index.)

   [Hughes, 1995] L. Hughes Jr., "Actually Useful: Internet Security
   Techniques", New Riders Publishing, Indianapolis, IN, 1995.

   [Howard, 1995] G. Howard, "Introduction to Internet Security: From
   Basics to Beyond", Prima Publishing, Rocklin, CA, 1995.

   [Icove, Seger, and VonStorch, 1995] D. Icove, K. Seger, and W.
   VonStorch, "Computer Crime: A Crimefighter's Handbook", O'Reilly &
   Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1995.

   [Johnson and Podesta] D. Johnson, and J. Podesta, "Formulating A
   Company Policy on Access to and Use and Disclosure of Electronic Mail
   on Company Computer Systems".

   A white paper prepared for the EMA, written by two experts in privacy
   law.  Gives background on the issues, and presents some policy
   options.

   Available from: The Electronic Mail Association (EMA) 1555 Wilson
   Blvd, Suite 555, Arlington, VA, 22209.  (703) 522-7111.

   [Kaufman, Perlman, and Speciner, 1995] C. Kaufman, R. Perlman, and M.
   Speciner, "Network Security:  PRIVATE Communication in a PUBLIC
   World", Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995.

   A comprehensive guide to the latest advances in computer network
   security protocols.  504 pages.

   [Kent, 1990] S. Kent, "E-Mail Privacy for the Internet: New Software
   and Strict Registration Procedures will be Implemented this Year",
   Business Communications Review, Vol. 20, No. 1, Pg. 55, 1 January
   1990.

   [Lu and Sundareshan, 1989] W. Lu and M. Sundareshan, "Secure
   Communication in Internet Environments: A Hierarchical Key Management
   Scheme for End-to-End Encryption", IEEE Transactions on
   Communications, Vol. 37, No. 10, Pg. 1014, 1 October 1989.

   [Lu and Sundareshan, 1990] W. Lu and M. Sundareshan, "A Model for
   Multilevel Security in Computer Networks", IEEE Transactions on



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 67]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Software Engineering, Vol. 16, No. 6, Page 647, 1 June 1990.

   [Merkle] R. Merkle, "A Fast Software One Way Hash Function", Journal
   of Cryptology, Vol. 3, No. 1.

   [Mogel, 1989] Mogul, J., "Simple and Flexible Datagram Access
   Controls for UNIX-based Gateways", Digital Western Research
   Laboratory Research Report 89/4, March 1989.

   [Muffett, 1992] A. Muffett, "Crack Version 4.1: A Sensible Password
   Checker for Unix"

   [NRC, 1991] National Research Council, "Computers at Risk: Safe
   Computing int the Information Age", National Academy Press, 1991.

   [Nemeth, et. al, 1995] E. Nemeth, G. Snyder, S. Seebass, and T. Hein,
   "UNIX Systems Administration Handbook", Prentice Hall PTR, Englewood
   Cliffs, NJ, 2ed. 1995.

   Best book on UNIX System Administration.  Also addresses UNIX
   security in easy understandable way.

   [NSA] National Security Agency, "Information Systems Security
   Products and Services Catalog", NSA, Quarterly Publication.

   NSA's catalogue contains chapter on: Endorsed Cryptographic Products
   List; NSA Endorsed Data Encryption Standard (DES) Products List;
   Protected Services List; Evaluated Products List; Preferred Products
   List; and Endorsed Tools List.

   The catalogue is available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S.
   Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  One may place telephone
   orders by calling:  (202) 783-3238.

   [OTA-CIT-310, 1987] United States Congress, Office of Technology
   Assessment, "Defending Secrets, Sharing Data: New Locks and Keys for
   Electronic Information", OTA-CIT-310, October 1987.

   This report, prepared for congressional committee considering Federal
   policy on the protection of electronic information, is interesting
   because of the issues it raises regarding the impact of technology
   used to protect information.  It also serves as a reasonable
   introduction to the various encryption and information protection
   mechanisms.  185 pages.  Available from the U.S. Government Printing
   Office.

   [OTA-TCT-606] Congress of the United States, Office of Technology
   Assessment, "Information Security and Privacy in Network
   Environments", OTA-TCT-606, September 1994.

   "This report was prepared in response to a request by the Senate
   Committee on Governmental Affairs and the House Subcommittee on
   Telecommunications and Finance.  The report focuses on policy issues
   in three areas: 1)national cryptography policy, including federal



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 68]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   information processing standards and export controls; 2)guidance on
   safeguarding unclassified information in federal agencies; and
   3)legal issues and information security, including electronic
   commerce, privacy, and intellectual property."  244 pages.  Available
   from the U.S. Government Printing Office.

   [Palmer and Potter, 1989] I. Palmer, and G. Potter, "Computer
   Security Risk Management", Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, 1989.

   [Pfleeger, 1989] C. Pfleeger, "Security in Computing", Prentice-Hall,
   Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

   A general textbook in computer security, this book provides an
   excellent and very readable introduction to classic computer security
   problems and solutions, with a particular emphasis on encryption.
   The encryption coverage serves as a good introduction to the subject.
   Other topics covered include building secure programs and systems,
   security of database, personal computer security, network and
   communications security, physical security, risk analysis and
   security planning, and legal and ethical issues.  538 pages including
   index and bibliography.

   [Quarterman, 1990] J. Quarterman, J., "The Matrix: Computer Networks
   and Conferencing Systems Worldwide", Digital Press, Bedford, MA,
   1990.

   [Reinhardt, 1992] R. Reinhardt, "An Architectural Overview of UNIX
   Network Security"

   More details in USENIX Thrid UNIX Security Symposium, September 14-16
   1992.

   [Reinhardt, 1993] R. Reinhardt, "An Architectural Overview of UNIX
   Network Security", ARINC Research Corporation, February 18, 1993.

   [Russell and Gangemi, 1991] D. Russell and G. Gangemi, "Computer
   Security Basics" O'Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1991.

   [Shirey, 1990] R. Shirey, "Defense Data Network Security
   Architecture", Computer Communication Review, Vol. 20, No. 2, Page
   66, 1 April 1990.

   [Smith, 1994] D. Smith, "Forming an Incident Response Team", Sixth
   Annual Computer Security Incident Handling Workshop, Boston, MA, July
   25-29, 1995.

   [Smith, 1989] M. Smith, "Common Sense Computer Security: Your
   Practical Guide to Preventing Accidental and Deliberate Electronic
   Data Loss", McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1989.

   A general text on computer security and how to access actual effort
   based on need.

   [Spafford, Keaphy, and Ferbrache, 1989] E. Spafford, K. Heaphy, and



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 69]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   D. Ferbrache, "Computer Viruses: Dealing with Electronic Vandalism
   and Programmed Threats", ADAPSO, 1989. (109 pages.)

   This is a good general reference on computer viruses and related
   concerns.  In addition to describing viruses in some detail, it also
   covers more general security issues, legal recourse in case of
   security problems, and includes lists of laws, journals focused on
   computers security, and other security-related resources.

   Available from: ADAPSO, 1300 N. 17th St, Suite 300, Arlington VA
   22209.  (703) 522-5055.

   [Stallings1, 1995] W. Stallings, "Internet Security Handbook", IDG
   Books, Foster City CA, 1995.

   [Stallings2, 1995] W. Stallings, "Network and InterNetwork Security",
   Prentice Hall, , 1995.

   [Stallings3, 1995] W. Stallings, "Protect Your Privacy: A Guide for
   PGP Users"  PTR Prentice Hall, 1995.

   [Stool, 1988] C. Stoll, "Stalking the Wily Hacker", Communications of
   the ACM, Vol. 31, No. 5, Pgs. 484-497, ACM, New York, NY, May 1988.

   This article describes some of the technical means used to trace the
   intruder that was later chronicled in "Cuckoo's Egg" (see below).

   [Stool, 1989] C. Stoll, "The Cuckoo's Egg", ISBN 00385-24946-2,
   Doubleday, 1989.

   Clifford Stoll, an astronomer turned UNIX System Administrator,
   recounts an exciting, true story of how he tracked a computer
   intruder through the maze of American military and research networks.
   This book is easy to understand and can serve as an interesting
   introduction to the world of networking.  Jon Postel says in a book
   review, "[this book] ... is absolutely essential reading for anyone
   that uses or operates any computer connected to the Internet or any
   other computer network."

   [USENIX, 1988] USENIX, "USENIX Proceedings: UNIX Security Workshop",
   Portland, OR, August 29-30, 1988.

   [USENIX, 1990] USENIX, "USENIX Proceedings: UNIX Security II
   Workshop", Portland, OR, August 27-28, 1990.

   [USENIX, 1992] USENIX, "USENIX Symposium Proceedings: UNIX Security
   III", Baltimore, MD, September 14-16, 1992.

   [USENIX, 1993] USENIX, "USENIX Symposium Proceedings: UNIX Security
   IV", Santa Clara, CA, October 4-6, 1993.

   [USENIX, 1995] USENIX, "The Fifth USENIX UNIX Security Symposium",
   Salt Lake City, UT, June 5-7, 1995.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 70]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [Vallabhaneni, 1989] S. Vallabhaneni, "Auditing Computer Security: A
   Manual with Case Studies", Wiley, New York, NY, 1989.


10.3  Ethics

   [CPSR, 1989] Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, "CPSR
   Statement on the Computer Virus", CPSR, Communications of the ACM,
   Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg. 699, June 1989.

   This memo is a statement on the Internet Computer Virus by the
   Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR).

   [Denning, 1990] P. Denning, Editor, "Computers Under Attack:
   Intruders, Worms, and Viruses", ACM Press, 1990.

   A collection of 40 pieces divided into six sections: the emergence of
   worldwide computer networks, electronic break-ins, worms, viruses,
   counterculture (articles examining the world of the "hacker"), and
   finally a section discussing social, legal, and ethical
   considerations.

   A thoughtful collection that addresses the phenomenon of attacks on
   computers.  This includes a number of previously published articles
   and some new ones.  The previously published ones are well chosen,
   and include some references that might be otherwise hard to obtain.
   This book is a key reference to computer security threats that have
   generated much of the concern over computer security in recent years.

   [Ermann, Willians, and Gutierrez, 1990] D. Ermann, M. Williams, and
   C. Gutierrez, Editors, "Computers, Ethics, and Society", Oxford
   University Press, NY, 1990.  (376 pages, includes bibliographical
   references).

   [Foster and Morrision, 1990] T. Forester, and P. Morrison, "Computer
   Ethics: Tales and Ethical Dilemmas in Computing", MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA, 1990.  (192 pages including index.)

   From the preface: "The aim of this book is two-fold: (1) to describe
   some of the problems created by society by computers, and (2) to show
   how these problems present ethical dilemmas for computers
   professionals and computer users.

   The problems created by computers arise, in turn, from two main
   sources: from hardware and software malfunctions and from misuse by
   human beings.  We argue that computer systems by their very nature
   are insecure, unreliable, and unpredictable -- and that society has
   yet to come to terms with the consequences.  We also seek to show how
   society has become newly vulnerable to human misuse of computers in
   the form of computer crime, software theft, hacking, the creation of
   viruses, invasions of privacy, and so on."

   The eight chapters include "Computer Crime", "Software Theft",
   "Hacking and Viruses", "Unreliable Computers", "The Invasion of



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 71]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Privacy", "AI and Expert Systems", and "Computerizing the Workplace."
   Includes extensive notes on sources and an index.

   [Gould, 1989] C. Gould, Editor, "The Information Web: Ethical and
   Social Implications of Computer Networking", Westview Press, Boulder,
   CO, 1989.

   [IAB-RFC1087, 89] Internet Activities Board, "Ethics and the
   Internet", RFC 1087, IAB, January 1989.  Also appears in the
   Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg. 710, June 1989.

   This memo is a statement of policy by the Internet Activities Board
   (IAB) concerning the proper use of the resources of the Internet.
   Available on-line on host ftp.nisc.sri.com, directory rfc, filename
   rfc1087.txt.  Also available on host nis.nsf.net, directory RFC,
   filename RFC1087.TXT-1.

   [Martin and Schinzinger, 1989] M. Martin, and R. Schinzinger, "Ethics
   in Engineering", McGraw Hill, 2nd Edition, 1989.

   [MIT, 1989] Massachusetts Institute of Technology, "Teaching Students
   About Responsible Use of Computers", MIT, 1985-1986.  Also reprinted
   in the Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg. 704, Athena
   Project, MIT, June 1989.  This memo is a statement of policy by the
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) on the responsible use of
   computers.

   [NIST, 1989] National Institute of Standards and Technology,
   "Computer Viruses and Related Threats: A Management Guide", NIST
   Special Publication 500-166, August 1989.

   [NSF, 1988] National Science Foundation, "NSF Poses Code of
   Networking Ethics", Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, Pg.
   688, June 1989.  Also appears in the minutes of the regular meeting
   of the Division Advisory Panel for Networking and Communications
   Research and Infrastructure, Dave Farber, Chair, November 29-30,
   1988.

   This memo is a statement of policy by the National Science Foundation
   (NSF) concerning the ethical use of the Internet.

   [Parker, Swope, and Baker, 1990] D. Parker, S. Swope, and B. Baker,
   "Ethical Conflicts:  Information and Computer Science, Technology and
   Business", QED Information Sciences, Inc., Wellesley, MA. (245
   pages).

   Additional publications on Ethics:

   The University of New Mexico (UNM)

      The UNM has a collection of ethics documents.  Included are
      legislation from several states and policies from many
      institutions.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 72]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


         Access is via FTP, IP address ariel.umn.edu.  Look in the
         directory /ethics.


10.4  Firewalls

   [Bellovin, 1992] S. Bellovin, "There Be Dragon", USENIX: Proceedings
   of the Third Usenix Security Symposium, Baltimore, MD. September,
   1992.

   [Chapman, 1992] B. Chapman, "Network(In) Security Through IP Packet
   Filtering", USSENIX: Proceedings of the Thrid UNIX Security
   Symposium, Balimore, MD, September 1992.

   [Chapman and Zwicky, 1995] B. Chapman and E. Zwicky, "Building
   Internet Firewalls", O'Reilly and Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1995.

   [Cheswick1] W. Cheswick, "An Evening with Berferd In Which a Cracker
   is Lured, Endured, and Studied", AT&T Bell Laboratories.

   [Cheswick2] W. Cheswick, "The Design of a Secure Internet Gateway",
   Proceedings of the Summer Usenix Conference, Anaheim, CA, June 1990.

   [Cheswick and Bellovin, 1994] W. Cheswick and S. Bellovin, "Firewalls
   and Internet Security:  Repelling the Wily Hacker", Addision-Wesley,
   Reading, MA, 1994.

   Landmark book on Firewalls.  A must for anyone designing, installing,
   managing firewalls.

   [NCSA, 1995] NCSA, "NCSA Firewall Policy Guide", 1995.

   [NCSA, 1996] NCSA, "Firewalls & Internet Security Conference '96
   Proceedings", 1996.

   [Ranum, 1992] M. Ranum, "A Network Firewall", Digital Equipment
   Corporation Washington Open Systems Resource Center, June 12, 1992.

   [Ranum, 1992] M. Ranum, "An Internet Firwall", Proceedings of World
   Conference on Systems Management and Security, 1992.

   Available ftp://decuac.dec.com/pub/docs/firewall/firewall.ps

   [Ranum, 1993] M. Ranum, "Thinking About Firewalls", 1993.

   A good start for those implementing or installing firewalls.
   Available ftp://ftp.tis.com

   [Ranum and Avolio, 1994] M. Ranum and F. Avolio, "A Toolkit and
   Methods for Internet Firewalls", Trustest Information Systems, 1994.

   Available ftp://ftp.tis.com

   [Treese and Wolman, 1993] G. Treese and A. Wolman, "X Through the



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 73]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Firewall, and Other Applications Relays", Digital Equipment
   Corporation, Cambridge Research Laboratory, CRL 93/10, May 3, 1993.

   [Venema] W. Venema, "TCP WRAPPER: Network monitoring, access control,
   and booby traps", Mathematics and Computing Science, Eindhoven
   University of Technology, The Netherlands.

   Available ftp://ftp.win.tue.nl/pub/security

10.5  Internet Worms, Hackers, Computer Viruses, etc

   [Barrett, 1996] D. Barrett, "Bandits on the Information
   Superhighway", O'Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA, 1996.

   [Brock, 1989] J. Brock, "November 1988 Internet Computer Virus and
   the Vulnerability of National Telecommunications Networks to Computer
   Viruses", GAO/T-IMTEC-89-10, Washington, DC, 20 July 1989.

   Testimonial statement of Jack L. Brock, Director, U. S.  Government
   Information before the Subcommittee on Telecommunications and
   Finance, Committee on Energy and
    Commerce, House of Representatives.

   [Eichin and Rochlis, 1989] M. Eichin, and J. Rochlis, "With
   Microscope and Tweezers:  An Analysis of the Internet Virus of
   November 1988", Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February 1989.

   Provides a detailed dissection of the worm program.  The paper
   discusses the major points of the worm program then reviews
   strategies, chronology, lessons and open issues, Acknowledgments;
   also included are a detailed appendix on the worm program subroutine
   by subroutine, an appendix on the cast of characters, and a reference
   section.

   [Eisenbery, et. al., 89] T. Eisenberg, D. Gries, J. Hartmanis, D.
   Holcomb, M. Lynn, and T. Santoro, "The Computer Worm", Cornell
   University, 6 February 1989.

   A Cornell University Report presented to the Provost of the
   University on 6 February 1989 on the Internet Worm.

   [Fites, Johnson, and Kratz, 1992] Fites, Johnson, and Kratz, "The
   Computer Virus Crisis", Van Hostrand Reinhold, 2nd edition, 1992.

   [GAO/IMTEX-89-57, 1989] U.S. General Accounting Office, "Computer
   Security - Virus Highlights Need for Improved Internet Management",
   United States General Accounting Office, Washington, DC, 1989.

   This 36 page report (GAO/IMTEC-89-57), by the U.S.  Government
   Accounting Office, describes the Internet worm and its effects.  It
   gives a good overview of the various U.S. agencies involved in the
   Internet today and their concerns vis-a-vis computer security and
   networking.




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 74]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Available on-line on host nnsc.nsf.net, directory pub, filename
   GAO_RPT; and on nis.nsf.net, directory nsfnet, filename GAO_RPT.TXT.

   [Goodell, 1996] J. Goodell, "The Cyberthief and the Samurai: The True
   Story of Kevin Mitnick-And The Man Who Hunted Him Down", Dell
   Publishing, 328pp, 1996.

   [Hafner and Markoff, 1991] K. Hafner and J. Markoff, "Cyberpunk:
   Outlaws and Hackers on the Computer Frontier", Touchstone, Simon &
   Schuster, 1991.

   [Kane, 1994] P. Kane, "PC Security and Virus Protection Handbook: The
   Ongoing War Against Information Sabotage", M&T Books, 1994.

   [IVPC, 1996] IVPC, "International Virus Prevention Conference '96
   Proceedings", NCSA, 1996.

   [Levy, 1984] S. Levy, "Hacker: Heroes of the Computer Revolution",
   Delta, 1984.

   The Original.

   [NCSA, 1995] NCSA, "NCSA's Corporate Computer Virus Prevention Policy
   Model", NCSA, 1995.

   [Littleman, 1996] J. Littleman, "The Fugitive Game: Online with Kevin
   Mitnick", Little, Brown, Boston, MA. 333p, 1996.

   [Reynolds-RFC1135, 1989] The Helminthiasis of the Internet, RFC 1135,
   USC/Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, December
   1989.

   This report looks back at the helminthiasis (infestation with, or
   disease caused by parasitic worms) of the Internet that was unleashed
   the evening of 2 November 1988.  This document provides a glimpse at
   the infection,its festering, and cure.  The impact of the worm on the
   Internet community, ethics statements, the role of the news media,
   crime in the computer world, and future prevention is discussed.  A
   documentation review presents four publications that describe in
   detail this particular parasitic computer program.  Reference and
   bibliography sections are also included.  Available on-line on host
   ftp.nisc.sri.com directory rfc, filename rfc1135.txt.  Also available
   on host nis.nsf.net, directory RFC, filename RFC1135.TXT-1.

   [Seeley, 1989] D. Seeley, "A Tour of the Worm", Proceedings of 1989
   Winter USENIX Conference, Usenix Association, San Diego, CA, February
   1989.

   Details are presented as a "walk through" of this particular worm
   program.  The paper opened with an abstract, introduction, detailed
   chronology of events upon the discovery of the worm, an overview, the
   internals of the worm, personal opinions, and conclusion.

   [Shimomura, 1996] T. Shimomura with J. Markoff, "Takedown:The Pursuit



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 75]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   and Capture of Kevin Mitnick, America's Most Wanted Computer Outlaw-
   by the Man Who Did It", Hyperion, 324p, 1996.

   [Slatalla and Quittner, 1995] M. Slatalla and J. Quittner, "Masters
   of Deception: The Gang that Ruled Cyberspace", Harper Collins
   Publishers, 1995.

   [Spafford, 1988] E. Spafford, "The Internet Worm Program: An
   Analysis", Computer Communication Review, Vol. 19, No. 1, ACM SIGCOM,
   January 1989.  Also issued as Purdue CS Technical Report CSD-TR-823,
   28 November 1988.

   Describes the infection of the Internet as a worm program that
   exploited flaws in utility programs in UNIX based systems.  The
   report gives a detailed description of the components of the worm
   program:  data and functions.  Spafford focuses his study on two
   completely independent reverse-compilations of the worm and a version
   disassembled to VAX assembly language.

   [Spafford, 1989] G. Spafford, "An Analysis of the Internet Worm",
   Proceedings of the European Software Engineering Conference 1989,
   Warwick England, September 1989.  Proceedings published by Springer-
   Verlag as: Lecture Notes in Computer Science #387.  Also issued as
   Purdue Technical Report #CSD-TR-933.


10.6  National Computer Security Center (NCSC)

   All NCSC publications, approved for public release, are available
   from the NCSC Superintendent of Documents.

   NCSC =3D National Computer Security Center 9800 Savage Road Ft Meade,
   MD 20755-6000

   CSC =3D Computer Security Center:  an older name for the NCSC

   NTISS =3D National Telecommunications and Information Systems Security
   NTISS Committee, National Security Agency Ft Meade, MD 20755-6000

   [CSC-STD-002-85, 1985] Department of Defense, "Password Management
   Guideline", CSC-STD-002-85, 12 April 1985, 31 pages.

   The security provided by a password system depends on the passwords
   being kept secret at all times.  Thus, a password is vulnerable to
   compromise whenever it is used, stored, or even known.  In a
   password-based authentication mechanism implemented on an ADP system,
   passwords are vulnerable to compromise due to five essential aspects
   of the password system: 1) a password must be initially assigned to a
   user when enrolled on the ADP system; 2) a user's password must be
   changed periodically; 3) the ADP system must maintain a 'password
   database'; 4) users must remember their passwords; and 5) users must
   enter their passwords into the ADP system at authentication time.
   This guideline prescribes steps to be taken to minimize the
   vulnerability of passwords in each of these circumstances.



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 76]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [NCSC-TG-001, 1988] NCSC, "A Guide to Understanding AUDIT in Trusted
   Systems", NCSC-TG-001, Version-2, 1 June 1988, 25 pages.

   Audit trails are used to detect and deter penetration of a computer
   system and to reveal usage that identifies misuse.  At the discretion
   of the auditor, audit trails may be limited to specific events or may
   encompass all of the activities on a system.  Although not required
   by the criteria, it should be possible for the target of the audit
   mechanism to be either a subject or an object.  That is to say, the
   audit mechanism should be capable of monitoring every time John
   accessed the system as well as every time the nuclear reactor file
   was accessed; and likewise every time John accessed the nuclear
   reactor file.

   [NCSC-TG-003, 1987] NCSC, "A Guide to Understanding DISCRETIONARY
   ACCESS CONTROL in Trusted Systems", NCSC-TG-003, Version-1, 30
   September 1987, 29 pages.

   Discretionary control is the most common type of access control
   mechanism implemented in computer systems today.  The basis of this
   kind of security is that an individual user, or program operating on
   the user's behalf, is allowed to specify explicitly the types of
   access other users (or programs executing on their behalf) may have
   to information under the user's control.  [...]  Discretionary
   controls are not a replacement for mandatory controls.  In any
   environment in which information is protected, discretionary security
   provides for a finer granularity of control within the overall
   constraints of the mandatory policy.

   [NCSC-TG-006, 1988] NCSC, "A Guide to Understanding CONFIGURATION
   MANAGEMENT in Trusted Systems", NCSC-TG-006, Version-1, 28 March
   1988, 31 pages.

   Configuration management consists of four separate tasks:
   identification, control, status accounting, and auditing.  For every
   change that is made to an automated data processing (ADP) system, the
   design and requirements of the changed version of the system should
   be identified.  The control task of configuration management is
   performed by subjecting every change to documentation, hardware, and
   software/firmware to review and approval by an authorized authority.
   Configuration status accounting is responsible for recording and
   reporting on the configuration of the product throughout the change.
   Finally, though the process of a configuration audit, the completed
   change can be verified to be functionally correct, and for trusted
   systems, consistent with the security policy of the system.

   [NTISSAM, 1987] NTISS, "Advisory Memorandum on Office Automation
   Security Guideline", NTISSAM CONPUSEC/1-87, 16 January 1987, 58
   pages.

   This document provides guidance to users, managers, security
   officers, and procurement officers of Office Automation Systems.
   Areas addressed include: physical security, personnel security,
   procedural security, hardware/software security, emanations security



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 77]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   (TEMPEST), and communications security for stand-alone OA Systems, OA
   Systems used as terminals connected to mainframe computer systems,
   and OA Systems used as hosts in a Local Area Network (LAN).
   Differentiation is made between those Office Automation Systems
   equipped with removable storage media only (e.g., floppy disks,
   cassette tapes, removable hard disks) and those Office Automation
   Systems equipped with fixed media (e.g., Winchester disks).

   Additional NCSC Publications:

   [NCSC-TG-004, 1988] National Computer Security Center, "Glossary of
   Computer Security Terms", NCSC-TG-004, NCSC, 21 October 1988.

   [NCSC-TCSEC, 1985] National Computer Security Center, "Trusted
   Computer System Evaluation Criteria", DoD 5200.28-STD, CSC-STD-001-
   83, NCSC, December 1985.

   [NCSC-CSC-STD-003-85, 1985] National Computer Security Center,
   "Guidance for Applying the Department of Defense Trusted Computer
   System Evaluation Criteria in Specific Environments", CSC-STD-003-85,
   NCSC, 25 June 1985.

   [NCSC-STD-004-85, 1985] National Computer Security Center, "Technical
   Rationale Behind CSC-STD-003-85: Computer Security Requirements",
   CSC-STD-004-85, NCSC, 25 June 1985.

   [NCSC-STD-005-85, 1985] National Computer Security Center, "Magnetic
   Remanence Security Guideline", CSC-STD-005-85, NCSC, 15 November
   1985.

   This guideline is tagged as a "For Official Use Only" exemption under
   Section 6, Public Law 86-36 (50 U.S. Code 402).  Distribution
   authorized of U.S. Government agencies and their contractors to
   protect unclassified technical, operational, or administrative data
   relating to operations of the National Security Agency.

   [NCSC-89-660-P, 1990] National Computer Security Center, "Guidelines
   for Formal Verification Systems", Shipping list no.: 89-660-P, The
   Center, Fort George G. Meade, MD, 1 April 1990.

   [NCSC-89-254-P, 1988] National Computer Security Center, "Glossary of
   Computer Security Terms", Shipping list no.: 89-254-P, The Center,
   Fort George G. Meade, MD, 21 October 1988.

   [NCSC-TRUSIX, 1990] National Computer Security Center, "Trusted UNIX
   Working Group (TRUSIX) rationale for selecting access control list
   features for the UNIX system", Shipping list no.:  90-076-P, The
   Center, Fort George G. Meade, MD, 1990.

   [NCSC-TG-005, 1987] National Computer Security Center, "Trusted
   Network Interpretation", NCSC-TG-005, NCSC, 31 July 1987.

   [NCSC-C1-001-89, 1989] Tinto, M., "Computer Viruses: Prevention,
   Detection, and Treatment", National Computer Security Center C1



Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 78]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   Technical Report C1-001-89, June 1989.

   [NCSC Conference, 1989] National Computer Security Conference, "12th
   National Computer Security Conference: Baltimore Convention Center,
   Baltimore, MD, 10-13 October, 1989: Information Systems Security,
   Solutions for Today - Concepts for Tomorrow", National Institute of
   Standards and National Computer Security Center, 1989.


10.7  Security Checklists

   [Aucion, 1989] R. Aucoin, "Computer Viruses: Checklist for Recovery",
   Computers in  Libraries, Vol. 9, No. 2, Pg. 4, 1 February 1989.

   [Wood, et.al., 1987] C. Wood, W. Banks, S. Guarro, A. Garcia, V.
   Hampel, and H. Sartorio, "Computer Security:  A Comprehensive
   Controls Checklist", John Wiley and Sons, Interscience Publication,
   1987.

10.8  Disaster Recovery

   [Bates, 1992] R. Bates, "Disaster Recovery Planning: Networks,
   Telecommunications and Data Communications", McGraw-Hill, 1992.

   [Lewis, 1996] S. Lewis, "Disaster Recovery Yellow Pages", The Systems
   Audit Group, 1996.

   [Wrobel, 1993] L. Wrobel, "Writing Disaster Recovery Plans for
   Telecommunications Networks and LANS", Artech House, 1993.

10.9  Additional Publications

10.9.1  Defense Data Network's Network Information Center (DDN NIC)

   The DDN NIC maintains DDN Security bulletins and DDN Management
   bulletins online on the machine: NIC.DDN.MIL.  They are available via
   anonymous FTP.  The DDN Security bulletins are in the directory: SCC,
   and the DDN Management bulletins are in the directory: DDN-NEWS.

   For additional information, you may send a message to:
   NIC@NIC.DDN.MIL, or call the DDN NIC at: 1-800-235-3155.

   [DDN88] Defense Data Network, "BSD 4.2 and 4.3 Software Problem
   Resolution", DDN MGT Bulletin #43, DDN Network Information Center, 3
   November 1988.

   A Defense Data Network Management Bulletin announcement on the 4.2bsd
   and 4.3bsd software fixes to the Internet worm.

   [DDN89] DCA DDN Defense Communications System, "DDN Security Bulletin
   03", DDN Security Coordination Center, 17 October 1989.

10.9.2  IEEE Proceedings




Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 79]





Internet Draft           Site Security Handbook                 May 1996


   [IEEE] "Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy",
   published annually.

   IEEE Proceedings are available from:

   Computer Society of the IEEE P.O. Box 80452 Worldway Postal Center
   Los Angeles, CA  90080

10.9.3  Other Publications:

   Computer Law and Tax Report Computers and Security Security
   Management Magazine Journal of Information Systems Management Data
   Processing & Communications Security SIG Security, Audit & Control
   Review

   Editor Information

   Barbara Y. Fraser
   Software Engineering Institute
   Carnegie Mellon University
   5000 Forbes Avenue
   Pittsburgh, PA 15213

   Phone: (412) 268-5010
   Fax:   (412) 268-6989
   email: byf@cert.org































Site Security Working Group                                    [Page 80]


