
New IETF Standards Track                                     A. Rousskov
Internet-Draft                                   The Measurement Factory
Expires: October 4, 2004                                   April 5, 2004


                Declaring the State of an Internet Draft
                   draft-rousskov-newtrk-id-state-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 4, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo describes a mechanism to relay the state(s) of an Internet
   Draft to the reader. This mechanism may be used, in part, to
   encourage or discourage review submission, test suite creation, and
   prototype implementation of the entire draft or its portions. The
   state of the draft is declared using a human-friendly notation
   suitable for automated extraction of standard states.










Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  State of this Draft  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Overall Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Declaration Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  Declaration Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.1 Boilerplate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.2 Draft-Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.3 Draft Parts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.4 Part States  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.5 Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.6 Trailer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.1 Soliciting a review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.2 Testing a Feature  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.3 Combination of states  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.4 Discouraging feedback  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.5 Providing a hook for future use  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.6 Minimum information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 15























Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


1. State of this Draft

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   Formal code following this paragraph provides the document version
   and describes the state of the document. More information about the
   document state may follow the code. If the actual version of this
   document does not match the encoded one, please disregard the entire
   state declaration as it is most likely stale.

   draft-rousskov-newtrk-id-state-00 state := {
   	Draft :- Review
   	Section "Security Considerations" :- Ignore
   }

   Please provide an early high-level review of this draft. Is an
   IETF-wide standard for documenting draft states needed? Is this draft
   a step in the right direction towards specifying such a standard?
   Should NEWTRK WG adopt this draft as a working group draft?

   The next revision of this draft is scheduled for 2004/04/15; reviews
   submitted prior to 2004/04/11 are likely to affect the next revision.

   Always check the latest published revision of this document for
   up-to-date information.

2. Motivation

   IETF publishes thousands of Internet Draft (ID) revisions per year.
   For a given ID, IETF versioning mechanism reflects the order of
   revision publications. While later revisions often correspond to more
   mature documents, it is generally impossible for the reader to know
   whether a particular revision of the draft is highly unstable, ready
   for thorough review, or suitable for a prototype implementation, etc.
   This uncertainty is even greater at the section of feature level of
   the draft because the state of one section or feature may be very
   different from another, even related section or feature. To make
   matters worse, it is common for working group drafts not to reflect
   working group opinion as a whole (until the draft is submitted for an
   archival publication).

   Usually, only draft authors and those closely following the draft
   have enough information to make statements about its state. This
   creates serious problems for others interested in the draft. For
   example, reviewers may not submit reviews assuming that the draft is
   too unstable or, vice versa, may submit a detailed review of the
   draft revision that is going to be hopelessly obsolete when the next
   revision is published the following morning.




Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   While it is sometimes easy to contact the draft authors for an
   advice, such a contact cannot be automated, often takes too much
   time, may not be possible for commercial secrecy reasons, or may be
   hindered by communication barriers. Moreover, authors or WG Chair
   opinion on the draft may not represent WG consensus, and contacting
   the entire WG may be an even less productive endeavor than contacting
   individuals.

   IETF RFCs solve a similar problem by using a set of RFC categories.
   Each category is well documented. While RFC categories have their own
   flaws (to be addressed by the New IETF Standards Track working
   group), they usually imply the state of an RFC with sufficient
   precision. Internet Drafts do not have similar categories.

   This document specifies a mechanism that explicitly tells the reader
   of an Internet Draft the state of that draft. The following effects
   are expected from wide use of the Draft State Declarations by IETF
   authors and groups:

   1.  Authors and WGs would think about and document the state of draft
       parts more often. This may prevent some of the late surprises in
       draft development and make it easier for new folks to contribute.

   2.  More draft readers will know what actions (e.g., review or
       prototyping) are appropriate. This may encourage review and
       testing.

   3.  Tools will be developed to facilitate the above changes.  This
       may make it easy and quick to find drafts that are prime for
       review and allow for semi-automated monitoring of draft states by
       liaisons or technology users. That, in turn, may make early
       review solicitations more effective.


3. Scope

   The draft state declaration mechanism is designed for IETF Internet
   Drafts. The mechanism is applicable for both Working Group (WG)
   drafts and individual drafts. The mechanism is applicable to
   standards track and non-standards track drafts. The state declaration
   is removed when the draft becomes an archival document (XXX: why? do
   all archival documents have a sufficiently known state?).

   For WG drafts, published draft state declaration reflects WG rough
   consensus. Standard IETF rules apply to sensing or appealing such
   consensus. These rules and related caveats are beyond the scope of
   this draft. Similarly, for non-WG drafts, published draft state
   declaration reflects author(s) rough consensus. The ways to achieve



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   or appeal such consensus are beyond the scope of this draft. Dealing
   with rogue or irresponsible authors or WGs is also beyond the scope
   of this draft.

   As any information in an Internet Draft, the state declaration does
   not require (but may receive) an IESG or other external review. As
   any ID publication, publication of an ID with the state declaration
   does not require an IESG or AD notification or approval. Other
   mechanisms that use draft state as a tool may require such reviews,
   notifications, approvals, etc.

   This document does not specify whether or how the state of the draft
   is communicated in the draft file name or in various draft indexes.

4. Terminology

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. When used
   with the normative meanings, these keywords will be all uppercase.
   Occurrences of these words in lowercase comprise normal prose usage,
   with no normative implications.

   The purpose of the remaining definitions is to simplify presentation
   by removing the necessity to distinguish individual drafts from WG
   drafts, single author from multiple authors, the entire draft from
   its parts, etc. The draft state declaration mechanism does not depend
   on those distinctions.

   author: ID author, authors, editor, or editors.

   WG: IETF working group or, in case of an individual ID, the author of
      the ID.

   draft part or portion: The entire Internet Draft or any, not
      necessarily sequential, portion of thereof.

   section: ID section, without regard to its nesting level (i.e.,
      subsection, subsubsection, etc.).

   reader: Any draft reader or user, including internal and external
      reviewers, new WG participants, other WGs, IETF Area Director
      (AD), IESG, WG liaisons, and various automation tools.


5. Overall Operation

   When a WG reaches first rough consensus on a portion of the draft,



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   the draft author SHOULD document that consensus in the draft.  The
   author MAY use a dedicated section (XXX: which may cause section
   renumbering when the declaration is stripped from an RFC; should we
   address that?) or MAY place the declaration in an already existing
   section. The author MUST NOT create more than one state declarations
   per draft.  The author submits the draft with the declaration for
   publication using the standard IETF submission procedure.

   For each revision of the draft that contains a draft state
   declaration, the author MUST validate the contents of the declaration
   against current WG rough consensus (WG consensus may change between
   publications). Replacing the outdated declaration content with a
   standard "unknown draft state" boilerplate is one way of keeping the
   declaration up to date.

   A reader of an Internet Draft familiar with the state declaration
   concept, searches for a reference to this specification or the
   boilerplate text.  If found, the nearby formal record and informal
   comments relay WG opinion (at the draft submission time) on the draft
   state to the reader. Such opinion may, for example, encourage early
   review or discourage prototyping of certain features. The declaration
   trailer reminds the reader to look for the most recent revision of
   the draft.

   Internet Draft indexes and databases may extract and process formal
   records from draft state declarations to facilitate navigation
   through ID space or manage review solicitations.

   (XXX: add definition of full compliance elsewhere).

6. Declaration Format

   This section documents the draft state declaration format. Authors
   MUST use this format. Its trivial syntax allows for easy manual
   typesetting, for simple auto-processing of state declarations, and
   for reduction of stale declarations.

   The following template specifies format of the major draft state
   declaration parts, using the ABNF [RFC2234].












Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


       declaration = boilerplate [formal-record] [comments] trailer

       boilerplate = text
       formal-record = LF draft-name "state := {" LF states LF "}"
       comments = text
       trailer = text

       draft-name = token
       states = 1*part-state
       part-state = part ":-" state

       part = token
       state = token

       token = VCHAR *CHAR VCHAR   ; subject to restrictions below

       phrase = 1*CHAR
       text = 1*phrase

   In addition to the explicit syntax rules defined by the above ABNF,
   the following rules apply:

   o  Formal-record always follows "known state" boilerplate and never
      "unknown state" boilerplates (see Section 7.1 for boilerplates
      definitions.

   o  Grammar elements can be surrounded by OPTIONAL whitespace. Besides
      traditional linear whitespace (LWSP), declaration whitespace
      includes draft headers, draft footers, and similar typesetting
      delimiters.

   o  Tokens do not contain ":-", ":=", or LF.

   Draft formatting tools such as Marshall Rose's xml2rfc might
   eventually provide macros or dialogs to assist authors in declaring
   draft states. However, formatting tools MUST NOT insert or update the
   encoded draft revisions as it will defeat the mechanism for detecting
   stale declarations.

   (XXX: is this too formal? can we make it simpler but still allow for
   easy auto-extraction of draft name, revision, and states?)

   (XXX: is this too informal, especially the whitespace definition
   part? Will parsers be able to find/extract states without many
   hacks?)






Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


7. Declaration Elements

   This section describes major elements of a draft state declaration.

7.1 Boilerplate

   The following are the two boilerplate definitions, for known and
   unknown states. Authors MUST NOT use other boilerplates.

   known-state-boilerplate: This document complies with the Draft State
      specification[RFC XXXX].  Formal code following this paragraph
      provides the document version and describes the state of the
      document. More information about the document state may follow the
      code. If the actual version of this document does not match the
      encoded one, please disregard the entire state declaration as it
      is most likely stale.

   unknown-state-boilerplate: This document complies with the Draft
      State specification[RFC XXXX]. The state of this document is
      unknown. Later revisions of this document are likely to contain
      specific state information.

   Since not all WGs are aware or use draft state declarations, placing
   an unknown-state-boilerplate provides the reader with more
   information than simply omitting the section. It also makes it
   possible for IESG to require draft state declarations without
   requiring WGs to reach rough consensus on at least some part of each
   WG draft.

7.2 Draft-Name

   The author MUST replace the <draft-name> parameter in the
   formal-record element of the draft state declaration with the name
   and revision number of the draft being submitted for publication.
   This requirement is meant to help readers detect (and ignore) stale
   state information. (XXX: is there a better name/label for the
   draft-name element?)

   To obtain up-to-date published state information, human readers MUST
   find the most recent published draft and MUST check whether the
   <draft-name> in the declaration corresponds to that draft version.

   If the <draft-name> in draft state declaration does not match the
   actual draft name (including revision number), automated readers MUST
   NOT use or relay the state information in a way that implies the
   information is up-to-date.  In other words, while it is OK to ignore
   (or warn about) mismatching draft-names, it is a violation of this
   specification to not check for the mismatch as failure to check will



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   mislead human readers.

7.3 Draft Parts

   Standard part values are provided below along with their semantics.
   Authors MUST NOT provide descriptions for these standard parts in the
   comments section.  This rule avoids misinterpretation of part
   semantics by readers, especially automated ones. Column characters
   (":") following part names below are formatting delimiters and are
   not part of the values.

   Draft: This part value refers to the entire document

   Section X: This part value refers to a specific section. The X
      parameter contains the number, title, or a similar visible section
      label that uniquely identifies the section within the document.
      Authors SHOULD NOT manually enter labels to avoid typos and
      inconsistencies with actual sections in the draft.

   When two overlapping parts are used with conflicting states, the
   state of the most specific part takes precedence for the overlapping
   region. For example, a review of the entire draft may be requested
   with an explicit instruction to ignore certain sections.

   When standard part values are not sufficient, authors MAY use other
   (extension) part values.

7.4 Part States

   Standard state values are provided below along with their semantics.
   Authors MUST NOT provide descriptions for these standard parts in the
   comments section.  This rule avoids misinterpretation of state
   semantics by readers, especially automated ones. Column characters
   (":") following part names below are formatting delimiters and are
   not part of the values.

   Ignore: WG expects to rewrite the corresponding part in some major,
      profound way.  While IETF peer reviews can be submitted at any
      time, reviewing this part is likely to be a waste of time.

   Review: WG solicits reviews of the corresponding part. Informal
      comments following the formal record may provide details about the
      review, including any deadlines. The WG expects to modify the
      corresponding part to address reviewer comments.

   Test: WG encourages early prototypes, experiments, and test suites to
      be developed for the corresponding part. The WG expects to modify
      the corresponding part to reflect early trials feedback. While



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


      IETF peer reviews can be submitted at any time, actual test
      results would be preferred to convince WG to change the
      corresponding part.

   Done: WG does not expect to modify the corresponding part in any way.
      WG expects the final version of the draft to be submitted with
      this part as it is written in this draft. Note that WG plans might
      change and that WG is not the only entity that can modify a draft.
      While IETF peer reviews can be submitted at any time, it would be
      difficult to convince WG to change the corresponding part.

   (XXX: should we add a standard "Help" state to indicate that the WG
   is looking for help writing the spec, not just review?)

   (XXX: should we add a standard "Consensus" state to indicate that the
   WG reached consensus for the specified part and implying that drafts
   without such state may not have WG consensus?)

   (XXX: should we add standard time/event conditions such as "frozen
   until YYYY/MM/DD"?)

   When standard state values are not sufficient, authors MAY use other
   (extension) state values.

7.5 Comments

   Authors MAY use the comment element to supply additional information
   related to some of the formally declared states. Comments become
   essential when non-standard part or state values are used, as their
   semantics would otherwise remain unknown. As already required above,
   authors must not redefine semantics of the standard parts and states
   using the comments element.

7.6 Trailer

   The following is the trailer text. The same trailer is used for known
   and unknown states. Authors MUST NOT use other trailers.

   trailer: Always check the latest published revision of this document
      for up-to-date information.

   The primary purpose of the trailer is to serve as a terminator of the
   draft state declaration, so that automated tools can extract or
   render the entire declaration. Without the trailer (e.g., if its
   information is moved to the boilerplates), it would be often
   impossible to auto-detect the presence of a comment or to find the
   end of a comment. RFC Editor may use this feature to automatically
   strip draft state declarations from Internet Drafts about to become



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   RFCs.

8. Security Considerations

   None.

9. Examples

   This section contains informative examples of draft state
   declarations.

9.1 Soliciting a review

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   Formal code following this paragraph provides the document version
   and describes the state of the document. More information about the
   document state may follow the code. If the actual version of this
   document does not match the encoded one, please disregard the entire
   state declaration as it is most likely stale.

   draft-ietf-opes-edge2edge-01 state := {
   	Draft :- Review
   }

   Please provide an early review of this draft by 2004/04/30. Do not
   pay much attention to details. We are basically looking for
   architecture-level comments at this point. We are especially
   uncertain about Section 3.4 and the caching feature.

   Always check the latest published revision of this document for
   up-to-date information.

9.2 Testing a Feature

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   Formal code following this paragraph provides the document version
   and describes the state of the document. More information about the
   document state may follow the code. If the actual version of this
   document does not match the encoded one, please disregard the entire
   state declaration as it is most likely stale.

   draft-ietf-tcp-proxy-04 state := {
   	TCP splicing (IEEE:X.Zb) :- Test
   }

   While we received positive reviews, we are not sure that TCP splicing
   works, especially on pigeon networks. If you have resources, please
   test this feature, at least on the MUST level. Is it feasible to



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   implement at all?

   Always check the latest published revision of this document for
   up-to-date information.

9.3 Combination of states

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   Formal code following this paragraph provides the document version
   and describes the state of the document. More information about the
   document state may follow the code. If the actual version of this
   document does not match the encoded one, please disregard the entire
   state declaration as it is most likely stale.

   draft-ietf-cool-proto-11 state := {
   	Draft :- Review
   	Section 13.5 :- Ignore
   	Section 13.6 :- Ignore
   	client side rendering :- Test
   }

   Alan Smithee has reviewed client-side rendering rules (see Sections
   3-5 and some bits in Section 10). It would be great to have a working
   compliance test suite _now_, before vendors rush this to market.

   If you review these and other sections, please try to send us
   feedback before the New Year. We plan to start working on the next
   generation server-side rules (sections 13.5 and 13.6) after that.

   Always check the latest published revision of this document for
   up-to-date information.

9.4 Discouraging feedback

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   Formal code following this paragraph provides the document version
   and describes the state of the document. More information about the
   document state may follow the code. If the actual version of this
   document does not match the encoded one, please disregard the entire
   state declaration as it is most likely stale.

   draft-smithee-deadp-14 state := {
   	Draft :- Done
   }

   I am going to submit this to RFC Editor for publication as an
   Informational RFC next week. There are already two implementations of
   this protocol. I am changing jobs and do not expect to work on this



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   any more. IETF NG working group is going to work on the next
   generation of the protocol.

   Always check the latest published revision of this document for
   up-to-date information.

9.5 Providing a hook for future use

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   The state of this document is unknown. Later revisions of this
   document are likely to contain specific state information.

   We expect to provide sate info after WG f2f meeting in May.

   Always check the latest published revision of this document for
   up-to-date information.

9.6 Minimum information

   This document complies with the Draft State specification[RFC XXXX].
   The state of this document is unknown. Later revisions of this
   document are likely to contain specific state information.Always
   check the latest published revision of this document for up-to-date
   information.

Appendix A. Acknowledgments

   The discussion about Working Group Snapshots [I-D.dawkins-newtrk-wgs]
   on the New IETF Standards Track (NEWTRK) WG mailing list inspired the
   creation of this document. Harald Tveit Alvestrand suggested adding
   formal descriptors to state declarations and reviewed an early
   version of this specification.

Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

Informative References

   [I-D.dawkins-newtrk-wgs]
              Dawkins, S., "Working Group Snapshot (WGS)",
              draft-dawkins-newtrk-wgs-00 (work in progress), March
              2004.




Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


Author's Address

   Alex Rousskov
   The Measurement Factory

   EMail: rousskov@measurement-factory.com
   URI:   http://www.measurement-factory.com/












































Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Declaring the State of an Internet Draft    April 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Rousskov                Expires October 4, 2004                [Page 16]


