

PPVPN Working Group                                  Tissa Senevirathne
Internet Draft
Document: draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt
Category: Informational                                     August 2002


   An Addressing Architecture for virtual Private Network Identifier


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   For potential updates to the above required-text see:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt

Placement of This Memo in Sub-IP Area

   RELATED DOCUMENTS:

     See the reference

   WHERE DOES IT FIT IN THE PICTURE OF THE SUB-IP WORK

      PPVPN

   WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG

      PPVPN WG charter specifies inter-AS VPN services. Globally
   unique, structured VPN identifiers are important element of inetr-AS
   VPN services.

   JUSTIFICATION

      As VPN technology matures, a VPN services can either VPRN, VPLS,
   VPWS or some other future class. The VPN services now has a global
   reach, spanning multiple service providers. Having a well define


Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              1
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002


   addressing architecture facilitates, management and administration
   of VPN services





Abstract

   In this document we present an addressing architecture for VPN
   Identifier. Addressing Architecture presented in this document
   allows to identify VPN in globally unique manner. It introduces a
   non overlapping address space for different classes of VPN (L3 VPN,
   VPLS etc..). The addressing architecture presented in this document
   allow to identify attributes of the VPN as part of the VPN
   identifier through an embedded attribute field.






































Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              2
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002



Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

1. Introduction

   Only standard method of VPN addressing available is RFC 2685 [3].
   RFC 2685 use 3byte OUI field and 4 byte index field. Thus making it
   7 byte field. The non 32-bit aligned nature of RFC 2685 poses many
   challenges to implementers as well as protocol designers. In RFC
   2685 there is no standard method to identify the class of the given
   VPN (i.e.: L3 VPN or l2 VPN etc..). Attributes of the VPN are
   considered as a separate process. This introduces special challenges
   to VPN discovery methods. VPN discovery methods try to address this
   by discovery method specific attributes. However, if the
   characteristics (class) and attributes of the VPN was part of the
   address, VPN discovery methods becomes simpler. In fact VPN
   discovery becomes some what closer to routing protocols. As a result
   user may select to use multiple discovery methods in combination.

   Mutually exclusive address spaces for different classes of VPN allow
   easy administration. On the other hand one may easily filter
   unwanted classes of VPN using simple policies. This may be
   attractive if global VPN discovery method in use.


2. Requirement for VPN addressing Architecture

   . Mutually exclusive address space for VPN classes(L3,L2..)

   . Address space for private VPN addresses

   . Address space for official addresses allocated by addressing
   authority.

   . Ability to encode VPN attribute such as underlying tunnel method
   as part of the address.

   . Format and the size of VPN identifier should be implementation and
   algorithm friendly. (e.g. in a 32 bit machine 32 or 64 bit aligned
   numbers can be handled much more efficiently than 56 bit number)

2.1 Mutually exclusive address space for VPN classes

   Mutually exclusive address space for each VPN class allow Providers
   to easily manage the VPN services. This is specially true when the
   provider is involved providing more than one class of VPN.

   On the other hand, Mutually exclusive address space lead to simpler
   VPN discovery methods. Presently most VPN discovery methods would

Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              3
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002


   use discovery method specific attributes to identify the class of
   the VPN (ie:L3, L2 etc..). Some discovery methods may not have
   methods to identify such differences.

   Presence of mutually exclusive address space facilitate PE devices
   to clearly identify the class of a given VPN.

2.2 Address space for private VPN addresses

   Clearly identified VPN address space for private addresses allow
   easier management of VPN that are locally visible. Also this
   facilitate more efficient usage of official VPN addresses. (This is
   more like 10.x.x.x address space)

2.3 Address space for official addresses allocated by addressing
authority

   Official address space is administered by an Addressing authority.
   Uniqueness of the address is ensured by the authority. Globally
   unique VPN address facilitate inter provider VPN services.

2.4 Ability to encode VPN attribute such as underlying tunnel method as
part of the address.

   In a unique address there may be site specific information that may
   be useful to distribute and discover. As an example, use MPLS as a
   tunneling protocol may be specific to one originating PE site.

   In another words semantics of the 32 bit integer distributed can be
   easily derived from the attribute field of the VPN address.

   Or after a VPN end point discovery appropriate signaling may be
   initiated based on the information derived.

2.4 Format and size of VPN identifier

      Format and size of the VPN identifier MUST not adversely affect
   the efficiency  search and algorithmic implementations.

   Any address that is either 32 or 64 bit aligned can be processed
   efficiently by most general purpose processors. RFC 2685 proposes a
   56 bit value as the VPN Identifier. Such non 32 bit aligned number
   lead to inefficient algorithms.


Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              4
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002
3. Addressing Model

   Based on the above requirements we propose following address model
   for VPN addressing

   |<------------------------- 64 ------------------------------>|
   |<-----8------> |                                             |
   |  |<-- 7 ---  >|<--- 8 --->|<------------48 ---------------->|
   +-------------------------------------------------------------+
   |S | Class     | Attribute  |  Address                        |
   +-------------------------------------------------------------+

   S -- Scope

      0 - Centrally administered , Globally unique VPN
      1 - Locally Administered VPN

   Class --

      0 - Default (Local policy MAY derive the appropriate class)
      1 - L3 VPN
      2 - VPLS
      3 - VPWS

      4-127 - unused

   Attribute - Site specific attribute

     0 - Default (Local policy MAY derive the appropriate tunnel type)
     1 - MPLS Tunnels
     2 - GRE Tunnels
     3 - L2TP Tunnels
     4 - IPsec Tunnels

     5-255 û- unused

3.1 Possible variations to the proposed model

   It is possible to define Scope as two bits and one of the bits MAY
   indicate either scope;class;attribute;address structure is used or
   scope;address structure is used. This allows have significantly
   larger VPN addressing space. However, absence of class and attribute
   may negate some of the requirements we set forth.

4. Textual Representation of VPN addresses

   We propose to a textual representation similar to Ipv6 RFC 2373 [4].
   An VPN address is may be represented as 16bit hexa decimal numbers
   separated by semicolon (:).

   E.g.:

   8000:4000:0000:0001

   Zeros may be eliminated using similar method as in RFC 2373 [4].

   E.g.:

   8000:4::1


5. Security Considerations

Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              5
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002



   A complete security analysis of the proposed Addressing architecture
   has not yet been performed.

6. References


   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   3  Fox, B. et.al Virtual Private Network Identifier, RFC 2685,
      September 1999

   4  Hinden, R. et.al, IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture, RFC 2373,
      Julyb1998

  7. Acknowledgments

  Mark Townsley provided extensive comments. His specific comments lead
  to Appendix A, entitled DevilÆs questions.


8. Author's Addresses

   Tissa Senevirathne
   1567 Belleville Way,
   Sunnyvale, CA 94087
   Phone: 408-245-5897
   Email: tsenevir@hotmail.com






















Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              6
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002


Appendix A: DevilÆs Questions

   Question : Someone might tell you that you are reinventing IP(v7?)
   addressing :-)

   Answer : Actually I proposing an alternative to RFC2685 for VPN
   addressing, RFC 2685
   in my opinion is useless

   Question: Can't wait until someone proposes a VPN Address NAT on you
   ;-)

   Answer:  :):) Actually it is possible, with the attribute field.

   Question: Seriously, I do thing that everyone's VPN life would be
   easier if there were a global address pool to tap. However, such a
   proposal does not come without serious management over head. Take a
   look at the resources necessary to manage the global IP address
   pool. Who will be the central assignment authority for VPN
   addresses? Who will run the root server to manage them? Will you
   include a DNS system to resolve the addresses?

   Answer : Juha is thinking of DNS based VPN discovery if that takeoff
   (most likely). Suddenly we are now looking of global VPN
   participation. Which essentially need to be unique. In addition
   global VPN administration may open new business opportunities.

   Question: Just unique within the set of folks participating in the
   discovery targeted at a given server. DNS Doesn't *have* to be
   global.

   Answer: If the DNS participants are limited, local address
   management is feasible. However, when the number of participants
   grow, having a centralized management helps.

   Question: That's just what we need, more for ICANN to do ;-)

   Answer : if you agree with me on my previous answer, global VPN
   administration is a small price to pay.

Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for

Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              7
                 draft-tsenevir-vpn-addr-arch-00.txt      August 2002


   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into




















































Senevirathne   Informational û Expiration February 2003              8

