



Network Working Group                                     S. Harris, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       Merit Network, Inc.
Obsoletes: 3005 (if approved)                               R. Salz, Ed.
Intended status: Best Current Practice         Akamai Technologies, Inc.
Expires: April 14, 2019                                 October 11, 2018


                      IETF Discussion List Charter
                     draft-ietf-iasa2-rfc3005bis-00

Abstract

   The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) discussion mailing list
   furthers the development and specification of Internet technology
   through discussion of technical issues, and hosts discussions of IETF
   direction, policy, meetings, and procedures.  As this is the most
   general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude is allowed.
   Advertising, whether to solicit business or promote employment
   opportunities, falls well outside the range of acceptable topics, as
   do discussions of a personal nature.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 14, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Harris & Salz            Expires April 14, 2019                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        IETF Discussion List Charter          October 2018


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Charter for the IETF Discussion List

   The IETF discussion list, ietf@ietf.org [1], serves two purposes.  It
   furthers the development and specification of Internet technology
   through discussion of technical issues.  It also hosts discussions of
   IETF direction, policy, meetings, and procedures.  As this is the
   most general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude is allowed.
   Advertising, whether to solicit business or promote employment
   opportunities, falls well outside the range of acceptable topics, as
   do discussions of a personal nature.

   This list is meant for initial discussion only.  Discussions that
   fall within the area of any working group or well established list
   should be moved to such more specific forum as soon as this is
   pointed out, unless the issue is one for which the working group
   needs wider input or direction.

   In addition to the topoics noted above, appropriate postings include:

   o  Last Call discussions of proposed protocol actions.
   o  Discussion of technical issues that are candidates for IETF work,
      but do not yet have an appropriate e-mail venue.
   o  Discussion of IETF administrative policies.
   o  Questions and clarifications concerning IETF meetings.
   o  Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are
      sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF.

   Inappropriate postings include:

   o  Unsolicited bulk e-mail.
   o  Discussion of subjects unrelated to IETF policy, meetings,
      activities, or technical concerns.
   o  Unprofessional commentary, regardless of the general subject.
   o  Announcements of conferences, events, or activities that are not
      sponsored or endorsed by the Internet Society or IETF.

   The IETF Chair, or a sergeant-at-arms appointed by the Chair, is
   empowered to restrict posting by a person, or of a thread, when the
   content is inappropriate and represents a pattern of abuse.  They are
   encouraged to take into account the overall nature of the postings by
   an individual and whether particular postings are an aberration or
   typical.  Complaints regarding their decisions should be referred to
   the IAB.



Harris & Salz            Expires April 14, 2019                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        IETF Discussion List Charter          October 2018


2.  References

2.1.  URIs

   [1] mailto:ietf@ietf.org

Authors' Addresses

   Susan R. Harris (editor)
   Merit Network, Inc.
   4251 Plymouth Rd., Suite C
   Ann Arbor, MI  48105
   USA

   Email: srh@merit.edu


   Rich Salz (editor)
   Akamai Technologies, Inc.
   150 Broadway
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   USA

   Email: rsalz@akamai.com



























Harris & Salz            Expires April 14, 2019                 [Page 3]
