

MIP6                                                            J. Kempf
Internet-Draft                                           DoCoMo Labs USA
Expires: June 3, 2005                                        E. Nordmark
                                                        SUN Microsystems
                                                          S. Chakrabarti
                                                                     Sun
                                                        December 3, 2004


                       Bootstrapping Mobile IPv6
                   draft-chakrabarti-mip6-bmip-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 3, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document defines an easy mechanism of boot-strapping Mobile IPv6
   service.  The boot-strapping mechanism includes locating a home
   agent, dynamic home-address allocation and setting up initial
   security association with the home-agent using IKE version 2 and EAP.



Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


   This solution provides a way of secure and easy deployment without
   the involvement of AAA servers for the boot-strapping purpose.  It is
   particularly useful in scenarios where AAA infrastructure is not
   available, although this mechanism can be applicable in general.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Deployment Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1   Universal Access Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2   Enterprise/University Campus Network . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3   Network Access Provider Service Only . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Protocol Descriptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1   Obtaining Home Agent Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2   Setting up Security Association  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3   Dynamic Home Address Assignment  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.4   Renewal of Bootstrapping Materials . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Home Agent Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Mobile Node Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  EAP Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Protocol Constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   A.  Privacy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   10.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 19






















Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


1.  Introduction

   Mobile IPv6 [3] describes mobility protocol between a Mobile Node and
   a Home Agent.  This document describes a simple method to initiate
   the Mobile IPv6 service by the Mobile Node, without requiring home
   network topology-dependent information, such as the home agent
   address, on the Mobile Node.  The initiation or boot-strapping of
   Mobile IPv6 [3] can happen any time depending on the policy applied
   on the Mobile Node.  It is possible that the boot-strapping method
   starts every time a Mobile Node boots or wakes up from standby
   status; alternately, it can be started when the user turns on
   "Mobility Service".

   Mobile IPv6 Bootstrapping problem statement [9] indicates that the
   mobile node must know its Home Agent address, its own Home Address
   and materials to obtain MN-HA [4] security association in order to
   start the Mobility service in a deployment scenario.  Mobile IPv6
   [3][4] protocols do not describe a method to obtain such initial
   information; it assumes that a Mobile Node is already configured with
   a home-address from its Home Agent and MN-HA security association is
   configured at MN and HA.  However, in  real deployment, this
   assumption requires manual configuration which does not scale as the
   Mobile Nodes increase in number.

   This document, in the following sections describes a solution for
   bootstrapping method that only involves Domain Naming Service (DNS)
   and a Home Agent running IKE version 2 [6].  Hence it does not
   require any other additional infrastructure such as AAA
   (Authentication, Authorization and Accounting Protocol) and operates
   separately from whatever scheme is used for authenticating the
   network access for the mobile node.

   The solution refers to other existing protocols and documents
   whenever possible.  The document assumes that the mobile node has
   already acquired IP service at its location, which might have been
   authenticated any number of ways:
   o  IEEE 802.1X
   o  PANA
   o  Universal Access Methods [13] or web-based credit card number
      verification for authenticated and authorized network access.
   o  Other local schemes based on manually handling out L2 (WEP) keys,
      registering MAC addresses, or controlling physical access a
      (wired) network.
   Thus it does not necessarily assume that the L2/EAP authentication is
   used for network access authentication.

   Privacy considerations are discussed in the Appendix.




Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


   The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MAY and RECOMMENDED
   are defined in [1].

















































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


2.  Deployment Examples

   This section describes a few examples of where AAA bootstrapping
   might not be available.

2.1  Universal Access Method

   Universal Access Method [13] is a technology for basic network access
   authentication and authorization that is widely used in 802.11
   hotspot networks throughout the world.  In a UAM network, the host is
   allowed to perform DHCP to obtain an IP address and other parameters
   necessary for network access, but routing to the Internet is
   inhibited until the host completes a login process.  The login
   process requires the host's user to attempt to browse a Web page,
   using a Web browser.  Any other IP traffic is dropped.  The HTTP GET
   issued by the Web browser is redirected, and a login page is
   displayed instead.

   On the login page, the user typically has a choice to either provide
   a login/password, for an account on file with the service provider,
   or a credit card number, for one-time only access.  If a
   login/password is provided, the back end conducts a typical Radius
   AAA transaction back to the home network AAA server.  If a credit
   card number is provided, a secure E-commerce protocol is used to
   contact the user's credit card provider, and the charges are billed
   to the user's credit card.  Acceptance of the charge by the credit
   card provider constitutes authorization for the user to get IP
   service.  Once the user has been authenticated and authorized for IP
   service, routing to the Internet is established and the original Web
   page browsed by the user is displayed.  The only protocol involved in
   the transaction is HTTP.

   In this deployment scenario, there is no hook for providing the
   Mobile Node with Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping parameters, because there
   is no L2 AAA transaction conducted between the Mobile Node and the
   network.  For account-based access, Radius is used on the back end,
   between the network access server (called a Public Access Control
   (PAC) Gateway in the UAM architecture) and the home network of the
   user, but there is no path from the PAC Gateway to the Mobile Node
   for delivering the bootstrap parameters.  For one-time access, there
   is no AAA involved at all.

   The protocol discussed in this document would be an appropriate
   solution to bootstrapping in this scenario, because it could be run
   after the PAC Gateway has opened Internet routing access.






Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


2.2  Enterprise/University Campus Network


   Many university and enterprise networks authenticate hosts attempting
   to use their network by checking whether the MAC address corresponds
   to a MAC address in a database of allowed terminals.  Some such
   deployments additionally require a login/password from the user for
   an account, using the same kind of HTTP Redirect procedure used by
   UAM.  In order for a user to access the network, the MAC address of
   the laptop must be provided to system administrators and an account
   established.

   In such deployment scenarios, there is also no L2 AAA transaction
   between the Mobile Node and the network that can serve to provide
   configuration parameters.  The protocol described in this document
   can be deployed by the campus or enterprise system administrator to
   bootstrap Mobile IPv6 service.

2.3  Network Access Provider Service Only

   The Mobile IPv6 Bootstrapping problem statement [9] describes a case
   where an Internet service provider only provides network access and
   does not provide mobility service.  In this case, the initial L2 AAA
   transaction cannot provide the Mobile Node with bootstrapping
   parameters, because the access network provider doesn't provide
   Mobile IPv6 service.  In this case, the Mobile Node could use the
   protocol discussed in this document to obtain service from another
   provider, perhaps one discovered opportunistically or perhaps one
   with which the user has a long term account.






















Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


3.  Protocol Descriptions

   Mobile IPv6 Bootstrapping [9] problem statement describes network
   access service and Mobile IPv6 service.  This document does not
   define protocols for network access and assumes that network access
   and authorization have taken place before the Mobile Node bootstraps
   for mobility service.  Thus, the following steps are required to
   perform this solution, they are:

   o  Find appropriate Home Agent FQDN from DNS SRV record
   o  Use IKEv2, possibly with EAP method to obtain IKE security
      association.  (And this would allow an evolution towards
      certificate-based authentication in the future without changing
      any protocols.)
   o  Use IKEv2 to obtain the Home-address dynamically if its not
      available to the Mobile Node already and then obtain MN-HA
      security association


3.1  Obtaining Home Agent Address

   A Mobile Node queries the DNS server to request information on Home
   Agent service.  RFC 2782[2] describes the policies to choose a
   service agent based on the preference and weight values.  The DNS SRV
   record may contain the preference and weight values for multiple Home
   Agents available to the Mobile Node in addition to the Home Agent
   FQDNs.  If multiple Home Agents are available in the DNS SRV record
   then Mobile Node is responsible to process the information as per
   policy and pick one Home Agent.  If the Home Agent of choice does not
   respond for some reason or the IKE authentication fails, the Mobile
   Node SHOULD try other Home Agents on the list.  The Home Agent
   information MUST be stored in the Mobile Node as long as it is using
   the mobility service or on the same access network in order to
   expedite the bootstrapping process for obtaining security association
   and home address.

   The service name for Mobile IPv6 home agent service as required by
   RFC 2782 is "mip6" and the protocol name is "ipv6".  Note that a
   transport name cannot be used here because Mobile IPv6 does not run
   over a transport.

   Example: A mobile node with the example.net home domain would perform
   a SRV query for _mip6._ipv6.example.net.

3.2  Setting up Security Association

   IKEv2 [6] describes IKE authentication by using EAP methods.  IKE
   version 2 allows a client to use an EAP method for authentication



Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


   while the responder uses certificates or pre-shared keys for the
   server authentication.  Thus the Mobile Node must have some
   information about the Home Agent's certificate authority in order to
   verify the certificate.  Such information MUST be preconfigured on
   the Mobile Node, if the Mobile Node has a long term relationship with
   the mobility service provider.  If that is not the case, the Home
   Agent's certificate certificate authority (CA) or root CA information
   SHOULD be obtained from the Home Agent's network through the DNS SRV
   record.  Each Home Agent's information is bound to its root CA or
   certificate authority.  While certificates are not commonly used on
   hosts today, certificate-based authentication - in which no EAP
   transaction is involved - can also be accommodated by the protocol.

   For purposes of tying the Mobile Node's IKEv2 identity to its EAP
   identity, the users Network Access Identifier [8] SHOULD be used to
   establish the IKEv2 security association.  This corresponds to an
   IKEv2 identity type of 3 (ID_RFC822_ADDR).  For more details in
   setting up the parameters for IKE authentication phase and consequent
   IKE child-SA phase refer to [5].

3.3  Dynamic Home Address Assignment

   A Mobile Node may obtain its home address dynamically from the Home
   Agent when it reboots or when its security association with the Home
   Agent expires.  If Home Agent knows its home address or the last used
   home address for the corresponding Home Agent, it SHOULD include that
   home address in the assignment request.  If Mobile Node is using SEND
   [10], it SHOULD supply a host id suffix for a CGA (Cryptographically
   generated address).

   The details of home address assignment using IKEv2 is described in
   [5].  A Mobile Node SHOULD store the home address locally for
   efficient renewal of security association with its Home Agent.

3.4  Renewal of Bootstrapping Materials

   A Mobile Node SHOULD store the home address and the Home Agent
   information locally as long as it is in the same network or using the
   same Mobile IPv6 service.  A Mobile Node MUST have its unique
   identity (for example, NAI) which is bound with home address  and
   MN-HA  IKEv2/IPsec security associations.  This unique identity must
   be stored both at Mobile Node and at the Home Agent.  This identity
   is used by the Home Agent to verify that it is talking to the same
   node which perhaps expired the SA (security Association) recently.
   This is useful for additional proof of authentication.  Binding to
   unique identity is also useful when a mobile node uses multiple home
   addresses.




Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


   A Mobile Node SHOULD renew its IKE/IPsec security associations before
   they expire.  It is recommended that the default IKE security
   association is at least same as IPsec SA  and home-address lifetime.
   The default IKE SA lifetime SHOULD be large (say
   IKE_BMIP_SA_LIFETIME_MAX).

   Thus the Mobile Node does not need to go through the whole
   bootstrapping process to renew home Address and IKE SA if it stays on
   the same access network for a long period of time.  Dynamic home
   address lifetime SHOULD be at least long enough to match IKE/IPsec SA
   lifetimes in order to prevent unnecessary boot-strapping messaging
   exchange.

   Upon reboot, a Mobile Node may or may not lose its home address, Home
   Agent address and IKE/IPsec security associations depending on the
   Mobile Node configuration options.  By default, a Mobile Node must
   start bootstrapping process upon reboot.

   If the access method involves user interaction, such as UAM, the user
   may be presented with a Web page after initial network access
   offering the FQDNs of one or several mobility service provider links.
   These links, when selected, may directly or indirectly cause the
   bootstrapping procedure described here to run.

   Reasons for re-bootstrapping after the initial one are subject to
   individual service provider policy, but some possible reasons for
   re-bootstrapping are the following:
   o  Load balancing
   o  Home Agents being taken off line for maintenance
   o  Unanticipated HA failure

   Note that RFC 3775 [3] currently defines no way for a HA to inform
   its active Mobile Nodes that it is about to go down and that it
   should find a new HA or recommending a new HA, like the ICMP Redirect
   message used by a first hop router.  By the existing Mobile IPv6
   standard, an MN will only discover that its HA is unavailable when
   either tunneled packets stop arriving, if traffic is not route
   optimized, or when it tries to perform a binding update to the HA and
   the HA does not respond.  It is possible that IKEv2 could provide
   some indication that the IPsec SA is being deactivated, but such an
   indication would not provide enough information to determine whether
   the MN should re-bootstrap and find a new HA, since the SA may be
   deactivated for other reasons.








Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


4.  Home Agent Requirements

   Home Agent MUST support [5].

   A Home Agent MAY operate along with a AAA home-server.  But the
   communication between Home Agent and the AAA home-server is
   independent  of the boot-strapping process in this solution.












































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


5.  Mobile Node Requirements
   o  A Mobile Node is aware of its Home Domain name or Home ISP domain
      name
   o  A Mobile Node MUST support [5].
   o  A Mobile Node must have configuration policies to control
      bootstrapping frequencies
   o  A Mobile Node must be capable of storing home address and Home
      Agent address and IKE  MN-HA [5] security associations
   o  A Mobile Node MUST be configured with a Network Access Identifier
      or other identity sufficient to obtain mobility service.









































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


6.  EAP Considerations

   IKE version 2 [6] specifies that when using EAP authentication of the
   initiator the responder must have a certificate.  There is a draft
   [11] discusses how EAP methods that provide mutual authentication and
   key agreement can be used for responder authentication instead of
   certificates.  If this proposal is standardized as an extension of
   EAP usage in IKEV2, then boot-strapping process does not need to use
   or process certificates.  However, for wide scale deployments,
   responder authentication using certificates may be more practical.









































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


7.  Security Considerations

   The protocol uses IKEv2/IPsec and EAP methods for secure exchange of
   initial security material exchange and security association.  It also
   talks about an unique Mobile Node identity to bind with the offered
   home addresses and the IPsec/IKE security associations.













































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


8.  Protocol Constants

   IKE_BMIP_SA_LIFETIME_MAX              1 day
















































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


9.  Acknowledgments

   None so far.
















































Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


Appendix A.  Privacy Considerations

   Bootstrapping process can be leveraged to assign a temporary address
   [7] to the Mobile Node in addition to the home address.  The Home
   Agent SHOULD tie these temporary addresses with the same MN-HA tunnel
   that is used for home address of the Mobile Node.  Thus the Mobile
   Node and Home Agent should share the same security associations as
   with Home address.  The unique identity binding is also useful in
   this case.  Purpose of having temporary home-address assignment is
   that the Mobile Node may use them for some applications as it does in
   non- mobile cases for privacy reasons.

   Publishing Home Agent addresses publicly in DNS servers may lead to
   unwarranted attention from undesirable elements seeking to disrupt
   mobility service through DoS attack.  While IKEv2 has been carefully
   engineered to prevent subtle DoS attacks, such as state depletion, a
   brute force DDoS attack can still be mounted.  The threat from DDoS
   in this case is no larger than for any other widely known public
   Internet server, such as a popular Web site or, indeed, a DNS server
   for a top level domain.  Measures similar to those used by popular
   Web site providers or DNS server operators can be deployed to
   mitigate such attacks.  Note that measures which "hide" Home Agent
   addresses by only sending them to authorized nodes through AAA
   transactions are not exempt from DDoS attack, because worm-style
   probing - in which the attacker sequentially iterates through all
   addresses on a subnet - can be used to determine whether a particular
   address corresponds to a deployed Home Agent.  In IPv6, such probing
   attacks are expected to be less effective due to the enormously
   enlarged address space, but with enough zombie nodes under their
   control, an attacker could still tie up a network.





















Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


10.  References

10.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P. and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
        specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
        February 2000.

   [3]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C. and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [4]  Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V. and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to
        Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home
        Agents", RFC 3776, June 2004.

   [5]  Devarapalli, V., "Mobile IPv6 Operation with IKEv2 and the
        revised IPsec Architecture", draft-ietf-mip6-ikev2-ipsec-00
        (work in progress), October 2004.

   [6]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol",
        draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-17 (work in progress), October 2004.

10.2  Informative References

   [7]   Narten, T. and R. Draves, "Privacy Extensions for Stateless
         Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 3041, January 2001.

   [8]   Aboba, B. and M. Beadles, "The Network Access Identifier", RFC
         2486, January 1999.

   [9]   Kempf, J. and J. Arkko, "The Mobile IPv6 Bootstrapping
         Problem", draft-kempf-mip6-bootstrap-00 (work in progress),
         March 2004.

   [10]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfeld, B., Zill, B. and P. Nikander,
         "SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", draft-ietf-send-ndopt-06
         (work in progress), July 2004.

   [11]  Eronen, P., "Extension for EAP Authentication in IKEv2",
         draft-eronen-ipsec-ikev2-eap-auth-02 (work in progress),
         October 2004.

   [12]  Giaretta, G., "MIPv6 Authorization and Configuration based on
         EAP", draft-giaretta-mip6-authorization-eap-02 (work in
         progress), October 2004.



Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


   [13]  Anton, B., Bullock, B. and J. Short, "Best Current Practices
         for Wireless Service Provider (WISP) Roaming", Feb. 2003,
         <http://www.wifialliance.org/OpenSection/downloads/wispr_v1.0.p
         df>.


Authors' Addresses

   James Kempf
   DoCoMo Labs USA
   181 Metro Drive
   Suite 300
   San Jose, CA, 95110
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 451 4711
   EMail: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com


   Erik Nordmark
   Sun Microsystems
   17 Network Circle
   Menlo Park, CA 95025
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 786 2921
   EMail: erik.nordmark@sun.com


   Samita Chakrabarti
   Sun Microsystems Inc.
   16 Network Circle
   Menlo Park, CA  95024
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 786 5068
   EMail: samita.chakrabarti@sun.com














Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    BMIP                     December 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Kempf, et al.             Expires June 3, 2005                 [Page 19]


