

Internet Engineering Task Force                             SIPPING WG 
Internet Draft                                              D. Trossen 
                                                        Nokia Research 
                                                        H. Schulzrinne 
                                                   Columbia University 
draft-trossen-sipping-ondemand-00.txt                 20. October 2003 
                                                   Expires: April 2004 
 
 
        On-Demand Access Authorization for SIP Event Subscriptions 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2003). All rights reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document will describe the problem and possible solution space 
   for a so-called Êon-demand access authorization for SIP event 
   subscriptions∆. The objective of this document is to properly 
   describe the particular problem, define requirements for solutions 
   to this problem, and outline possible solutions. With this, the 
   document intends to drive the standardization of one method forward 
   in order to provide a common solution to the presented problem. 









     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [1] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................3 
   2. Terminology.....................................................3 
   3. Problem Space...................................................4 
   3.1. Use Cases.....................................................4 
   3.1.1. Location Scenarios..........................................4 
   3.1.2. Content Delivery Scenarios..................................5 
   3.1.3. Service Discovery in Visitor Environment....................5 
   3.1.4. Match Making Service........................................5 
   3.1.5. Context-aware Gaming........................................6 
   4. The Role of (XCAP) Authorization Policies.......................6 
   5. Requirements....................................................7 
   6. Solution Space..................................................8 
   6.1. Authorization Policy Server Transactions......................8 
   6.2. Temporary Account.............................................9 
   6.2.1 Temporary Account with Time Window...........................9 
   6.3. Ticket.......................................................10 
   6.4. Message Authentication.......................................11 
   7. Security Considerations........................................12 
   8. Acknowledgements...............................................12 
   9. References.....................................................12 
   10. Authors' Addresses............................................13 



























     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [2] 




Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Access authorization for SIP event subscriptions is crucial due to 
   the highly private nature of information revealed in the resulting 
   notifications. Work is ongoing within the SIMPLE and GEOPRIV working 
   groups to define authorization policies for certain use cases [5][7] 
   as well as the protocol for defining, conveying, and managing such 
   policies [4][6]. This work is based on the proper definition of 
   access policies for a set of users related to a set of information. 
   Upon reception of a SIP SUBSCRIBE, it is assumed that the SIP event 
   server verifies the access policy for the particular subscriber with 
   respect to the requested information, using the stored policy 
   information. Hence, at the time of receiving the SIP SUBSCRIBE at 
   the SIP event server, the existence of a proper policy for the 
   particular access is assumed. 
    
   In this document, we will outline a problem referred to as Êon-
   demand access∆, i.e., a type of access for which a proper 
   authorization policy does not exist at the time of access due to the 
   ad-hoc character of the access. We will present use cases in which 
   such Êon-demand access∆ will happen. We will then outline the 
   solution space as to address this problem.  
    
   The objective of this document is to properly describe particular 
   problem, define requirements for solutions to this problem, and 
   outline possible solutions. With this, the document intends to drive 
   the standardization of one method forward in order to provide a 
   common solution to the presented problem. 
    
    
2. Terminology 
    
   Resource:  A resource in the scope of this document is an object to  
      which a certain state information is associated, called Êresource    
      data∆ in the remainder of the document. Examples are presence as  
      a resource belonging to the presentity. The resource data is the  
      current presence information (subject to the particular  
      disclosure policy of the presentity). Resources can also be  
      associated to devices, such as printers, in which the resource  
      data represents, for instance, the current state of the printer.  
    
   Resource data provider:  An element that hosts a particular piece of 
      resource data. Examples are SIP event servers, which host event  
      data related to a particular user, e.g., presence event data. 
    
   Querier:  An element, such as an application or service, that  
      requests access to a particular piece of resource data. Examples    
      are watchers in SIP presence or subscribers for any SIP events. 
    
   Resource owner:  An entity that has authorization power over the  
      particular resource data. Examples are presentities in SIP  
      presence.   
    
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [3] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
    
3. Problem Space 
    
   With the defined terminology of Section 2, consider a resource data 
   provider, a querier, and a resource owner.  
    
   The querier desires (temporary) access to the particular resource 
   (or particular parts of the resource) at the resource data provider, 
   without having the resource owner to create or modify state 
   information for such access at the resource data provider. In this, 
   the desire for access is somehow conveyed from the querier towards 
   the resource owner. The temporary access can be time-limited or 
   limited in notifications (such as time window based, one-time or N-
   time notifications).  
    
   The following additional constraints might occur: 
     * The identity of the querier might not be known to the resource  
       owner before the desire for access is conveyed towards the  
       resource owner.  
     * The type of access, i.e., the resource as such as well as the  
       resource data, might not be known to the resource owner before  
       the desire for access is conveyed towards the resource owner. 
     * The conveyance of the desire to access the resource data and the  
       actual access might lie within a rather short time window.  
    
   The problem to be solved is to enable an authorized access to the 
   desired resource by the querier at the resource data provider. 
    
   In the case of SIP event subscriptions, the resource data provider 
   is a SIP event server, the querier is the subscriber (or watcher in 
   presence [3]), and the resource owner is the presentity in the 
   presence case. The desired access constitutes a (properly 
   authorized) SIP event subscription to the particular resource. In 
   this, it is worth mentioning that such access is not restricted to 
   currently discussed presence items only [9][10] rather than to any 
   kind of (future) presence items or SIP events in general. 
    
   It is beyond the scope of this document as to how the querier 
   conveys the desire for access to the resource owner. A variety of 
   methods, such as within an HTTP or SOAP transaction between querier 
   and resource owner (see also the following use cases), are possible 
   for such conveyance.  
    
3.1. Use Cases 
    
   The following section outlines use cases for the above described on-
   demand access authorization problem.  
    
3.1.1. Location Scenarios 
    
   Consider the provisioning of location-based services from a service 
   provider (the querier) to a user (the resource owner).  
    
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [4] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
   As one example, the user desires to obtain location-based data from 
   the service provider, such as map information for the current 
   location of the user. For that, the service provider needs a one-
   time access in order to fetch the current location information of 
   the user.  
    
   As another example, the user subscribes to a location-based service 
   at the provider. In order to perform the requested service, the 
   service provider requires permission to obtain the user∆s current 
   location information with a particular granularity for a certain 
   time period, e.g., 10 minutes. 
    
3.1.2. Content Delivery Scenarios 
    
   Consider the delivery of content, such as news, that is dependent on 
   certain presence items. In order to perform the adaptation, the 
   content provider needs to access these presence items for the time 
   of the content delivery (which can be rather temporary in cases 
   where the content was found during surfing the Internet).  
    
   Examples for such presence items are location, activity, or 
   placetype [10](to distinguish business-related from more private 
   news or select appropriate content if in public places).  
    
   Although not defined (yet), one could also envision the usage of 
   affective information, e.g., the user∆s current mood, to deliver 
   appropriate content.  
    
3.1.3. Service Discovery in Visitor Environment 
    
   Consider the problem of service discovery in visitor environments, 
   i.e., the requesting user and the service discovery system are not 
   known to each other before engaging in transactions.  
    
   In this, we assume that the discovery service allows for service 
   selection based on user information such as current location (based 
   on an indoor system), activity, currently used communication device 
   and so on.  
    
   For this, the discovery service requires an on-demand access to this 
   information of the user, in which the actual access being 
   implemented through SIP event subscriptions.  
    
3.1.4. Match Making Service 
    
   Consider a match making service, locally provided within a point of 
   interest, such as an amusement park, a mall or a bar. Upon arriving 
   at the point of interest, the user receives the service announcement 
   and subscribes to the service (during this service subscription, the 
   provisioning of the user profile might happen as well).  
    
   In order to perform the desired match making, the service provider 
   might require access to certain user information, such as location 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [5] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
   within the point of interest (if the place is larger) or current 
   activity.  
    
3.1.5. Context-aware Gaming 
    
   Multi-player gaming experience can be enriched by user∆s context 
   information such as location of the players or even aggregated 
   sensor information (e.g., information such as Êstanding∆, Êwalking∆, 
   Êrunning∆ that was derived from sensor data), potentially provided 
   through (enriched) presence or dedicated SIP events.  
    
   Further, such games could be established between a-priori unknown 
   parties (ad-hoc gaming in point-of-interest for instance) but could 
   also require a-priori unknown set of information from either player. 
    
   Hence, upon starting the game, each player requires access 
   authorization for this particular set of information from each of 
   the other players for the duration of the game (if the duration of 
   the game is unknown, the authorization can be renewed before 
   expiring).  
    
4. The Role of (XCAP) Authorization Policies 
    
   The SIMPLE working group is current developing XCAP [4] as a 
   solution to define and convey authorization policies for presence 
   events. This system assumes an XCAP policy server to be consulted 
   prior to granting access to the requested resource in the SIP event 
   subscription [11]. In this, note that such protocol for consulting, 
   i.e., the communication between presence server and XCAP server, has 
   not yet been defined. 
    
   However, within the above defined problem space, such existence of 
   an XCAP server for authorization cannot generally be assumed for two 
   reasons. Firstly, XCAP currently only defines authorization policies 
   for presence document items. It does not define access authorization 
   for general SIP events (although the underlying XML schema is likely 
   to support this), and currently there does not exist any work item 
   within the IETF to do so for general SIP events.  
    
   Secondly, the assumption of the existence of an authorization server 
   [11] as such, to be consulted in the case of receiving a presence 
   subscription, cannot easily be transferred to SIP events in general. 
   In contrast to SIP presence, general SIP events could be hosted by a 
   much wider variety of service providers, and even through end user 
   systems themselves. The proper integration of such a diverse system 
   of SIP event servers into an XCAP-based framework is unlikely to 
   happen. 
    
   Hence, for the remainder of this document, we have to keep in mind 
   that the existence of such authorization server is not a given fact, 
   rather than an option only, and a rather unlikely one for general 
   SIP events. 
    
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [6] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
5. Requirements 
    
   From the outlined problem and the presented use cases, we derive the 
   following requirements to be fulfilled by any solution: 
    
   REQ 1: A solution MUST allow for specifying the particular pieces of  
          resource data to which access is granted. 
    
   REQ 2: A solution MUST allow for verifying the identity of the  
          resource owner in the authorization. 
    
   REQ 3: A solution MUST prevent replay attacks of access  
          authorization information through the querier or third  
          parties. 
    
   REQ 4: A solution SHOULD allow for specifying a time window of  
          access, either relatively (starting with the time of  
          subscription) or absolutely. 
    
   REQ 5: A solution SHOULD allow for tying the access to a particular  
          querier, if so desired by the resource owner. 
    
   REQ 6: A solution SHOULD allow for restricting the notifications the  
          querier will receive within the access period.  
    
   REQ 7: A solution SHOULD avoid racing conditions in the access to  
          the resource data in the sense that the querier will not  
          subscribe to the resource data before proper authorization is  
          ensured. 
    
   REQ 8: Any authorization information SHOULD be transmitted in a  
          secure manner. 
    
   REQ 9: [Something about additional complexity/involved transactions  
          of a solution?] 
    
   Requirements 1 and 2 ensure as a minimal functionality that the 
   particular pieces to access are well defined in the authorization 
   and that the identity of the resource owner can be verified as the 
   identity that granted the access. 
    
   Requirement 3 targets unwanted resource access through re-using the 
   access authorization, either through the querier or third parties 
   (handing the information after usage to someone else).  
    
   Requirement 4 aims at supporting scenarios such as in Section 3.1.1, 
   in which the querier has time-restricted access to the resource. 
    
   Requirement 5 targets the transferability of the authorization. 
   However, the fulfillment of this requirement is only useful in 
   certain scenarios. For instance, if the resource data were certain 
   presence items, tying the access to the querier (the watcher in this 
   case) would still allow the querier to act as a strawman, i.e., the 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [7] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
   watcher could simply pass the very same presence items to someone 
   else who could even be explicitly excluded from the access. In 
   scenarios though, in which the resource data is associated with some 
   kind of physical resource, tying the access to the particular 
   querier is highly desirable. However, such support of prohibiting 
   authorization transfer will most likely highly influence a final 
   solution.  
    
   Requirement 6 aims at supporting cases such in Section 3.1.1 in 
   which one-time access (or generally N-time access, in which N can be 
   defined through the resource owner) is granted to the querier. 
    
   Requirement 7 aims at ensuring that services using such kind of Êon-
   demand access authorization∆ will not have to deal with race 
   conditions that are imposed by the access granting process. 
    
   Requirement 8 targets unwanted access disclosure to third parties. 
    
6. Solution Space 
    
   This section gives an overview of possible solutions for the 
   presented problem. These possible solutions are presented on a 
   rather functional level, appreciating that dedicated solutions can 
   be found in each of the presented solution categories. 
    
6.1. Authorization Policy Server Transactions 
    
   The first category relies on the existence of a server that hosts 
   appropriate authorization policies for the resource data. Such 
   server is consulted prior to the actual granting of access through 
   the resource data provider. The work around XCAP [4][11] defines 
   such system as well as the appropriate protocols and application 
   usages. In the following, we will use XCAP as an exemplary 
   implementation of this solution category. 
    
   XCAP in general allows for solving the on-demand access 
   authorization by having the resource owner set the appropriate 
   access policy for the particular access at the XCAP server using 
   appropriate XCAP transactions. However, this requires the existence 
   of an appropriate XML schema within XCAP for the particular SIP 
   event or presence item. 
    
   These XCAP transactions have to happen during the conveyance of the 
   querier∆s desire for access prior to the actual subscription. This 
   needs proper synchronization with the transaction during which the 
   desire is conveyed in order to avoid that the querier sends the 
   subscription before the appropriate authorization setting has been 
   finalized. 
    
   Due to the ad-hoc character of the access, it is likely that the 
   resource owner would like to have the authorization removed after 
   the actual service transaction, e.g., after the location service (as 
   outlined in Section 3.2.1.) has been provided to the resource owner. 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [8] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
   This requires another set of XCAP transactions after the service 
   provisioning took place. 
    
   However, as already outlined in Section 3.1., while the existence of 
   an XCAP-like system is likely in SIP presence, its existence for 
   general SIP events is rather unlikely, in particular if we envision 
   the provisioning of SIP event based services by a larger diversity 
   of service providers than in the SIP presence case.  
    
6.2. Temporary Account 
    
   Temporary accounts could be used to some extent for on-demand access 
   authorization of a-priori unknown identities. For that, it is 
   assumed that proper authorization policies exist for each temporary 
   account, which has been created by the resource owner. This of 
   course also assumes an XCAP-like authorization system (see Section 
   3.1.) to be in place. 
    
   The credentials for a particular temporary account could then be 
   conveyed from the resource owner to the querier, which in turn uses 
   the credentials for access of the particular data.  
    
   In order to end the access period, the resource owner needs to 
   explicitly revoke the access authorization at some point after the 
   access period, requiring appropriate XCAP transactions for the 
   particular temporary account.  
    
   The creation of temporary accounts though puts a certain burden on 
   the resource data provider due to the required maintenance of the 
   additional temporary accounts. Further, the temporary accounts needs 
   to be incorporated in the authorization policies, involving the XCAP 
   server. This becomes even more critical since, depending on the 
   particular use case, the resource owner might not want to re-use the 
   temporary account (since a previous querier could use the 
   credentials to gain access even after the desired access period). In 
   that case, the particular temporary account needs to be removed 
   together with the authorization policy. 
    
   For a-priori unknown information, it is required to set appropriate 
   authorization policies through XCAP before the actual subscription, 
   folding this into the XCAP transactions case of Section 4.1. 
    
6.2.1 Temporary Account with Time Window 
    
   Temporary accounts, as described above, could also be associated 
   with time windows of validity to solve the re-use problem. The 
   resource owner is then responsible to provide the appropriate 
   credentials for the desired time window of access.  
    
   TO BE DISCUSSED: 
     * such techniques usually work with fixed time windows, posing a  
       problem for arbitrary lengths of access periods. This would  

     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                       [9] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
       require re-provisioning with appropriate credentials for the  
       next time window. [IS THIS CORRECT?] 
     * How would the problem be solved to define appropriate  
       authorization policies for time window based identities in XCAP?  
    
    
6.3. Ticket 
    
   Tickets can be seen as a temporary account with assigned 
   authorization policies for a particular querier.  
    
   The resource owner, after having received the necessary information 
   to be accessed, creates a ticket with a trusted Êticket server∆ (the 
   ticket server could be co-located with the resource data provider or 
   it could be a separate entity). This ticket is associated with the 
   particular information that is intended to be accessed, i.e., 
   resource owner has to specify this information towards the ticket 
   server. Further, an identifier is included to prevent re-usage of 
   the ticket. The resource owner might include the querier∆s 
   identifier if the access is intended to be bound to the particular 
   querier. The ticket could also be bound to a certain time window, 
   which would have to be specified by the resource owner in the ticket 
   creation. The resource owner then conveys the ticket towards the 
   querier, which in turn includes the ticket in the subscription 
   towards the resource data provider.  
    
   Upon reception of the subscription, the resource data provider needs 
   to verify the ticket. In this, the resource data provider needs to 
   verify that the ticket is associated with the specified information 
   in the querier∆s subscription. This requires appropriate extraction 
   of the subscription data and conveyance of the information, together 
   with the ticket, to the ticket server. Other information to be 
   included could be the querier∆s identity. If the ticket is indeed 
   valid and associated to the provided information, the ticket server 
   responds positively, and the subscription can be granted. 
    
   The described method requires appropriate protocols for ticket 
   creation (between resource owner and ticket server) and verification 
   (between resource data provider and ticket server) to be defined. It 
   further requires extensions to SIP SUBSCRIBE in the sense that the 
   SIP event server processing has to take into account the embedding 
   of the ticket information in the SIP SUBSCRIBE body.  
    
   Even though the ticket-based approach does not require an XCAP-like 
   authorization server, it still introduces a new logical component, 
   namely the ticket server, with which the resource data provider 
   needs to have a trust relationship. In case the ticket server is not 
   co-located with the resource data provider, similar arguments as in 
   Section 3.1. apply regarding the likelihood of having such kind of 
   system in place for arbitrary SIP events. 
    
   As related work, [13] describes a ticket-based scheme for obtaining 
   location information. 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                      [10] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
    
6.4. Message Authentication 
    
   In our assumptions and description of the problem space in Section 
   3, we assumed that the resource owner obtained knowledge of the 
   resource information to which the querier desires access.  
    
   Based on this knowledge, the following message authentication scheme 
   can be used for granting access. This method is similar to the 
   ÊPGPticket∆ scheme [8], although applied in this case to SIP event 
   subscriptions and not necessarily using PGP only.  
    
   After receiving the information from the querier regarding the 
   desired access, the resource owner formulates a message back to the 
   querier. This message includes, similar to the ticket approach: 
     * information regarding the desired access, such as presence items  
       or SIP event package names or other event-specific information,  
       based on the obtained resource information from the querier. 
     * an identifier that prevents re-usage of the message (Could be  
       a simple sequence number, which is increased with each granted  
       access. Such sequence number exists for each resource owner and  
       is maintained at the resource data provider) 
     * identity of the querier, if the permission is bound to the  
       querier. 
     * time window of access, i.e., start and/or end time of validity  
       of the access, if the permission is restricted in time. 
    
   The resource owner then signs the message appropriately (using 
   either public key mechanisms or shared secrets ˚ it is assumed that 
   the shared secret between resource owner and resource data provider 
   was established prior to the transaction), and sends the message 
   towards the querier. Note that this conveyance back depends on the 
   general nature of the transaction between the querier and resource 
   owner, during which the desire for access has been formulated. This 
   could be, for instance, an HTTP transaction. 
    
   The querier then embeds the signed payload within the SIP SUBSCRIBE 
   message that is sent towards the resource data provider, i.e., the 
   SIP event server.  
    
   Upon reception, the SIP event server (resource data provider) 
   extracts the payload and verifies the authenticity of the payload. 
   Apart from verifying the authenticity, checks could be required 
   regarding the identity of the querier, the time window of access, 
   and the desired information to be accessed, depending on the 
   inclusion of the corresponding information within the signed payload 
   (see above). For that, the SIP SUBSCRIBE processing within SIP event 
   servers needs to be extended, compared to RFC 3265 [12]. 
    
   If the authenticity of the SIP SUBSCRIBE payload has been verified 
   positively, the SIP event server grants access to the corresponding 
   resources, i.e., it positively confirms the subscription according 
   to [12]. 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                      [11] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   A solution for the problem described in this document shall allow 
   for granting access in ad-hoc authorization scenarios as described 
   in Section 3.1. In this, any solution should allow for  
     * defining all relevant resource information in the authorization, 
     * tying the access to a particular querier, if so desired by the  
       resource owner, 
     * preventing re-usage of the authorization through the querier or  
       third parties, 
     * preventing disclosure of the authorization to third parties 
     * tying the access to a particular (relative or absolute) time  
       window, if so desired by the resource owner, and 
     * verifying the identity of the resource owner. 
    
   These security considerations have been identified and are addressed 
   within the defined requirements of Section 5. 
   In addition, mechanisms should be in place that allow for revoking 
   any granted authorization even before the expiration of the defined 
   time window (if it was defined). However, such revocation mechanism 
   has been left out of this document as an optional mechanism.  
    
8. Acknowledgements 
    
   The authors would like to thank Dana Pavel and Chris Newman for 
   their input. 
    
9. References 
    
   [1]  H. Sugano, S. Fujimoto, et al., "Presence information data 
        format (PIDF)," Internet draft, Internet Engineering Task 
        Force, May 2003. Work in progress. 

   [2]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement 
        levels," RFC 2119, Internet Engineering Task Force, March 1997. 

   [3]  J. Rosenberg, "A presence event package for the session 
        initiation protocol (SIP)," Internet draft, Internet 
        Engineering Task Force, Jan. 2003. Work in progress. 

   [4]  J. Rosenberg, "The Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
        Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)", Internet Draft, Internet   
        Engineering Task Force, (work in progress), May 2003. 

   [5]  J. Rosenberg, "An Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
        Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP) Usage for Presence Lists", 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, (work in 
        progress), May 2003. 

   [6]  J. Rosenberg, "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event 
        Package for Modification Events for the Extensible Markup 
        Language (XML) Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP) Managed 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                      [12] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
        Documents", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
        (work in progress), May 2003. 

   [7]  H. Tschofenig et al., "Location Object Authorization Policies", 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, (work in 
        progress), August 2003. 

   [8]  V. Moscaritolo, A. Mione, "PGPticket", Internet Draft 
        (expired), Internet Engineering Task Force, August 1999. 

   [9]  H. Sugano, S. Fujimoto, et al., "Presence information data 
        format(PIDF)", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
        (work in progress), May 2003. 

   [10] H. Schulzrinne (ed.), "RPID -- Rich Presence Information Data 
        Format", Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, (work 
        in progress), July 2003. 

   [11] J. Rosenberg, M. Isomaki, "Requirements for Manipulation of 
        Data Elements in Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Instant 
        Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions (SIMPLE) Systems", 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, (work in 
        progress), April 2003. 

   [12] A. Roach, "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event 
        Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002. 

   [13] C. Newman, ÙPawn Ticket based Access to Location Informationˆ, 
        Presentation at 57th IETF meeting, Vienna, July 2003. 


10. Authors' Addresses 
    
   Dirk Trossen 
   Nokia Research 
   5 Wayside Road              
   Burlington, MA 02474 USA      
   Email:  dirk.trossen@nokia.com 
    
   Henning Schulzrinne 
   Dept. of Computer Science 
   Columbia University 
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue 
   New York, NY 10027 USA 
   Email: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu 
    







     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                      [13] 

Internet Draft On-Demand Authorization for SUBSCRIBE    October 2003 
    
    
   Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 

    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
  Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
     
Trossen, Schulzrinne     Expires April 2004                      [14] 

