


Network Working Group                                     R. Rahman, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended status: BCP                                   November 14, 2008
Expires: May 18, 2009


                IP Router Alert Considerations and Usage
            draft-rahman-rtg-router-alert-considerations-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 18, 2009.


















Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


Abstract

   The IP Router Alert Option is an IP option that alerts transit
   routers to more closely examine the contents of an IP packet.  RSVP,
   PGM and IGMP are some of the protocols which make use of the IP
   Router Alert option.  This document discusses security aspects and
   common practices around the use of router alert and discusses
   consequences on the use of router alert by existing or new
   applications.  Common practices in router alert implementation
   facilitating router protection are also discussed.  Finally a
   possible enhancement to the current specification of Router Alert is
   presented for feedback.


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Guidelines for use of Router Alert . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Reliance on Router Alert by Applications . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  When Consenting Adults Exchange IP Router Alert Packets  .  6
   4.  Example Protection Mechanisms in a Router Alert
       Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  Handling Packets Carrying the Router Alert Option  . . . .  9
     4.2.  Applying Rate Limiting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  Router Alert in Congested Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.4.  Handling Unknown Payload Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  A New Filtering Mechanism to Select IP RAO
                Packets of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21












Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


1.  Terminology

   For readability, this document uses the following loosely defined
   terms:

   o  Slow path : Software processing path for packets

   o  Fast path : ASIC/Hardware processing path for packets











































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


2.  Introduction

   [RFC2113] and [RFC2711] respectively define the IPv4 and IPv6 Router
   Alert Option.  In this document, we collectively refer to those as
   the IP Router Alert option.  RSVP ([RFC2205], [RFC3209]), PGM
   ([RFC3208]) and IGMP ([RFC3376]) are some of the protocols which make
   use of the IP Router Alert option.  Those protocols are used to
   support critical elements of the Internet infrastructure (e.g.
   RSVP-TE for traffic engineering within a service provider network)
   and as such they need to be protected.

   IP datagrams carrying the IP Router Alert option are usually examined
   in a router's "slow path" and an excess of such datagrams can cause
   performance degradation or packet drops in a router's "slow path".
   (Note that a router's "slow path" can also be attacked with IP
   packets destined to one of the router's local IP addresses.)

   [RFC4081] and [RFC2711] mention the security risks associated with
   the use of the IP Router Alert option: flooding a router with bogus
   IP datagrams which contain the IP Router Alert option would cause a
   performance degradation of the router's "slow path" and can also lead
   to packet drops in the "slow path".

   [RFC2711] mentions that limiting, by rate or some other means, the
   use of Router Alert option is a way of protecting against a potential
   attack.  However, if rate limiting is used as a protection mechanism
   but if the granularity of the rate limiting is not fine enough to
   distinguish among router alert packet of interest from unwanted
   router alert packet, a router alert attack could still severely
   degrade operation of protocols of interest that depend on the use of
   IP Router Alert.  Section 4 discusses examples of protection
   mechanisms that may be available from a router implementation of the
   IP router alert.

   In some environments where it was not possible to accurately and
   reliably distinguish between router alert packet of interest and
   unwanted router alert packets, operators have resorted to actively
   protecting themselves against externally generated router alert
   packets in ways that result in end to end router alert packets being
   (occasionally or systematically) dropped and/or ignored on a segment.
   The consequences of such practises on the use of router alert by
   existing or new applications are discussed in Section 3 of the
   present document.  This section also discusses environments where IP
   router alert can be used effectively.

   This document also discusses in Appendix A a possible enhancements to
   the current specification of Router Alert to ensure that risks
   associated with unintentional interception of packets that are not of



Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


   real interest to a given router are minimized (if not eliminated) by
   facilitating identification in the fast path of the subset of packets
   with router alert that are of interest to the router.  The objective
   of this appendix is to solicit feedback on the question of whether an
   enhancement to the current router alert specification is justified,
   and if yes, how to enhance it.

2.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].







































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


3.  Guidelines for use of Router Alert

3.1.  Reliance on Router Alert by Applications

   As mentioned earlier, some networks actively protect themselves
   against externally generated router alert packets.  This may be by
   tunneling router alert packets [I-D.dasmith-mpls-ip-options] so that
   the router alert option is hidden through that network or it may be
   via mechanisms resulting in occasional (e.g. rate limiting) or
   systematic drop of router alert packets.

   Also, application protocols are usually carried within IP by a
   transport protocol such as UDP, TCP, or SCTP.  In these cases, the
   application protocol is not visible in the IP header and could not be
   determined without further "deep packet" inspection.  In the event of
   the Router Alert option being used for an application protocol
   carried in a transport protocol, the intercepted IP packet would be
   delivered to the transport protocol for processing in accordance with
   [RFC2113].  However, the behavior of the transport protocol in these
   circumstances is not defined, and may cause rejection of the packet
   for various reasons.

   As a consequence, in the general case of open networks, applications
   can not safely rely on router alert packets being visible to all
   nodes on the path today, and importantly can not even rely on router
   alert packets being transported end to end.

   [RFC2113] implies that the router may examine other fields of a
   received packet that contains the IP Router Alert option to decide
   whether that packet needs further processing, but no further advice
   is given.  Examination of other fields of the received IP packet that
   carries the Router Alert to help determine what to do with the packet
   would result in implementation-specific behavior that is
   unpredictable to the sender of the packet.  Therefore applications
   cannot depend on router alert interception involving inspection of
   fields in the packet outside the IP header.

   Thus, creating an application or end-to-end protocol that uses the IP
   Router Alert is currently considered harmful and is strongly
   discouraged.  A different mechanism should be used to decrease the
   risk of impacting existing protocols that use the IP Router Alert
   option.

3.2.  When Consenting Adults Exchange IP Router Alert Packets

   In some controlled environments, the network administrator can
   determine that IP router alert packets will only be received from
   trusted well-behaved devices or can establish that the protection



Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


   mechanisms discussed in the present document against the plausible
   RAO- based DoS attacks (e.g.  RAO filtering and rate-limiting) are
   sufficient.  In that case, an application relying on exchange and
   handling of RAO packets (e.g.  RSVP) may be safely deployed within
   the controlled network.  In other words, a network that feels
   appropriately protected against the risks associated with his
   environment, may decide to freely and openly partake in router alert
   message exchange with consenting entities.  A private enterprise
   network firewalled from the Internet may be an example of such
   controlled environment.

   In some environments, the network administrator can reliably ensure
   that IP router alert packets from any untrusted device (e.g. from
   external routers) are prevented from entering a trusted area (e.g.
   the internal routers).  For example, this may be achieved by ensuring
   that routers straddling the trust boundary (e.g. edge routers) always
   encapsulate those packets (without Router Alert) through the trusted
   area (as discussed in [I-D.dasmith-mpls-ip-options]).  In such
   environments, the risks of DOS attacks through the IP router alert
   vector is removed in the trusted area (or greatly reduced) even if IP
   router alert is used inside the trusted area (say for RSVP).  Thus an
   application relying on Router Alert may be safely deployed within the
   trusted area.  In other words, the network protects itself from the
   risks of partaking in IP Router-Alert exchange with strangers but
   feels free to exchange router alert messages among trusted parties.
   A Service Provider running RSVP-TE in his network may be an example
   of such protected environment.

   When a controlled environment requires RAO packet exchange across his
   routers for some application (e.g.  RSVP) and transits via a Service
   Provider network (that is not part of the controlled environment),
   the administrator of the controlled environment needs to ensure with
   the Service Provider that the router alert messages will not be
   dropped when transiting the Service Provider network.  In other
   words, the network ought to ensure that another network that needs to
   be involved in exchange of router alert packet is consenting.

   Since some existing applications would benefit from end-to-end
   transport of router alert packets, it is desirable that a Service
   Provider protects his network from attacks based on router alert
   using mechanisms that minimize dropping of end to end router alert
   packets.  For example, using protection mechanisms such as those
   described in Section 4 a Service Provider can safely protect
   operation of a protocol depending on router alert within his network
   (e.g.  RSVP-TE) while at the same time safely transporting router
   alert packets carrying another protocol that may be used end to end.
   As another example, using mechanisms such as those discussed in
   [I-D.dasmith-mpls-ip-options] a Service Provider can safely protect



Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


   operation of a protocol depending on router alert within his network
   (e.g.  RSVP-TE) while at the same time safely transporting router
   alert packets carrying another protocol that may be used end to end
   (e.g.  RSVP IPv4/6).

   Where the Service Provider cannot transport end to end router alert
   packets over his network (i.e. they choose to drop them), it is
   desirable that the Service Provider carry these packets through their
   network and remove the IP router alert option from the IP header on
   ingress/receipt of the packet.  This ensures that at least the packet
   will make it through the Service Provider network allowing the packet
   to be intercepted via other means than the IP router alert.

   Where the Service Provider does not ensure transport of router alert
   packets for an end to end protocol of interest to a Service Provider
   user, the user may remove the IP router alert option from the IP
   header before sending the packet to the Service Provider and may then
   intercept the packet on the other side using some other interception
   technique (and then possibly restore the IP Router alert option).

   The authors of this document are seeking feedback on whether some of
   the practices discussed in this section ought to be elevated to BCP
   requirements or recommendations.




























Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


4.  Example Protection Mechanisms in a Router Alert Implementation

   Implementations of Router Alert on routers generally include
   mechanisms for protection against the associated security risk.  This
   section provides examples of behaviors that may be supported by
   router implementations to help protect the router.  The authors are
   seeking feedback about whether such mechanisms (or a subset/superset
   of those) ought to be elevated to BCP requirements and
   recommendations instead of simply described as examples.

4.1.  Handling Packets Carrying the Router Alert Option

   o  a router implementation may elect to perform packet inspection to
      see whether they carry the Router Alert option in the "fast path".
      This avoids punting all packets to the slow path when the router
      is interested in some router alert packets.

   o  a router implementation may elect to not send to the "slow path"
      IP packets carrying the Router Alert option unless router alert
      interception is explicitly enabled on the router (or interface).
      This avoids punting any router alert packet when the router is not
      interested in any of those.

   o  a router implementation may elect to not send to the "slow path"
      IP packets carrying the Router Alert option unless there is at
      least one protocol explicitly enabled on the router (or interface)
      which is defined to use the IP Router Alert option.  This avoids
      punting any router alert packet when the router is not interested
      in any of those.

   o  a router implementation may elect to allow configuration of which
      protocol is "of interest" for the Router Alert option interception
      (on router or interface level).  The router implementation may
      then elect to not send packets carrying the Router Alert option to
      the "slow path" unless the payload protocol carried in the packet
      is configured as "protocol of interest".  This avoids punting
      router alert packet carrying a protocol in which the router is not
      interested.

4.2.  Applying Rate Limiting

   o  a router implementation may elect to support (in the fast path)
      rate limiting of the number of Router Alert IP datagrams (e.g. at
      router or interface level) which go to the "slow path".  The
      benefits of rate limiting is described in [RFC2711].

   o  a router implementation may elect to support (in the fast path)
      separate rate limiting per payload protocol.  This allows one



Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


      protocol relying on router alert to be protected from DOS attacks
      using router alert with a different protocol.

4.3.  Router Alert in Congested Systems

   o  a router implementation may elect to support selective dropping of
      packets carrying the Router Alert option (rather than pass them to
      the "slow path") in preference to dropping other control plane
      packets, in the face of control plane congestion.  This protects
      other control plane protocols from router alert attacks.

4.4.  Handling Unknown Payload Protocols

   If an IP packet contains the Router Alert option, but the payload
   protocol is not explicitly identified as a Payload of interest by the
   router examining the packet, the behavior is not defined by
   [RFC2113].  However, the definition of RSVP in [RFC2205] assumes that
   the packet will be forwarded using normal forwarding based on the
   destination IP address.

   o  a router implementation may elect to forward within the "fast
      path" (subject to all normal policies and forwarding rules) a
      packet carrying the Router Alert option containing a payload that
      is not a payload of interest to that router.  The "not passing"
      behavior protects the router from DOS attacks using router alert
      packets of a protocol unknown to the router.  The "forwarding"
      behavior contributes to transparent end to end transport of router
      alert packets (e.g. to facilitate their use by end to end
      application).






















Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


5.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses security risks associated with current usage
   of the IP Router Alert Option and associated practices.















































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


6.  IANA Considerations

   None.
















































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


7.  Contributors

   The contributors to this document (in addition to the editors) are:

   o  David Ward:

      *  Cisco Systems

      *  wardd@cisco.com

   o  Francois Le Faucheur:

      *  Cisco Systems

      *  flefauch@cisco.com

   o  Ashok Narayanan:

      *  Cisco Systems

      *  ashokn@cisco.com

   o  Adrian Farrell:

      *  OldDog Consulting

      *  adrian@olddog.co.uk

   o  Tony Li:

      *  tony.li@tony.li




















Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


8.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Dave Oran, Magnus Westerlund, John Scudder,
   Ron Bonica and Ross Callon for their comments.















































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              September 1981.

   [RFC2113]  Katz, D., "IP Router Alert Option", RFC 2113,
              February 1997.

   [RFC2711]  Partridge, C. and A. Jackson, "IPv6 Router Alert Option",
              RFC 2711, October 1999.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.dasmith-mpls-ip-options]
              Jaeger, W., Mullooly, J., Scholl, T., and D. Smith,
              "Requirements for Label Edge Router Forwarding of IPv4
              Option Packets", draft-dasmith-mpls-ip-options-01 (work in
              progress), October 2008.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [RFC3175]  Baker, F., Iturralde, C., Le Faucheur, F., and B. Davie,
              "Aggregation of RSVP for IPv4 and IPv6 Reservations",
              RFC 3175, September 2001.

   [RFC3208]  Speakman, T., Crowcroft, J., Gemmell, J., Farinacci, D.,
              Lin, S., Leshchiner, D., Luby, M., Montgomery, T., Rizzo,
              L., Tweedly, A., Bhaskar, N., Edmonstone, R.,
              Sumanasekera, R., and L. Vicisano, "PGM Reliable Transport
              Protocol Specification", RFC 3208, December 2001.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC4081]  Tschofenig, H. and D. Kroeselberg, "Security Threats for
              Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS)", RFC 4081, June 2005.



Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


   [RFC5350]  Manner, J. and A. McDonald, "IANA Considerations for the
              IPv4 and IPv6 Router Alert Options", RFC 5350,
              September 2008.
















































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


Appendix A.  A New Filtering Mechanism to Select IP RAO Packets of
             Interest

   This appendix discusses a possible enhancement to the current
   specification of Router Alert to ensure that risks associated with
   unintentional interception of packets that are not of real interest
   to a given router are minimized (if not eliminated) by facilitating
   identification in the fast path of the subset of packets with router
   alert that are of interest to the router.  A key aspect of the
   proposal is to facilitate finer grain identification of router alert
   packets of interest versus unwanted router alert packets while only
   requiring inspection of the router alert header.  In particular:

   o  the proposal allows router alert packets from different
      application protocols to be easily distinguished even if they
      share the same transport protocol (i.e. the have the same IP PID).

   o  the proposal allows router alert packets for the same application
      protocol but associated with different contexts (e.g. end to end
      RSVP vs internal RSVP-TE) to be easily distinguished.

   The objective of this appendix is to solicit feedback on the question
   of whether an enhancement to the current router alert specification
   is justified, and if yes, how to enhance it.

   [RFC2113] specifies no mechanism for identifying different users of
   IP RAO, with the result that many fast switching implementations punt
   most/all packets marked with IP RAO into the slow path.  It is
   desirable for fast switching implementations to easily identify which
   packets marked with IP RAO are actually of interest to local
   protocols, so that other packets marked with IP RAO may be
   efficiently forwarded.  In the past, router alert implementations
   have also looked at the IP PID [RFC0791] as a discriminator for
   different protocols using IP RAO.  However, this has two drawbacks.
   The first is that messages with the same IP PID may represent
   different protocol operations for IP RAO processing (e.g.  RSVP vs.
   RSVP-TE), or even different contexts (e.g. different levels of RSVP
   aggregation [RFC3175]), and it is desirable to distinguish these in
   the fast path.  The second drawback is that IP PID values are a
   scarce resource, and it is likely that new IP datagram protocols will
   be assigned UDP port numbers rather than IP PIDs.  Any such future
   protocol which desires to use IP RAO would require additional checks
   in the fast path to select out the correct packets for local
   processing.  To solve these problems, we propose an extension to the
   specification and processing behaviour of the IP RAO header.

   [RFC2113] specifies a 2-octet value in the IP RAO option field.
   [RFC5350] specifies creation of an IANA registry for managing this



Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


   2-octet value, and proposes a unified IPv4/IPv6 usage as follows:
   +-------------+--------------------------------------+-----------+
   | Value       | Description                          | Reference |
   +-------------+--------------------------------------+-----------+
   | 0           | Router shall examine packet          | [RFC2113] |
   | 1-32        | Aggregated Reservation Nesting Level | [RFC3175] |
   | 33-65502    | Available for assignment by the IANA |           |
   | 65503-65534 | Available for experimental use       |           |
   | 65535       | Reserved                             |           |
   +-------------+--------------------------------------+-----------+

   We propose the following change to IP RAO processing:

   o  The following 2-octet field will now be used to identify the
      protocol and context from an IP RAO perspective.  For IANA
      assignment purposes, this field will be split into two octets
          +----------+----------+
          + protocol + context  +
          + selector + selector +
          + (8 bits) + (8 bits) +
          +----------+----------+

      The protocol selector will be assigned for major protocols by IANA
      and the context selector will be specific to the protocol.
      Protocol selector 0 is reserved for backward compatibility and
      protocol selector 255 is reserved for experimental use.  New
      protocol using IP RAO MUST allocate and use new protocol selector
      and context selector values.  For protocol selector 1-254, the
      value of the protocol and context selector fields MUST be assigned
      in a manner such that the content of the IP RAO option is
      sufficient to determine whether a packet is of interest to a node,
      with a reasonable level of granularity.  For example, having the
      [RFC3175] aggregate reservation nesting level in the context
      selector allows P routers to quickly separate out RSVP messages
      for aggregate vs. end-to-end flows.  Or, a separate context
      selector for RSVP-IPv4 vs. RSVP-TE sessions allows nodes to
      efficiently ignore one session type while processing another.

   o  Fast path switching implementations SHOULD use this field to
      determine whether they wish to select a packet with IP RAO for
      local processing.  A table of in-use protocol/context selector
      values can be looked up during packet switching to determine
      whether the packet is to be locally processed.  For packets marked
      with protocol selectors 1-254, the value of the IP RAO value field
      is sufficient to rapidly determine whether the packet may be
      forwarded unmodified or whether it should be punted to the "slow
      path" for local processing.




Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


   o  The protocol selector 0 is reserved for backwards compatibility.
      For packets marked with protocol selector 0, the packet MUST be
      examined further to determine whether it is of local interest, in
      compliance with current protocol requirements.

   o  All the requirements regarding protecting router control plane
      resources from attacks based on IP RAO, and protecting different
      protocols using IP RAO from each other, continue to apply in this
      context.  The protocol selector and context selector fields MAY be
      used to differentiate between these protocols.

   o  Protocol and context selector values will be allocated for
      existing users of IP RAO as well (e.g.  RSVP, IGMPv2 and PGM).






































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


Author's Address

   Reshad Rahman (editor)
   Cisco Systems
   2000 Innovation Dr.
   Kanata, Ontario  K2K 3E8
   Canada

   Email: rrahman@cisco.com










































Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         Router Alert Considerations         November 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Rahman                    Expires May 18, 2009                 [Page 21]


