


Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                          October 18, 2003
Expires: April 17, 2004


             National and Local Characters in DNS TLD Names
                      draft-klensin-idn-tld-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to
   produce derivative works is not granted.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   In the context of work on internationalizing the Domain Name System
   (DNS), there have been extensive discussions about "multilingual" or
   "internationalized" top level domain names (TLDs), especially for
   countries whose predominant language is not written in a Roman-based
   script.  This document reviews some of the motivations for such
   domains and the constraints that the DNS imposes.  It then suggests
   an alternative, local translation, that may solve a superset of the
   problem while avoiding protocol changes, serious deployment delays,
   and other difficulties.  The suggestion utilizes a localization
   technique to permit any TLD to be accessed using the characters of
   any language not merely language- or country-specific "multilingual"
   TLDs in the language(s) and script(s) of that country.



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1   Background on the "Multilingual Name" Problem  . . . . . . .  3
   1.1.1 Approaches to the requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1.2 Writing the name of one's country in its own characters  . .  4
   1.1.3 Countries with multiple languages and countries with
         multiple names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.2   Domain Name System Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   1.2.1 Administrative Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   1.2.2 Aliases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   1.3   Internationalization and Localization  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.    Client-side solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.1   IDNA and the client  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.2   Local translation tables for TLD names . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.    Advantages and disadvantages of local translation  . . . . .  7
   3.1   Every TLD in the local language and character set  . . . . .  7
   3.2   Unification of country code domains  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3   User understanding of local and global references  . . . . .  9
   3.4   Limits on TLD Propagation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.    Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 12


























Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


1. Introduction

1.1 Background on the "Multilingual Name" Problem

   People who share a language usually prefer to communicate in it,
   using whatever characters are normally used to write that language,
   rather than in some "foreign" one.  There have been standards for
   using mutually-agreed characters and languages in electronic mail
   message bodies and selected headers since the introduction of MIME in
   1992 [MIME] and the Web has permitted multilingual text since its
   inception.  However, since domain names are exposed to users in email
   addresses and URLs (and corresponding arrangements for other
   protocols) demand rapidly arose to permit domain names in
   applications that used characters other than those of the very
   restrictive, ASCII-subset, "hostname" or "letter-digit-hyphen"
   ("LDH") conventions recommended in the DNS specifications [RFC1035].
   The effort to do this rapidly became known as "multilingual domain
   names", although that is a misnomer, since the DNS deals only with
   characters and identifier strings, and not, except by accident, what
   people usually think of as "names".  And there has been little actual
   interest in what would actually be a "multilingual name", i.e., a
   name that contains components from more than one language.  Instead,
   interest has focused on the use, in the context of the DNS, of
   strings that conform to specific languages.

1.1.1 Approaches to the requirement

   If the requirement is seen, not as "modifying the DNS", but as
   "providing users with access to the DNS from a variety of languages
   and character sets", three sets of proposals have emerged in the IETF
   and elsewhere.  They are:

   1.  Perform processing in client software that recodes a user-visible
       string into an ASCII-compatible form that can safely be passed
       through the DNS protocols and stored in the DNS.  This is the
       approach used, for example, in the IETF's "IDNA" protocol
       [RFC3490]

   2.  Modify the DNS to be more hospitable to non-ASCII names and
       strings.  There have been a variety of proposals to do this in
       almost as many ways, some of which have been implemented on a
       proprietary basis by various vendors.  None of them have gained
       acceptance in the IETF community, primarily because they would
       take a long time to deploy, would leave many problems unsolved,
       and that might cause problems with deployed solutions that had
       not yet been upgraded.

   3.  Move the problem out of the DNS entirely, relying instead on a



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


       "directory" or "presentation" layer to handle
       internationalization. The rationale for this approach is
       discussed in [RFC3467].

   This document proposes a fourth approach, applicable to the top level
   domains (TLDs) only (see Section 1.2.1 for a discussion of the
   special issues that make TLDs problematic).  That approach could be
   used as an alternate or supplement to the strategies summarized
   above.

1.1.2 Writing the name of one's country in its own characters

   An early focus of the "multilingual domain name" efforts was
   expressed in statements such as "users in my country, in which ASCII
   is rarely used, should be able to write an entire domain name in
   their own character set".  In particular, since all top-level domain
   names, at present, follow the LDH rules, the somewhat more
   restrictive naming rules discussed in [RFC1123], and the coding
   conventions specified in [RFC1591], all fully-qualified DNS names
   were effectively required to contain at least one ASCII label (the
   TLD name), and that was considered inappropriate.  One should,
   instead, be able to write the name of the ccTLD for China in Chinese,
   the name of the ccTLD for Saudi Arabia in Arabic, and so on.  That
   much could be accomplished, given updated applications, by using a
   new TLD name with IDNA encoding.  But, if one examines (or even
   thinks about) user behavior and preferences, it is almost as
   important that one be able to write the name of the ccTLD for China
   in Arabic and that of Saudi Arabia in Chinese: true
   internationalization implies that, at least to the extent to which
   ambiguity and conflicts can be avoided, people should be able to use
   the languages and character sets they prefer.  For the same reasons
   that one would like to have all-Chinese domain names available in
   China, it is important to have the capability to have an apparent
   Chinese TLD for domain whose second level and beyond are Chinese
   characters, even when the TLD itself serves predominantly
   non-Chinese-speaking registrants and users.

1.1.3 Countries with multiple languages and countries with multiple
      names

   From a user interface standpoint, writing ccTLD names in local
   characters is a problem.  As discussed below in Section 1.2.2, the
   DNS itself does not easily permit a domain to be referred to by more
   than one name (or spelling or translation of a name).  Countries with
   more than one official language would require that the country name
   be represented in each of those languages.  And, just as it is
   important that a user in China be able to represent the name of the
   Chinese ccTLD in Chinese characters, she should be able to access a



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


   Chinese-language site in France using Chinese characters.  That would
   require that she be able to write the name of the French ccTLD in
   those characters rather than in a form based on a Roman character
   set.

1.2 Domain Name System Constraints

1.2.1 Administrative Hierarchy

   The domain name system is designed around the idea of an
   "administrative hierarchy", with the entity responsible for a given
   node of the hierarchy responsible for policies applicable to its
   subhierarchies (Cf. [RFC1034] and [RFC1035]). The model works quite
   well for the domain and subdomains of a particular enterprise.  In an
   enterprise situation, the hierarchy can be organized to match the
   organizational structure; there are established ways to set policies;
   and there are, at least presumably, shared assumptions about overall
   goals and objectives among all registrants in the domain.  It is more
   problematic when a domain is shared by unrelated entities which lack
   common policy assumptions.  It is difficult to reach agreement on
   rules that should apply to all of them.  That situation always
   prevails for the labels registered in a TLD (second-level names)
   except in those TLDs for which the second level is structural (e.g.,
   the .CO, .AC, .GOV conventions in many ccTLDs or in the historical
   geographical organization of .US [RFC1480]) in which case, it exists
   for the labels within that structural level.

   TLDs may, but need not, have consistent registration policies for
   those second (or third) level names.  Countries (or ccTLD
   administrators) have often adopted rules about what entities may
   register in their ccTLDs, and what forms the names may take.  RFC
   1591 outlined registration norms for most of the gTLDs, even though
   those norms have been largely ignored in recent years. And some
   recent "sponsored" domains are based on quite specific rules about
   appropriate registrations.  Homogeneous registration rules for the
   root are, by contrast, impossible: almost by definition, the
   subdomains (TLDs) registered in the root are diverse and no single
   policy applying to all root subdomains is feasible.

1.2.2 Aliases

   In an environment different from the DNS, a rational way to permit
   assigning local-language names to a country code (or other) domain
   would be to set up an alias for the name, or to use some sort of "see
   instead" reference.  But the DNS does not have quite the right
   facilities for either.  Instead, it supports a "CNAME" record, whose
   label can refer only to a particular label and not to a subtree.  For
   example, if A.B.C is a fully-qualified name, then a CNAME reference



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


   from X to A would make X.B.C appear to have the same values as A.B.C.
   However, a CNAME reference from Y to C would not make A.B.Y
   referenceable (or even defined) at all.  A second record type, DNAME
   [RFC2672], can provide an alias for a portion of the tree.  But it is
   problematic technically, and its use is strongly discouraged except
   as a means of enabling a transition from one domain to another.

1.3 Internationalization and Localization

   It has often been observed that, while many people talk about
   "internationalization", they often really mean, and want,
   "localization". "Internationalization" in this context,  suggests
   making something globally accessible while incorporating a
   broad-range "universal" character set and conventions appropriate to
   all languages and cultures.  "Localization", by contrast, involves
   having things work well in a particular locality or for a broad range
   of localities, although aspects of the style of operation might
   differ for each locality.  Anything that actually involves the DNS
   must be global, and hence internationalized, since the DNS cannot
   meaningfully support different responses based, e.g., on the location
   of the user making a query.  While the DNS cannot support
   localization internally, many of the features discussed earlier in
   this section are much more easily thought about in local terms
   --whether localized to a geographical area, users of a language, or
   using some other criteria -- than in global ones.

2. Client-side solutions

   Traditionally, the IETF has avoided becoming involved in
   standardization for actions that take place strictly on individual
   hosts on the network, assuming that it should confine itself to
   behavior that is observable "on the wire", i.e., in protocols between
   network hosts.  Exceptions to this general principle have been made
   when different clients were required to utilize data or interpret
   values in compatible ways to preserve interoperability: the standards
   for email and web body formats, and IDNA itself, are examples of
   these exceptions.  Regardless of what is required to be standardized,
   it is almost never required, and often unwise, that a user interface
   present "on the wire" formats to the user, at least by default
   (debugging options that show the wire formats are common and often
   quite useful).  However, in most cases when the presentation format
   and the wire format differ, the client program must take precautions
   that the wire format can be reconstructed from user input, or to keep
   the wire format, while hidden, bound to the presentation mechanism so
   that it can be reconstructed.  While it is rarely a goal in itself,
   it is often necessary that the user be at least vaguely aware that
   the wire ("real") format is different from the presentation one and
   that the wire format be available for debugging.



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


2.1 IDNA and the client

   As mentioned above, IDNA itself is entirely a client-side protocol.
   It works by providing labels to the DNS in a special format called
   "punycode" [RFC3492].  When labels in that format are encountered,
   they are transformed, by the client, back into internationalized
   (normally Unicode ) characters.  In the context of this document, the
   important obvservation about IDNA is that any application program
   that supports it is already doing considerable transformation work on
   the client; it is not simply presenting the "on the wire" formats to
   the user.

2.2 Local translation tables for TLD names

   We suggest that, in addition to maintaining the code and tables
   required to support IDNA, clients may want to maintain a table that
   contains a list of TLDs and locally-desirable names for each one. For
   ccTLDs, these might be the names (or locally-standard abbreviations)
   by which the relevant countries are known locally (whether in ASCII
   characters or others).  With some care on the part of the application
   designer (e.g., to ensure that local forms do not conflict with the
   actual TLD names), a particular TLD name input from the user could be
   either in local or standard form without special tagging or problems.
   When DNS names are received by these client programs, the TLD labels
   would be mapped to local form before IDNA is applied to the rest of
   the name; when names are received from users, local TLD names would
   be mapped to the global ones before being passed into IDNA or used in
   other DNS processing.

3. Advantages and disadvantages of local translation

3.1 Every TLD in the local language and character set

   The notion of a top-level domain whose name matches, e.g., the name
   that is used for a  country in that country or the name of a language
   in that language as, as mentioned above, immediately appealing.  But
   most of the reasons for it argue equally strongly for other TLDs
   being accessible from that language.  A user in Korea who can access
   the national ccTLD in the Korean language and character set has every
   reason to expect that both generic top level domains and and domains
   associated with other countries would be similarly accessible,
   especially if the second-level domains bear Korean names.  A user in
   Spain or Portugal, or in Latin America, would presumably have similar
   expectations, but would expect to use Spanish names, not Korean ones.

   That level of local optimization is not realistic --some would argue
   not possible-- with the DNS since it would ultimately require that
   every top level domain be replicated for each of the world's



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


   languages.  That replication process would involve not just the top
   level domain itself: in principle, all of its subtrees would need to
   be completely replicated as well.  Perhaps, in practice, not all
   subtrees would require replication, but only those for which a
   language variation or translation was significant.  But, while that
   restriction would change the scale of the problem, it would not alter
   its basic nature. The administrative hierarchy characteristics of the
   DNS (see Section 1.2.1) turn the replication process into an
   administrative nightmare: every administrator of a second-level
   domain in the world would be forced to maintain dozens, probably
   hundreds, of similar zone files for the the replicates of the domain.
   Even if only the zones relevant to a particular country or language
   were replicated, the administrative and tracking problems to bind
   these to the appropriate top-level domain and keep all of the
   replicas synchronized would be extremely difficulty at best.  And
   many administrators of third- and fourth-level domains, and beyond,
   would be faced with similar problems.

   By contrast, dealing with the names of TLDs as a localization
   problem, using local translation, is fairly simple.  Each function
   represented by a TLD -- a country, generic registrations, or
   purpose-specific registrations -- could be represented in the local
   language and character set as needed.  And, for countries with many
   languages, or users living, working, or visiting countries where
   their language was not dominant, "local" could be defined in terms of
   the needs or wishes of each particular user.

3.2 Unification of country code domains

   It follows from some of the comments above that, while there appears
   to be some immediate appeal from having (at least) two domains for
   each country, one using the ISO 3166-1 code and another one using a
   name based on the national name in the national language, such a
   situation would create considerable problems for registrants in the
   multiple domains.  For registrants maintaining enterprise or
   organizational subdomains, ease of administration in a single family
   of zone files will usually make a registration in a single top-level
   domain preferable to replicated sets of them, at least as long as
   their functional requirements (such a local-language access) are met
   by the unified structure.

   For countries with multiple national languages that are considered
   equal and legally equivalent, the advantages of a translation-based
   approach, rather than multiple registrations and replicated trees,
   would be even more significant.

   Of course, having replicated domains might be popular with some
   registries and registrars, since replication would almost inevitably



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


   increase the total number of domains to be registered.

3.3 User understanding of local and global references

   While the IDNA tables (actually Nameprep [RFC3491] and Stringprep
   [RFC3454]) must be identical globally for IDNA to work reliably, the
   tables for mapping between local names and TLD names could be locally
   determined, and differ from one locale to another, as long as users
   understood that international interchange of names required using the
   standard forms.  That understanding could be assisted by software.
   It is likely that, at least for the foreseeable future, DNS names
   being passed among users in different countries, or using different
   languages, will be forced to be in punycode form to guarantee
   compatibility in any event, so the marginal knowledge or effort
   needed to put TLD names into standard form and transmit them that way
   would be very small.

3.4 Limits on TLD Propagation

   The concept of using local translation does have one side effect,
   which some portions of the Internet community might consider
   undesirable. The size and complexity of translation tables, and
   maintaining those tables, will be, to a considerable extent, a
   function of the number of top-level domains, the frequency with which
   new domains are added, and the number of domains that are added at a
   time.  A country or other locale that wished to maintain a complete
   set of translations (i.e., so that every TLD had a representation in
   the local language) would presumably find setting up a table for the
   current collection of a few hundred domains to be a task that would
   take some days.  If the number of TLDs were relatively stable, with a
   relatively small number being added at infrequent intervals, the
   updates could probably be dealt with on an ad hoc basis.   But, if
   large numbers of domains were added frequently, or if the total
   number of TLDs became very large, maintaining the table might require
   dedicated staff. Worse, updating the tables stored on client machines
   might require update and synchronization protocols and all of the
   complexities that tend to go with such protocols.

4. Security Considerations

   IDNA provides a client-based mechanism for presenting Unicode names
   in applications while passing only ASCII-based names on the wire.  As
   such, it constitutes a major step along the path of introducing a
   client-based presentation layer into the Internet.  Client-based
   presentation layer transformations introduce risks from
   non-conforming tables that can change meaning without external
   protection.  For example, if a mapping table normally maps A onto C
   and that table is altered by an attacker so that A maps onto D



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


   instead, much mischief can be committed.  On the other hand, these
   are not the usual sort of network attacks: they may be thought of as
   falling into the "users can always cause harm to themselves"
   category.  The local translation model outlined here does not
   significantly increase the risks over those associated with IDNA, but
   may provide some new avenues for exploiting them.

   Both this approach and IDNA rely on having updated programs present
   information to the user in a very different form than the one in
   which it is transmitted on the wire.  Unless the internal (wire) form
   is always used in interchange, there are possibilities for ambiguity
   and confusion about references.

5. Acknowledgments

   This document was inspired by a number of conversations in ICANN,
   IETF, MINC, and private contexts about the future evolution and
   internationalization of top level domains.  Unknown to the author,
   but unsurprisingly (the general concept should be obvious to anyone
   even slightly skilled in the relevant technologies), the concept has
   been apparently developed independently in other groups, including
   JET, but, as far as this author knows, not written up for general
   comment. Discussions within, and about, the ICANN IDN Committee have
   been particularly helpful, although several of the members of that
   committee may be surprised about where those discussions led.  Email
   correspondence with several people after the first version of this
   document was posted, notably Richard Hill, Paul Hoffman, S L Lee, and
   Soobok Lee, led to considerable clarification in the subsequent
   versions.

References

   [ISO10646]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Information Technology - Universal Multiple-octet coded
              Character Set (UCS) - Part 1: Architecture and Basic
              Multilingual Plane", ISO Standard 10646-1, May 1993.

   [MIME]     Borenstein, N. and N. Freed, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet
              Mail Extensions): Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing
              the Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC 1341, June
              1992.

              Updated and replaced by Freed, N. and N. Borenstein,
              "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part One:
              Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC2045, November
              1996.   Also, Moore, K., "Representation of Non-ASCII Text
              in Internet Message Headers", RFC 1342, June 1992. Updated



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


              and replaced by Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet
              Mail Extensions) Part Three: Message Header Extensions for
              Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047, November 1996.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1123]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts - Application
              and Support", STD 3, RFC 1123, October 1989.

   [RFC1480]  Cooper, A. and J. Postel, "The US Domain", RFC 1480, June
              1993.

   [RFC1591]  Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation",
              RFC 1591, March 1994.

   [RFC2672]  Crawford, M., "Non-Terminal DNS Name Redirection", RFC
              2672, August 1999.

   [RFC3454]  Hoffman, P. and M. Blanchet, "Preparation of
              Internationalized Strings ("stringprep")", RFC 3454,
              December 2002.

   [RFC3467]  Klensin, J., "Role of the Domain Name System (DNS)", RFC
              3467, February 2003.

   [RFC3490]  Faltstrom, P., Hoffman, P. and A. Costello,
              "Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)",
              RFC 3490, March 2003.

   [RFC3491]  Hoffman, P. and M. Blanchet, "Nameprep: A Stringprep
              Profile for Internationalized Domain Names (IDN)", RFC
              3491, March 2003.

   [RFC3492]  Costello, A., "Punycode: A Bootstring encoding of Unicode
              for Internationalized Domain Names in Applications
              (IDNA)", RFC 3492, March 2003.











Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com










































Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Characters in DNS TLD Names           October 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Klensin                  Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 14]


