

Network Working Group                                      Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                        Harvard University
                                                              Rohan Mahy
                                                                   Cisco
                                                          Allison Mankin
                                                                 USC/ISI
                                                               Joerg Ott
                                                                IPDialog
                                                             Brian Rosen
                                                                 Marconi
                                                             Dean Willis
                                                             Dynamicsoft
                                                           November 2001

                           SIP Change Process
                      <draft-tsvarea-sipchange-00.txt>

   1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   2. Abstract

   The IETF's Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC 2543] is becoming
   quite popular for a growing number of applications.  One result of
   this popularity is a continuous flood of suggestions for SIP
   modifications and extensions.  This memo describes how the Transport
   Area directors along with the SIP and SIPPING working group chairs
   have decided to deal with such suggestions.

   3. The IETF SIP Working Group

   The IETF Session Initiation Protocol (sip) Working Group is chartered
   to be the "owner" of the SIP protocol. All changes or extensions to


Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                           [Page 1]





Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              November 2001


   SIP must first exist as SIP Working Group documents.  The SIP Working
   group is charged with being the guardian of the SIP protocol for the
   Internet.  It should only extend or change the SIP protocol when
   there are compelling reasons to do so.

   Documents that must be handled by the SIP working group include new
   SIP methods and new SIP headers.  SIP extensions must be standards
   track and must be developed in the IETF, from requirements provided
   by the SIPPING Working Group.  The process for SIP packages will be
   addressed case-by-case until there is more standards experience with
   this format.

   4. The IETF SIPPING Working Group 

   The IETF  Session Initiation Protocol Proposal INvestiGation
   (sipping) Working Group is chartered to be a much needed
   filter in front of the SIP Working Group.  This working group is to
   investigate requirements for applications of SIP, some of which may
   lead to requests for extensions to SIP.  These requirements may come
   from individuals who are reporting the requirements determined by
   another standards body.  In some cases the requirements can be met by
   SIP as it exists,  in other cases the requirement will not be seen by
   the SIPPING working group as general enough to warrant a change to
   SIP, and in some cases multiple requirements may be combined into a
   single set.  SIPPING should also act as a filter to the applicability
   of SIP.  Because the protocol gets so much attention, some
   application designers may want to use it just because it is there,
   such as for detailing cars using the new SIP BRUSH method.  When the
   SIPPING working group decides on a set of requirements, it forwards
   them to the SIP working group.

   5. SIP Change Process

   Anyone who thinks that the existing SIP protocol will not do their
   task must write an individual ID explaining the problem they are
   trying to solve, why SIP is the applicable protocol, and why the
   existing SIP protocol will not work.  The Internet-Draft must include
   a detailed set of requirements (distinct from solutions) that SIP
   would need to meet to solve the particular problem.  The Internet
   Draft must also describe in detail any security issues that arise
   from meeting the requirements.  After this Internet-Draft is
   published, the authors should send a note to the SIPPING Working
   Group mailing list to start discussion on the Internet-Draft.

   The SIPPING working group chairs in conjunction with the Transport
   Area Directors will determine if the particular problems raised in
   the Internet-Draft warrants being added to the SIPPING charter based
   on the mailing list discussion.  The SIPPING working group should



Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                           [Page 2]





Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              November 2001


   consider whether the requirements merge with others from other or
   related applications, and refine the ID accordingly.

   If the chairs and the ADs both feel that the particular new problems
   should be added to the SIPPING Working Group charter, the ADs will
   present the proposed SIPPING charter modifications to the IESG and
   IAB, in accordance with the usual process for charter expansion.  If
   the IESG (with IAB advice) approves of the charter changes, the
   SIPPING working group can then work on the problems described in the
   Internet-Draft.

   In a separate Internet-Draft, the authors may describe a set of
   changes to SIP that would meet the requirements. This Internet-Draft
   would be passed on for SIP working group consideration (if
   warranted).  There is no requirement on the SIP working group that
   the solution idea of this additional ID be adopted.

   With respect to standardization, this process means that SIP
   extensions come only from the SIP Working Group, and only from the
   IETF, as the body that created SIP.  The IETF will not publish a SIP
   extension RFC outside of the process described here.

   The SIP Working Group is required to protect the architectural
   integrity of SIP and must not add features that do not have general
   use beyond the specific case - they also must not add features just
   to make some function more efficient at the expense of simplicity or
   generality.

   Some working groups besides SIPPING generate requirements for SIP
   solutions and/or extensions as well.  At the time of writing, these
   include SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging (simple)
   and Service in the PSTN/IN Requesting InTernet Service (spirits).

   6. Extensibility and Architecture

   In an idealized technical design, the extensibility design would be
   self-contained, and it would be inherent that new extensions and new
   headers would naturally have an architectural coherence with the
   original protocol.

   However, this idealized vision has not been attained in the world of
   standards tracks protocols.  Implications for interopability can be
   addressed by capabilities negotiation rules.  The effects of adding
   features that overlap or that deal with a point solution and are not
   general are much harder to control with rules.  Therefore the
   Transport Area calls for this architectural guardianship and
   application of Occam's Razor by a Working Group.




Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                           [Page 3]





Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              November 2001


   We encourage other protocol working groups with highly extensible
   protocols to review whether they need more coordination of extensions
   (including restricting them to IETF) as in the SIP case.

   7. Security Considerations

   Complexity and indeterminate or hard to define protocol behavior,
   depending on which of many extensions operate, is a fine breeding
   ground for security flaws.

   All Internet-Drafts that present new requirements for SIP must
   include a discussion of the security requirements and implications
   inherent in the proposal.  All RFCs that modify or extend SIP must
   explore the security considerations of the modifications and
   extensions.

   8. References

   [RFC 2543] " SIP: Session Initiation Protocol.", M. Handley, H.
   Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg, RFC 2543, March 1999

   9. Author's Addresses

   Scott Bradner
   Email: sob@harvard.edu

   Rohan Mahy
   Email: rohan@cisco.com

   Allison Mankin
   Email: mankin@isi.edu

   Joerg Ott
   Email: jo@ipdialog.com

   Brian Rosen
   Email: brian.rosen@marconi.com

   Dean Willis
   Email: dean.willis@softarmor.com

   10. Acknowledgements

   The Transport ADs thank our IESG and IAB colleagues for valuable
   discussions of extensibility issues in a wide range of protocols,
   including those that our area brings forward and others, and 
   many members of the SIP community at IETF for dialogue on these
   issues for SIP.


Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                           [Page 4]





Internet-Draft             SIP Change Process              November 2001


   10. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




























Transport ADs and SIP* Chairs                           [Page 5]


