


Sipping                                                        D. Worley
Internet-Draft                                                   Pingtel
Expires: August 15, 2007                               February 11, 2007


     A New Forking Mechanism for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                    draft-worley-sipping-forking-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).















Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


Abstract

   The rules for SIP proxies are organized so that when a UAC sends an
   out-of-dialog request, even if the request is forked to a number of
   UASs, (usually) only one UAS will accept the request, and only the
   final response from that UAS will be returned to the UAC.  This
   forking mechanism is optimal for an INVITE intended to connect one
   human user with another human uses, but is poor for requests that
   have a "one to many" nature, especially PUBLISH and SUBSCRIBE
   requests, but also including some INVITEs.  This document proposes an
   alternative forking mechanism that better supports "one to many"
   requests, and that mechanism be the standardized meaning of the
   (existing but weakly specified) "Request-Disposition: no-cancel,
   parallel" header.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The current forking mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Problems with the current forking mechanism  . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Determinism and diagnosis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  PUBLISH  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  SUBSCRIBE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  Intercom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.5.  Conferencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.6.  Messaging  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  A new proxy forking mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Using the new forking mechanism for routing diagnosis  . . . .  9
   6.  Relationship to URI-list services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Upward compatibility relative to RFC 3841  . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Revision history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     10.1. Changes from draft-worley-sipping-forking-00 to
           draft-worley-siping-forking-01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     10.2. Changes from draft-worley-sipping-forking-01 to
           draft-worley-siping-forking-02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   11. Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17










Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


1.  Introduction

   When a UAC sends an out-of-dialog request, it may pass through many
   proxies, which may fork the request and deliver copies of it to
   several UASs.  The rules for SIP proxies are organized so that
   (usually) only one UAS will accept the request, and only the final
   response from that UAS will be returned to the UAC.  This process
   produces results which are optimal for INVITEs, which are intended to
   connect one human user with another human user.  But this process is
   not optimal in other circumstances, especially SUBSCRIBE and PUBLISH
   requests, where an automaton UAC wishes to send information to or
   receive information from a set of automaton UASs.

   In particular, these requests would perform better if they were
   forked using mechanism that differs in these ways:

   1.  the request is forked immediately (parallelly) to all targets,
       regardless of the "q" values of the contact URIs,

   2.  the request is forked to all applicable UASs, even after one UAS
       has accepted the request, and

   3.  all final responses from all UASs are returned to the UAC, rather
       than being consolidated into one final response.

   We propose that the above forking process be considered the
   standardized definition of the header "Request-Disposition: no-
   cancel, parallel" [10], so that a UAC can request that a request be
   forked using this alternative mechanism.






















Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


2.  The current forking mechanism

   The rules for SIP proxies in RFC 3261 [1] are organized so that for
   any out-of-dialog request, (usually) only one UAS accepts the request
   and only its final response is received by the UAC.  (Within-dialog
   requests are intrinsically routed to a single destination, the remote
   target.)

   In order to accomplish this, various requirements are placed on
   proxies: If a proxy receives a 2xx response from one UAS to which it
   has forked the request, it must send no further copies of the request
   to other UASs.  If the request was an INVITE, it must immediately
   CANCEL all other forked copies of the request.  A proxy should
   (normally) consolidate all final responses it receives from UASs into
   one "best response" to be forwarded to the UAC.

   The principle that the proxy ensures that only one UAS accepts the
   request is enforced only approximately -- Due to parallel forking,
   the request may be sent to two UASs simultaneously, and they may both
   accept it.  If the request method is not INVITE, the proxy will
   choose one of the responses to send to the UAC and discard the other.
   If the request method is INVITE, the proxy is required to forward
   both 2xx responses to the UAC, so that it can be aware that two
   dialogs were established at the UASs.  In that case, the UAC usually
   sends BYEs to terminate any dialogs beyond the one created by the
   first 2xx response it receives.

   This behavior for proxies was specified in RFC 3261 because it is
   optimal for most INVITEs, which are intended to create a
   communication path between one human user and another human user.
   There are problems with this forking mechanism when establishing
   other kinds of communication sessions.



















Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


3.  Problems with the current forking mechanism

   The currently specified behavior for proxies is less useful in many
   situations other than an ordinary INVITE.

3.1.  Determinism and diagnosis

   The current forking mechanism is admirably suited for offloading the
   work of dealing with the multiple destination UASs to the proxy that
   is nearest the point of forking.  But ipso facto, it hides any
   failures or unexpected behaviors from the UAC, making it difficult
   for a human or automaton located at the UAC to diagnose request
   routing problems without having administrative access to every proxy
   along the route.  (And it is impossible to determine the identity of
   a proxy that is involved without already having administrative access
   to the "upstream" proxies.)  In addition, because of the "race"
   between two UASs that are willing to accept a request, the outcome of
   the request can be non-deterministic, so a series of diagnostic
   requests may produce inconsistent responses.

3.2.  PUBLISH

   The PUBLISH [3] and SUBSCRIBE [2] requests seem admirably suited for
   an automaton UAC to distribute information to, or retrieve
   information from, a set of automaton UASs.  But the current forking
   mechanism makes it impossible for the UAC to reliably send one
   request to all members of a set of UASs that are the forking targets
   of one URI.

   This is evident for PUBLISH requests, which carry the information to
   be disseminated.  If the PUBLISH is intended to send information to a
   particular UA, the request-URI could specify that UA.  But there is
   currently no way to reliably disseminate information to all of the
   UAs that are the destinations for a particular AOR; all that is
   guaranteed is that at least one UAS will receive the information.
   For most PUBLISH requests, it would be preferable for the request to
   be distributed to all forking targets.

3.3.  SUBSCRIBE

   Any method which attempts to gather information from a group of UAs
   (such as SUBSCRIBE) has similar problems as PUBLISH, but the use of
   SUBSCRIBE to establish subscriptions at the UASs, which then send
   NOTIFY requests, makes the situation even messier: Because the method
   is not INVITE, all 2xx responses are consolidated into one response
   by the proxies.  This often delays the 2xx response from reaching the
   UAC until after the NOTIFYs sent by the UASs reach the UAC.  In
   practice, the UAC can only determine the set of subscriptions that it



Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


   has created by watching for the NOTIFYs that they send.

   In the prototypical example of the pick-up by a user on a phone of a
   call ringing on another phone [8], the phone executing the pick-up
   sends a SUBSCRIBE to the AOR for the extension to be picked up.  The
   proxy forks this SUBSCRIBE to all the phones that have an appearance
   of the extension, and each UAS phone sends a NOTIFY detailing the
   early dialogs on that phone.  This information enables the executing
   phone to find the dialog which it must pick up, regardless of the UA
   on which the dialog is currently ringing.

   If all incoming calls to that AOR are parallel-forked, all of these
   subscriptions will return the same set of dialogs, so how the
   SUBSCRIBE is forked is not important.  (Actually, the different UASs
   will return homologous sets of early dialogs, with the same Call-Id's
   and from-tags, but different to-tags.)  But if the different UAs for
   the AOR are serially forked, the dialog will be ringing on only one
   UA at a time, and it is important that the SUBSCRIBE that is
   searching for that dialog be forked simultaneously to all of the UAs
   for the AOR.  The current forking mechanism does not make this
   possible.

3.4.  Intercom

   Another situation in which it would be preferable for all potential
   targets to receive the request is in an "intercom" feature of an
   office phone system, where an audio stream is distributed to all the
   phones in the system, to be output through a speaker on each phone.
   To implement an intercom request as a single INVITE from the UAC, the
   single INVITE must be forked to all of targets for request-URI, and
   the UAC must be able to establish dialogs with all of them.

3.5.  Conferencing

   A more subtle case where connecting to all targets would be useful is
   the routing of an INVITE generated by a conference system which forks
   to multiple targets. [4] Sometimes such an INVITE is intended to
   contact a single human, but at other times, its request-URI routes to
   many humans, and the intention is to include all of them in the
   conference.  Including multiple respondents in the conference is
   straightforward to achieve if the forking process allows dialogs to
   be established with all the UASs, by simply including all of the
   dialogs in the conference.

   Another example shows there are additional complications in this
   situation.  Consider sending an initial INVITE to the alias
   sip:sales@example.com, if you want to have a conference with all your
   sales personnel.  This alias in turn resolves to the AORs



Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


   sip:alice@example.com, sip:bob@example.com, and
   sip:colin@example.com.  It is natural to fork the INVITE in parallel
   to all these targets.

   Now, if sip:alice@example.com resolves to two contacts (desk phone
   and cell phone, maybe) with differing q-values, what should happen?
   Should the INVITE be forked in the normal (probably serial) manner to
   these contacts?  (That is probably the best way to reach Alice.)  Or
   should both contacts receive the INVITE via parallel forking?

   Further complications can be introduced by assuming that
   sip:sales@example.com initially is forked to
   sip:sales-tokyo@example.com, sip:sales-ciudad-mexico@example.com, and
   sip:sales-new-york@example.com, each of which then forks to
   individual salespeople at those offices, and then assuming that each
   salesperson's AOR is forwarded through several proxies before
   reaching the UAs.

   It might be possible to mark the INVITE such that the forking of
   sip:sales@example.com is done in parallel according to the new
   scheme, and that the forking of each resulting AOR is done in the
   traditional manner, but it seems to me that such variants are
   endless, and it would be impossible to specify them all in a
   systematic way.  And in any case, the UAC doesn't reliably know the
   downstream forking structure.

3.6.  Messaging

   Some "messaging" applications would be better served by forking to
   all available UASs than by the current forking mechanism.  The
   MESSAGE [5] request can be used to send SMS-style short messages, and
   in many cases, it would be preferable to fork them to all UAs for the
   AOR, as a UA might accept the request even if its user is not present
   (and store the message for display to the user later).  So we wish to
   distribute the MESSAGE to all UAs, not being able to predict which
   one can first deliver the message to the user.

   Similarly, a UAC that supports the MSRP messaging protocol [6] as a
   media session type may, like many instant messaging clients, be
   willing to support simultaneous messaging sessions, and so would
   prefer to issue INVITEs with a meaning much like an INVITE to a voice
   conference.  Section 3.5









Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


4.  A new proxy forking mechanism

   Because the current forking mechanism is ideal for single-session
   INVITEs, it should not be discontinued.  But there is a need for a
   new forking mechanism that can be applied to requests which the UAS
   wants to establish dialogs with all possible targets.  The
   alternative forking mechanism differs from the current forking
   mechanism in three ways:

   1.  A proxy simultaneously sends copies of the request to all targets
       in the contact set, regardless of whether any targets have
       already returned final responses, and regardless of any specified
       "q" values in any contact set.

   2.  A proxy does not send CANCELs to other legs of a forked INVITE
       when one leg returns a 2xx response.

   3.  A proxy returns all final responses to the requester immediately
       when they are received (much as a stateless proxy would), rather
       than holding them and consolidating them into one response.

   One possibility for activating this mechanism would be to have the
   proxy choose the forking mechanism based on the method of the
   request.  But this is undesirable for several reasons: (1) It
   requires every proxy in the signaling path to know the proper
   treatment of every method that a UAC might send. (2) The example of
   an INVITE generated by a conference system (Section 3.5) shows that
   the best processing of requests depends on more factors than just the
   method. (3) Making proxy behavior dependent on the request method
   violates separation of concerns, warning that it would tend to
   interfere with later SIP extensions.

   Thus, we need to define a mechanism which a UAC can use mark requests
   for its desired desired forking mechanism.  For upward compatibility,
   requests which are not marked must be processed as specified in RFC
   3261.  Requests which are marked for the alternative forking
   mechanism, but which are forked by a proxy which does not understand
   the alternative mechanism, will still be processed as in RFC 3261,
   but that causes no loss of functionality relative to the current
   situation.  The "Request-Disposition: no-cancel parallel" header
   defined in RFC 3841 [10] appears to be the natural way to activate
   this mechanism.









Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


5.  Using the new forking mechanism for routing diagnosis

   TCP/IP networking has evolved a rich set of tools for diagnosing
   network problems, such as ping, traceroute, nslookup, dig, and
   telnet.  Some of these tools depend on features of the TCP/IP
   protocol suite that were added to specifically support diagnostics,
   whereas others exploit the protocol suite in ways not imagined when
   it was designed.  Currently, few diagnostic tools exist for SIP
   networking other than the OPTIONS request for testing end-to-end
   connectivity.  In particular, it is hard for a UA to trace the
   routing of a SIP request; tracing usually requires administrative
   access to the proxies involved.

   A simple "traceroute" can be made by sending a series of OPTIONS
   requests with Max-Forwards values starting at one and increasing by
   one.  Each OPTIONS request will be penetrate one step further along
   the proxy chain before being returned as either a 2xx (OK) or 483
   (Too Many Hops) response.  (See section 11.2 of [1].)  But each step
   of the process can return only one response (OPTIONS being a non-
   INVITE request), thus hiding most information about any forking that
   may be occurring.

   Using the new forking mechanism, the responses to this series of
   OPTIONS requests would show evidence of the forking that is involved
   the the request's path, as the responses from each request would span
   the breadth of the forking at the specified depth in the routing
   tree.

   However, a 483 response is not guaranteed to contain much information
   about the SIP agent which generated the response.  Nor is it required
   to contain much information about the request as it appeared at that
   agent.  In particular, knowing the request-URI from the request at
   that point would be invaluable, as would knowing the Via headers,
   which allow the routing tree to be reconstructed automatically.  But
   if SIP agents implement [7] and generate 483 responses that return
   the headers of the failing request, the collection of 483 responses
   would provide detailed information about how the request had been
   routed.













Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


6.  Relationship to URI-list services

   The new forking mechanism can be compared to the "URI-list services"
   mechanism [9].  In both cases, a server downstream from the UAC sends
   copies of the request to a set of destinations.  In URI-list
   services, this server is a specialized URI-list server; in this
   proposal, the server is a SIP proxy operating in a special mode.  The
   biggest difference is that in URI-list services, the list of targets
   is determined directly by the UAC by providing a URI-list (or a
   reference to one), which allows the UAC to create the list of targets
   on an ad-hoc basis; whereas in this proposal, the list of targets
   must be the set of contacts for a SIP URI that is interpreted by a
   proxy, which allows the list to be maintained by the proxy
   independently of any UAC that might use it.  (This independence is
   what creates the diagnosis problem Section 3.1.)




































Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


7.  Upward compatibility relative to RFC 3841

   After writing the 00 version of this Internet-Draft, the author
   discovered that RFC 3841 [10] has defined the Request-Disposition
   header so that the header "Request-Disposition: no-cancel, parallel"
   header has nearly the semantics that this draft proposes: Features 1
   and 2 of Section 4 are specifically included in [10], whereas feature
   3 (final responses are forwarded immediately) seems to be included
   only by implication from feature 2 (proxy does not cancel forks upon
   receiving a 2xx from another fork).  But that RFC is rather sketchy
   about the exact significance of the Request-Disposition header, so if
   we standardize the meaning of that header to be the forking mechanism
   defined here, we must worry about upward compatibility with any
   previous implementations of "Request-Disposition: no-cancel,
   parallel" -- which may more closely resemble RFC 3261 forking.

   The most visible difference between this forking mechanism and
   possible previous implementations of RFC 3841 is that a UAC may
   receive multiple responses to a single request.  If it is an INVITE
   request, RFC 3261 allows that multiple responses might be received,
   though only if they are all 2xx responses.  But multiple responses
   from a non-INVITE request would also possible if the proxy that forks
   the request is stateless, or if a response was processed by a
   different proxy in a replicated set of proxies than processed the
   request.  These situations are probably not quite within the RFC 3261
   specification, but seem like they could easily arise in practice, and
   UACs should already be able to handle them.

   In general, the significant problem would be in the UAC processing
   responses and reporting them to the application that invokes the SIP
   stack.  But in information publishing or gathering operations,
   response processing is not particularly important.  When publishing
   information, the application will not be monitoring the responses, as
   it does not manage its connection to any particular destination.  Any
   reported success or failure from any particular destination will not
   change the behavior of the publisher, as there is little it can do to
   adjust to the failure of one UAS.  In information gathering, the
   responses to a SUBSCRIBE request are not important either, as the
   significant information comes from the NOTIFY requests that are sent
   by the created subscriptions, and each of those is processed
   separately by the SIP stack already.

   So it seems that we can safely assume that any previously implemented
   UAC that uses "Request-Disposition: no-cancel, parallel" will work
   acceptably if a proxy uses this new forking mechanism in response to
   that header.





Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


8.  Security considerations

   This mechanism presents no security considerations that are known to
   the author.















































Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


9.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Scott Lawrence and Michael Procter for
   their comments and advice.















































Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


10.  Revision history

10.1.  Changes from draft-worley-sipping-forking-00 to
       draft-worley-siping-forking-01

      Added "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)" to the title.

      Updated contact information.

      Adopted "Request-Disposition: parallel" as the indicator for the
      new forking mechanism, and added discussion of upward
      compatibility relative to previous implementations of RFC 3841.

      Expanded on the example of a conference call to
      sip:sales@example.com to show how complex the situation can
      become.

      Added comparison with URI-list services.

      Added Security considerations, Acknowledgments, and Revision
      history sections.  Re-titled References section as Normative
      references.

      Updated references to draft-ietf-simple-publish-01, RFC 4353,
      draft-ietf-simple-message-sessions-14, and
      draft-ietf-sip-hop-limit-diagnostics-02.  Added references to
      draft-worley-sipping-pickup-01,
      draft-ietf-sipping-uri-services-05, and RFC 3841.

      Added statement that this I-D intends to create a standardized
      definition for the "Request-Disposition: parallel" header.

10.2.  Changes from draft-worley-sipping-forking-01 to
       draft-worley-siping-forking-02

      Updated contact information.

      Changed "Request-Disposition: parallel" to "Request-Disposition:
      no-cancel, parallel", which includes more of the desired behavior
      by reference to [10].

      Updated references to Internet-Drafts.









Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


11.  Normative references

   [1]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]   Roach, A., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event
         Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002.

   [3]   Niemi, A., "SIMPLE Presence Publication Mechanism",
         I-D draft-ietf-simple-publish-01, June 2003.

   [4]   Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the Session
         Initiation Protocol", RFC 4353, February 2006.

   [5]   Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "Session Initiation
         Protocol (SIP) Extension for Instant Messaging", RFC 3428,
         February 2005.

   [6]   Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "The Message Session
         Relay Protocol", I-D draft-ietf-simple-message-sessions-18,
         December 2006.

   [7]   Lawrence, S., Hawrylyshen, A., and R. Sparks, "Diagnostic
         Responses for SIP Hop Limit Errors",
         I-D draft-ietf-sip-hop-limit-diagnostics-03, June 2006.

   [8]   Worley, D., "Call Pickup Examples in SIP",
         I-D draft-worley-sipping-pickup-02, June 2006.

   [9]   Camarillo, G. and A. Roach, "Framework and Security
         Considerations for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Uniform
         Resource Identifier (URI)-List Services",
         I-D draft-ietf-sipping-uri-services-06, September 2006.

   [10]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat, "Caller
         Preferences for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
         RFC 3841, August 2004.













Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


Author's Address

   Dale R. Worley
   Pingtel Corp.
   400 West Cummings Park, Suite 2200
   Woburn, MA  01801
   US

   Phone: +1 781 938 5306 x173
   Email: dworley@pingtel.com
   URI:   http://www.pingtel.com








































Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           A New Forking Mechanism           February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Worley                   Expires August 15, 2007               [Page 17]

