



Network Working Group                                           A. Atlas
Internet-Draft                                          Juniper Networks
Intended status: Best Current Practice                     C. O'Flaherty
Expires: January 4, 2018                                            ISOC
                                                            H. Chowdhary
                                                                    NIXI
                                                           July 03, 2017


                 Geographically-Focused IETF Activities
                 draft-atlas-geo-focused-activities-00

Abstract

   The document defines how Geographically-Focused IETF Activities are
   organized and how IETF policies apply.  It is intended for eventual
   publication as a BCP but this is currently an initial strawman
   proposal based upon the existing variety of experience with the
   experimental activities in this space over the past several years.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Organization of Geographically-Focused IETF Activities  . . .   5
     3.1.  IETF Local Communities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Repeating Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  One-Time Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.4.  Appointment, Term of Service, and Transitions for
           Coordinators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.5.  Support for Coordinators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  IETF Policies Applied to Geographically-Focused IETF
       Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Keeping Attendance Records (Bluesheets) . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  Note Well . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Open and Professional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.4.  Localization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.5.  Use of IETF Name and Logo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.5.1.  Not Official IETF Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Use of IETF Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  Social Media and Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Feedback Loop: Metrics and Surveys  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   10. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   The IETF primarily focuses our activities on plenary meetings,
   mailing lists, and individual Working Group interim meetings with
   Internet Drafts, RFCs, and some structured text or code as
   deliverables.  There has been and continues to be interest in having
   activities focused in different geographical areas.  There is a wide
   variety of such activities that are supported by different
   motivations and objectives.  The following list is illustrative - not
   restrictive.

   1.  IETF Days supported by the Internet Society

   2.  View-only of a Working Group Session with IETF introduction

   3.  RFCs We Love technical talks meeting




Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   4.  Open physical meetings with technical talks on topics of IETF
       interest

   5.  Remote Participation Hubs

   6.  Hackathons to build IETF awareness and encourage developers
       towards practical implementations of IETF standards

   7.  Panels, seminars and tutorials at academic events, NOG meetings,
       IXP meetings etc.

   8.  Open social informal meet-ups (over lunch, dinner, etc.)

   Some of the motivations and objectives include: 1. increasing
   awareness of the IETF's role in the Internet ecosystem, 2. providing
   feedback and exposure to potential new IETF work and providing
   mentoring and support to help authors bring that work into the IETF,
   3. outreach to encourage new potential IETF participants, 4.
   Increasing IETF diversity 5. increase cross-area learning, 6.
   strengthen professional and social connections between IETFers, 7.
   provide feedback and discussion on early work & mentoring to newer
   IETFers, 8. reduce financial barriers to low-volume new participants
   and show advantages from face-to-face interactions.

   These objectives can be summed up as increasing awareness of the
   IETF, doing outreach to encourage new IETF participation, and
   increase technical discussions and cross-learning to encourage faster
   and better technical output.  These are objectives that are in the
   best interest of the IETF.

   The IETF works well when organization happens from motivated people
   who self-organize and the IETF can provide support and light
   oversight.  The IETF has an Education, Mentoring, and Outreach
   Directorate that serves at the pleasure of the IETF Chair and
   oversight of outreach-related activities are part of that
   Directorate's charter.

   The IETF has a variety of policies and processes that are focused on
   preserving an open and transparent standards process with clarity
   around IPR impacts.  The IETF Trust holds trademarks that are used by
   the IETF for our activities; it is important that these are used
   appropriately and with permission.

   This document defines how the various processes and policies apply to
   geographically-focused activities.  This document also defines the
   light oversight for how such activities are run.





Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


2.  Terminology

   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities  An IETF Activity that is
      centered in a specific geographic area.  Examples include IETF
      Local Communities, Remote Awareness Hubs, IETF Awareness Events,
      and Remote Participation Hubs.  Necessary attributes are being
      geographically-focused and open for participation.

   IETF Local Community:  A persistent geographically-focused local
      group of those participating in the IETF and
      interested in the IETF.  An IETF Local Community may do a variety
      of different activities, include Remote Participation Hubs.  The
      necessary attributes are persistence and technical discussion
      related to the IETF.  The focus is on growing a local group of
      people participating in the IETF and strengthening the
      professional and social relationships between them to encourage
      collaboration.

   Remote Awareness Hub  An event where video from one or more IETF
      Working Group or Plenary sessions are shown.
      The event may happen at the same time as the session or may be
      time-shifted and use a recording.  There may be additional
      introductory presentations or other activities.  Necessary
      attributes are focus on an event and viewing of an IETF WG or
      Plenary session.  The focus is on holding an event to raise
      awareness of what happens at an IETF meeting.

   IETF Awareness Activity  An activity where "what the IETF is and
      does" is presented to raise awareness of the IETF.  Materials
      might include presentations about IETF technical work or other
      technical work that might be related to IETF work.  Necessary
      attributes are focus on an activity and on discussing the IETF.

   Remote Participation Hub  An activity that is connected to an IETF
      Working Group or Plenary session such that interactive
      participation in the session is possible.  Necessary attributes
      are focus on an activity and the potential for interactive
      participation in the primary session.

   General Coordinators  The individuals responsible for coordinating
      and running a Geographically-Focused IETF Activity.  These are
      appointed by the Education, Mentoring, and Oversight Directorate.

   Local Coordinator  For some awareness activities which are a single
      activity, those interested in organizing it may serve as the Local
      Coordinators while a general Coordinator, who helps with such
      events, may provide the IETF experience and support.




Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   Repeating Activity  An activity may be sufficiently successful in a
      particular geography so that there is interest in having it
      repeat.  This might be Remote Participation Hubs, Remote Awareness
      Hubs, or other activities.  When there is a desire and expectation
      for a series of repeating activities, then it is useful to have
      Local Coordinators and manage the series similarly to an IETF
      Local Community.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119, BCP 14
   [RFC2119].

3.  Organization of Geographically-Focused IETF Activities

   These activities can be focused on a single activity, repeating
   activities or creating an IETF Local Community.  It's desirable to
   have at least 2 Coordinators for a Geographically-Focused IETF
   Activity accepted by the Directorate.  In this section, the oversight
   role is given to the Directorate because the Directorate's
   organization is not defined here.  It is expected that oversight MAY
   be delegated to the Directorate member in charge of Outreach
   Programs; the Directorate MUST be notified of such and MAY choose to
   override the decision.  If the situation is still not resolved, then
   the IETF Chair will make the final decision.

3.1.  IETF Local Communities

   An IETF Local Community is expected to be a persistent group with
   periodic activities.  Each IETF Local Community MUST have at least 1
   Coordinator accepted by the Directorate.  It is recommended to
   identify at least 2 Coordinators; more than 5 is not desirable.  The
   Local Community Coordinators will work together to define the
   activities and schedule and do the organization to make the
   activities happen.  If it is not possible for a Coordinator to attend
   a particular meeting, the Coordinator can appoint a proxy to run the
   meeting and follow the necessary policies (attendance, note-well,
   etc).

3.2.  Repeating Activities

   If successful, it is likely that some one-time activities, such as a
   Remote Participation Hub, may become repeating.  Such a stream of
   activities in a fixed geography SHOULD have at least 1 Coordinator
   reporting to the Directorate.  This will allow the Coordinator to
   participate in the support provided by the Directorate and other
   Coordinators.




Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


3.3.  One-Time Activities

   Some Geographically-Focused IETF Activities may be one-time activity.
   There still needs to be oversight and support for such activities.
   The Directorate MUST identify at least 1 Coordinator to oversee and
   provide support for such one-time activities.  A Geographically-
   Focused IETF Activity in a particular geography that do not have a
   Coordinator identified fall under the One-Time Activity Coordinators,
   even if that activity has or is repeating.  There may be a period
   where it isn't clear that specific Coordinators for the activity
   should be appointed; for instance, it may not be obvious for a year
   or more that the activity will continue to repeat.

   The One-Time Activity Coordinators MUST appoint a Local Coordinator
   for any activity that the none of the One-Time Activity Coordinators
   will be attending and running.

3.4.  Appointment, Term of Service, and Transitions for Coordinators

   In general, a Coordinator should be familiar with the IETF and
   preferably be or have been an active participant.  For a new Local
   Community or a Repeating Activity, it is likely that there are good
   candidates for Coordinators.  If not, that may be a sign that the
   health of the activity is in question and more support is needed
   before appointing Coordinators.

   It is not appropriate to assume that a Coordinator will serve for an
   indefinite amount of time.  The Directorate should check in with both
   the Coordinators and with the associated mailing lists or activities
   to see how the activity is going and if the Coordinators are
   interested in continuing to do a good job.  The Directorate - and in
   particular the individual in charge of Outreach Programs within the
   directorate, should serve to hear about any concerns and issues
   around the Coordinator's performance.  The Coordinators serve at the
   pleasure of the Directorate.  Changes are primarily made by the
   Directorate member in charge of Outreach Programs - but the
   Directorate MUST be informed.  If there are concerns, then the
   Directorate can override the decision.  If the situation is still not
   resolved, it will go to the IETF Chair for resolution.

   To ensure smooth transitions between Coordinators, the Directorate
   member in charge of Outreach Programs must have the ability to change
   ownership and administration of resources used by the Geographically-
   Focused IETF Activity.  In the case where such resources are the
   Coordinator's personal resources or their organization's resource
   (e.g. a MeetUp, a company resource, etc.), discussion and
   documentation (e.g. in the wiki) of a transition strategy before the
   resource begins being used is necessary.



Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


3.5.  Support for Coordinators

   The Directorate SHOULD provide support for Coordinators.  This should
   include the ability for Coordinators to learn from each others'
   experiences.  Different geographies may find different ideas and
   structures work better.  There MUST be a way to bring up up common
   administrative issues and concerns so that the Directorate can
   facilitate resolving them.

4.  IETF Policies Applied to Geographically-Focused IETF Activities

   This document uses definitions from [RFC8179] because IPR
   considerations drive some of the policy, such as whether it is
   appropriate to show a Note-Well reminder and whether it is necessary
   to track who was present at an activity.

      According to [RFC8179], "IETF": In the context of this document,
      the IETF includes all individuals who participate in meetings,
      working groups, mailing lists, functions, and other activities
      that are organized or initiated by ISOC, the IESG, or the IAB
      under the general designation of the Internet Engineering Task
      Force, or IETF, but solely to the extent of such participation.

   Some Geographically-Focused IETF Activities may be initiated by ISOC
   and others organized by the Education, Mentoring, and Outreach
   Directorate, as initiated by the IETF Chair.  Experiments with such
   activities over the last couple years have been organized by ISOC,
   members of the IESG, and folks active in the Directorate.  Therefore,
   these Geographically-Focused IETF Activities are part of the IETF and
   it is necessary to define how various IETF policies apply.

   The key question for how IETF policies apply to a geographically-
   focused activity is whether that activity should be considered
   "Participating in an IETF discussion or activity", as defined in
   [RFC8179].

4.1.  Keeping Attendance Records (Bluesheets)

   In the IETF, there are three motivations for keeping track of whom
   attends a session.  First, there are logistics and tracking the
   health of the associated group; for instance, what size meeting room
   is physically required?  Second, there is documenting whom is
   influencing the standards process by participating in the session.
   Third, there is documenting whom is in the room for legal issues
   around intellectual property; the IETF does receive sufficient
   requests for copies of bluesheets that they are available on-line.





Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   For all Geographically-Focused IETF Activities, the Coordinators
   SHOULD keep track of attendance.  Logistically, this supports
   planning for future similar events.  It can provide a method for
   continued communication.  It provides some quantitative input to
   develop an understanding of how successful towards an activity's
   objectives an activity was.  For activities that are anticipated to
   influence the standards process, it is important to track who has
   attended.  For Remote Participation Hubs, the Coordinators MUST have
   participants use the current remote participation tools available.
   For other such activities, the Coordinates SHOULD track the
   attendance.

   At a minimum, attendance records MUST include name and affiliation.
   Unless participants simply use the current remote participation
   tools, a readable digital image of these SHOULD be provided to the
   Secretariat via the defined process.  Attendance records MAY also
   include additional information, but information such as an email
   address SHOULD not be provided as part of a readable digital image.
   Such additional information MAY be used by the Coordinators and
   Directorate for metrics and, with agreement, future contact.

4.2.  Note Well

   At IETF Sessions, a Note Well is shown to remind attendees of their
   obligations under the IETF's IPR policy.  Showing the Note Well does
   not change or create the obligations; it is merely a helpful
   reminder.  In Geographically-Focused IETF Activities, there are
   likely to be folks new to the IETF for whom not merely showing the
   Note Well, but having some discussion around its purpose can be
   useful.  With [RFC8179], the IPR-related obligations apply not merely
   to IETF sessions but to a variety of discussions intending to
   influence the standards process.

   For events that are anticipated to influence the standards process,
   such as Remote Participation Hubs and some IETF Local Community
   events, the Coordinators MUST ensure that the IETF's Note Well is
   shown; for Remote Participation Hubs, this may simply be as part of
   viewing the WG or Plenary session.  Coordinators SHOULD show the
   IETF's Note Well at formal (i.e. where it is possible to project
   presentations) events and discuss briefly what it means.  This is
   useful for events targeting IETF awareness because understanding how
   the IETF handles IPR provides useful information for potential
   participants and their affiliations.








Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


4.3.  Open and Professional

   Just as the IETF Plenary meetings and Working Group interims are open
   to all who wish to participate, it is necessary that Geographically-
   Focused IETF Activities are also open to all participants.
   Participants must behave according to professional standards.
   [RFC7154] is a BCP defining guidelines for conduct in the IETF; it
   applies to Geographically-Focused IETF Activities as well.  [RFC7776]
   defines Anti-Harassment procedures and creates an Ombudsteam to
   handle issues.

4.4.  Localization

   Since Geographically-Focused IETF Activities specifically happen in
   widely varying localities, there can be language and other location-
   specific considerations.  While the IETF works only in English, there
   may be some types of events where using the local language is
   preferable.  There may be other localization accommodations that are
   appropriate to consider.  A localization accommodation MUST NOT
   compromise the openness of the event for attendees.

4.5.  Use of IETF Name and Logo

   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities may use the IETF logo and IETF
   name, with suitable oversight.  For IETF Local Communities, there are
   Coordinators appointed who will be informed about the IETF Trust
   policies and basic acceptance.  For other Geographically-Focused IETF
   Activities, there will also be either specific Coordinators for the
   activity, in the case of repeating events, or Coordinators who
   provide oversight to help individual events happen with local
   coordinators.  In general, not using a misleading name and not
   modifying the IETF logo or name is sufficient.  For unusual cases,
   these will be discussed on the Coordinators' mailing list and
   remaining questions will be addressed to the IAD.

4.5.1.  Not Official IETF Activities

   Even though the IETF supports and encourages the organization of
   activities aimed to increase participation, when they're not official
   IETF activities, careful care of IETF name and logo usage should be
   taken.  In order to obtain permission to use or display any IETF logo
   or name, you must first complete and send, to iad@ietf.org, the form:
   http://trustee.ietf.org/docs/IETF_General_TM_License.pdf Please
   include a description of your activity, contact information,
   referrals inside the IETF community and any other information that
   can be used for approval.  As as general guideline, as long as you're
   not using a misleading name for your activity (avoid using names that
   can be confused with official IETF activities) and you haven't



Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   modified any IETF Trust logo or name, you will receive a positive
   response.

   IETF logo files can be found in the IETF site (https://ietf.org/
   logo/)

5.  Use of IETF Resources

   The IETF can provide resources such as mailing lists, wikis,
   calendars.  When a new resource is needed, the Outreach Programs
   Directorate member is responsible for forwarding on an appropriate
   request.  Area Directors can approve new mailing lists; requests for
   new mailing lists will go to the IETF Chair or appointed delegate for
   initial approval.

   The following is a proposed structure for IETF mailing-lists to be
   used by the Geographically-Focused IETF Activities.

   1.  outreach-coordinators mailing list: This list has at least the
       Coordinators appointed by Directorate, but has open membership
       and archive.

   2.  ietf-hub-[geography]: For Repeating Events and IETF Local
       Communities, there is an associated mailing list.  Another
       possible name is ietf-local-[geography]; currently there are
       ietf-hub-boston and ietf-hub-bangalore.

   3.  vmeet: for discussion of Geographically-Focused IETF Activities
       as well as virtual meetings, since that is where the conversation
       has been happening.

   4.  Ietf-community-[large-geography]: To coordinate across the Local
       Communities and for other Geographically-Focused IETF Activities.
       A current example is ietf-community-india.

   5.  outreach-discuss: For discussion of outreach activities around
       the IETF Community.

   It is useful to have a wiki that allows a persistent URI for sharing
   events, storing information about past events, and brainstorming/
   organizing new ones.  With the proposed structure where all of the
   Geographically-Focused IETF Activities are related to Outreach, a
   wiki for outreach, that can then be self-organized, is needed.  This
   can currently be under https://trac.ietf.org/trac/edu/outreach;
   appropriate links and visibility will be needed and need to be
   periodically reevaluated.





Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   A shared on-line calendar that at least Coordinators can add events
   to is needed.  This will provide a single place to check when and
   where various activities are happening.  Given that many IETFers
   travel for business, it also makes it easy for IETFers to discover if
   there is a local activity happening that is of interest.

6.  Social Media and Communications

   Most of IETF communications activities are coordinated and
   accomplished by ISOC staff.  For Social media, industry media and
   other communication needs the Coordinator should contact
   comms@ietf.org for an appropriate messaging.  Through ISOC's support,
   the activity will be better promoted and aligned with IETF
   expectations.  There is an ongoing revision of IASA activities that
   can affect how future IETF communications are managed.

   Once the basic requirements and a template for the communication are
   understood by Coordinators, it is expected that only unusual
   communications will need discussion.  Sharing of the information is
   still desirable so that events can be better promoted.  Coordinators
   will need to work on promoting the activities and reaching out to the
   relevant communities.

7.  Feedback Loop: Metrics and Surveys

   The breadth of objectives and activities covered by Geographically-
   focused IETF activities makes it very hard to have a single set of
   metrics or appropriate surveys.  Having geographically-focused IETF
   activities is an experiment.  It is useful to know how the various
   activities are doing and what changes or tuning might be desirable.
   There is useful information to collect from Coordinators and from
   attendees.

   Here is a list of possible questions for Coordinators.

   1.  What types of events are you holding?  How frequently?  What is
       the attendance?

   2.  What types of communication & outreach are you using?  What seems
       effective?

   3.  What WGs and Areas are of interest?

   4.  How could the IETF make holding events easier?

   5.  What kinds of events are you interested in holding in the future?

   6.  Would mentors or remote speakers be helpful?



Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   7.  What objectives do you have for your events?

   8.  What is the mixture of folks attending in terms of IETF
       experience, affiliation, technical interests, and active
       participation?

   9.  What advice would you give other Coordinators?

   Here is a list of possible questions for attendees.  Some may be
   primarily useful in IETF awareness and others primarily in IETF Local
   Communities.:

   1.   What is your knowledge of and experience with the IETF before
        attending?

   2.   Did this event meet your expectations?  Was it interesting or
        productive?  Would you attend another similar event?

   3.   What types of events would be interesting?  Technical
        discussions, social/informal discussion, remote hubs,
        hackathons, joint draft or RFC review and discussion, other?

   4.   How did you hear about the event?

   5.   Are you aware of the following ways to learn about future events
        and IETF-related activities?

   6.   What technical areas would you be interested in working on in
        the IETF?

   7.   Do you feel prepared to engage on IETF Working Group mailing
        lists and review drafts?  What type of support would help?

   8.   Does your affiliation/day-job understand the benefits of
        participating in the IETF?

   9.   How might the IETF make participating easier?

   10.  What WG sessions have you attended?

   11.  What could be done better?

   12.  What IETF topics would inspire you to participate?








Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no impact on IANA registries.

9.  Security Considerations

   The policies in this document provide support and oversight of
   geographically-focused IETF activities so that the IETF name and logo
   are not misrepresented and so that the IETF's IPR and Anti-Harassment
   policies are followed.  An appeal path is provided to handle
   problems.

10.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7154]  Moonesamy, S., Ed., "IETF Guidelines for Conduct", BCP 54,
              RFC 7154, DOI 10.17487/RFC7154, March 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7154>.

   [RFC7776]  Resnick, P. and A. Farrel, "IETF Anti-Harassment
              Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 7776, DOI 10.17487/RFC7776, March
              2016, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7776>.

   [RFC8179]  Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Intellectual Property
              Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 79, RFC 8179,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8179, May 2017,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8179>.

Authors' Addresses

   Alia Atlas
   Juniper Networks

   Email: akatlas@juniper.net


   Christian O'Flaherty
   ISOC

   Email: oflaherty@isoc.org







Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                     I-D                         July 2017


   Harish Chowdhary
   NIXI

   Email: harish@nixi.in















































Atlas, et al.            Expires January 4, 2018               [Page 14]
