

          INTERNET DRAFT                 F.D. Wright, Lexmark International
          <draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt>
          November 27, 1996                           Expires: May 27, 1997


                Requirements for WEB Browser-based Internet Printing

          STATUS OF THIS MEMO

          This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
          documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
          areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
          distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

          Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
          months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
          documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
          Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as ''work
          in progress.''

          To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
          the ''1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
          Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net
          (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
          Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

          1. ABSTRACT

          This document describes the requirements for WEB browser-based
          Internet printing protocol.  It describes the end-user, operator
          and administrator wants and needs in the context of printing
          documents from a variety of sources.  These sources include
          standard desktop applications (e.g. word processors,
          spreadsheets, and browsers), documents selected by reference
          (e.g. URL) and documents created by batch or background
          applications.  Additionally, requirements for light-weight
          printer status and management and job status and management
          services will be discussed.

          2. TERMINOLOGY

          Internet Printing for the purposes of this document is the
          application of World Wide Web tools, programs, servers and
          networks to allow ''end-users'' to print to a remote printer
          using, after initial setup or configuration, the same methods,
          operations and paradigms as would be used for a locally attached
          or a local area network attached printer.  This includes the use
          of HTTP servers and browsers for providing static, dynamic and
          interactive printer locating services, user installation,





          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 1]

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996




          selection, configuration, and status inquiry of remote printers
          and jobs.

          For the purposes of this document, a WEB Browser is software
          available from a number of sources including but not limited to
          the following: Microsoft Internet Explorer, NCSA Mosaic, Netscape
          Navigator, Sun Hot Java!.  The major task of these products is to
          use the Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP) to retrieve,
          interpret and display Hypertext Markup Language (HTML).

          Throughout this document, 'printer' shall be interpreted to
          include any device which is capable of marking on a piece of
          media using any available technology.  No assumption is made
          about multi-tiered printing solutions involving servers (single
          or multiple) logically in front of the actual printing device and
          all such configurations shall be supported but shall appear to
          the ''end-user'' as only a single device.

          3. REQUIREMENTS

          The next three sections identify the requirements of a Web-based
          Internet printing protocol from three roles assumed by humans:
          ''end-user'', ''operator'', and ''administrator.''  The
          requirements defined here are only those that need to be
          addressed by an application level Internet printing protocol.
          Other requirements, such as that the ''operator'' needs physical
          access to the printer are not covered by this document.

          3.1 End-user

          An ''end-user'' of a printer accepting jobs through the Internet
          is one of the roles in which humans act.  The ''end-user'' is the
          person that will submit a job to be printed on the printer.

          The requirements of the ''end-user'' are broken down into six
          categories: finding/locating, local instance, viewing printer
          status, submitting a print job, viewing job status, altering the
          print job.

          3.1.1 Finding or locating a printer. ''End-users'' wants to be
          able to find and locate printers to which they are authorized to
          print.  They want to be able to perform this function using a
          standard WEB browser.  Multiple criteria can be applied to find
          the printers needed.  These criteria include but are not limited
          to:



          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 2]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996





          - by name (Printer 1, Joes-color-printer, etc.)
          - by geographic location (bldg 1, Kentucky, etc.)
          - by capability or attribute (color, duplex, legal paper, etc.)

          Additionally, ''end-users'' want to be able to limit the scope of
          their searching to:

          - inside the corporate firewall
          - include only a particular domain (lexmark.com)
          - exclude specified domains

          3.1.2 Create an instance of the printer.  After finding the
          desired printer, an ''end-user'' needs to be able to create a
          local instance of that printer within the ''end-user'' operating
          system or desktop.  This local instance will vary depending upon
          the printing paradigm of the operating system.  For example, some
          UNIX users will only want a queue created on the machine while
          other UNIX users and Windows NT users will want not only the
          queue but also the necessary icons and registry entries to be
          created and initialized.  Where required, drivers may need to be
          downloaded from some repository and installed on the computer.
          All necessary decompressing, unpacking, and other installation
          actions should occur without ''end-user'' interaction or
          intervention excepting initial approval by the ''end-user.''
          Once the local instance of the printer has been installed, it
          shall appear to the ''end-user'' of operating system and to the
          applications running there as any other printer (local, local
          area network connected, or network operating system connected) on
          the ''end-user'' desktop or environment.

          3.1.3 Viewing the status of a printer.  Before using a selected
          printer or, in fact at any time, the ''end-user'' needs the
          ability to verify the characteristics and status of both printers
          and jobs queued for that printer using the WEB browser.  When
          checking the characteristics of a printer, the ''end-user''
          typically wants to be able to determine the capability of the
          device, e.g.:

          - loaded media, commonly paper, by size and type
          - paper handling capability, e.g. duplex, collating, finishing
          - color capability

          When checking the status of the printer, the ''end-user''
          typically wants to be able to determine:



          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 3]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996





          - is the printer on-line?
          - what are the defaults to be used for printing?

          When checking the status on jobs queued for the printer, the
          ''end-user'' typically wants to be able to determine:

          - how many jobs are queued for the printer?
          - how are job priorities assigned?

          3.1.4 S                 ubmitting a print job.  Once the desired printer has been
          located and installed, the ''end-user'' wants to print to that
          printer from normal applications using standard methods.  These
          normal applications include such programs as word processors,
          spreadsheets, data-base applications, WEB browsers, etc.  In
          addition to printing from an application, the ''end-user'' needs
          to have the ability to submit a print job by reference.  Printing
          by reference is defined to mean using a WEB browser to submit a
          job by providing a reference to an existing document.  The
          reference, which could be a URL, will be resolved before the
          actual print process occurs.

          Some means shall be provided to determine if the format of a job
          matches the capability of the printer.  This can either be done
          automatically by the printer or can be done by the ''end-user.''
          A standard action shall be defined should the job's requirements
          not match the capabilities of the printer.

          Because the ''end-user'' does not want to know the details of the
          underlying printing process, the protocol must support job-to-
          printer capability matching (all implementations are not
          necessarily required to implement this function.)  This matching
          capability requires knowing both the printer's capabilities and
          attributes and those capabilities and attributes required by the
          job.  Actions taken when a print job requires capabilities or
          attributes that are not available on the printer vary and can
          include but are not limited to:

          - rejecting the print job
          - redirecting the print job to another printer
          - printing the job, accepting differences in the appearance

          Print jobs will be submitted by background or batch applications
          without human intervention.  Any application level Internet
          printing application must support this type of printing.



          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 4]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996





          ''End-users'' need the ability to set certain print job
          parameters at the time the job is submitted.  These parameters
          include but are not limited to:

          - number of copies
          - job priority
          - job defaults


          3.1.5 Viewing the status of a submitted print job.  After a job
          has been submitted to a printer, the ''end-user'' needs a way to
          view the status of that job (i.e. job waiting, job printing, job
          done) using a WEB browser.

          In addition to the need to inquire about the status of a print
          job, automatic notification of the completion of that job is also
          required.  This notification capability is not defined by the
          protocol but the protocol must provide a means of enabling and
          disabling the notification.

          3.1.6 Altering the status of a submitted print job.  While a job
          is waiting to be printing or has been started but not yet
          completed, the original creator/submitter of the print job (i.e.
          the ''end-user'') shall be able to cancel the job entirely (job
          is waiting) or the remaining portion of it (job is printing.)


          3.2 Operator

          An ''operator'' of a printer accepting jobs through the Internet
          is one of the roles in which humans act.  The ''operator'' has
          the responsibility of monitoring the status of the printer as
          well as managing and controlling the jobs at the device.  These
          responsibilities include but are not limited to the replenishing
          of supplies (ink, toner, paper, etc.), the clearing of minor
          errors (paper jams, etc.) and the reprioritization of ''end-
          user'' jobs.

          The requirements of the ''operator'' include all those of the
          ''end-user.''

          3.2.1 Alerting.  One of the required ''operator'' functions is
          having the ability to discover or to be alerted to changes in the
          status of the printer particularly those changes that cause the



          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 5]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996




          printer to stop printing and to be able to correct those
          problems.  As such, an Internet printing protocol shall be able
          to alert a designated ''operator'' or ''operators'' to these
          conditions such as ‘out of paper’, ‘out of ink’, etc.
          Additionally. the ''operator'' shall be able to, asynchronous to
          other printer activity, inquire as to the printer or job status.

          3.2.2 Changing Print and Job Status.  Another of the required
          ''operator'' functions is the ability to affect changes to
          printer and job status remotely.  For example, the ''operator''
          will need to be able to reprioritize or cancel any print jobs on
          a printer to which the ''operator'' has authority.

          3.3 Administrator

          An ''administrator'' of a printer accepting jobs through the
          Internet is one of the roles in which humans act.  The
          ''administrator'' has the responsibility of creating the printer
          instances and controlling the authorization of other
          ''end-users'' and ''operators.''

          The requirements of the ''administrator'' include all those of
          the ''end-user.''  Additionally the ''administrator'' must have
          tools, programs, utilities and supporting protocols available to
          be able to:

          - create an instance of a printer
          - create, edit and maintain the list of authorized ''end-users''
          - create, edit and maintain the list of authorized ''operators''
          - create, edit and maintain the list of authorized
          ''administrators''
          - create, customize, change or otherwise alter the manner in
          which the status of printers and jobs are presented
          - create, customize, change or otherwise alter front-end or
          pre-print processes
          - create, customize, change or otherwise alter back-end or
          post-print processes
          - administrate billing or other charge-back mechanisms
          - create sets of defaults
          - create sets of capabilities

          The ''administrator'' must have the capability to perform all the
          above tasks locally or remotely to the printer.

          4.0 OBJECTIVES OF THE PROTOCOL



          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 6]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996





          The protocol to be defined by an Internet printing working group
          will address the requirements of the ''end-user''.  It will not,
          at least initially, address the ''operator'' or ''administrator''
          requirements.

          The protocol defined shall be independent of the operating system
          of both the client and the server.  Any platform providing a WEB
          Browser shall be supported as a client.  Any platform providing a
          WEB/HTTP server and printing services shall be supported as a
          server.

          4.1 Security

          There are general requirements for security in an Internet
          printing application.  These requirements include authentication,
          authorization, privacy, and commercial transaction.

          4.2 Interaction with LPD (RFC1179)

          Many versions of UNIX and in fact other operating systems provide
          a means of printing as described in RFC1179 (Line Printer Daemon
          Protocol.)  This document describes the file formats for the
          control and data files as well as the messages used by the
          protocol.  Because of the simplistic approach taken by this
          protocol, many manufacturers have include proprietary
          enhancements and extensions to 'lpd.'  Because of this divergence
          and due to other requirements described in this document, there
          is no requirement for backward compatibility with 'lpd'.

          4.3 Firewalls

          As stated in the ''end-user'' requirements section, Internet
          printing shall by definition support printing from one enterprise
          to another.  As such, the Internet printing protocol must be
          capable of passing through firewalls (where enabled by the
          firewall administrator) preferably without modification to the
          existing firewall technology.

          4.4 Internationalization

          Users of Internet printing will come from all over the world.  As
          such, where appropriate, internationalization and localization
          will be enabled for the protocol.




          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 7]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997

          INTERNET DRAFT   Internet Printing Requirements     Nov 27, 1996





          5.0 REFERENCES

          RFC1179 - Line Printer Daemon Protocol
          RFC1759 - Printer MIB
          ISO/IEC 10175, Document Printing Application

          6.0 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

          This document draws heavily from preliminary work done by others.
          The author gratefully acknowledges the contributions of:

          Scott Isaacson
          Novell
          scott_isaacson@novell.com

          Roger Debry
          IBM
          rdebry@us1.ibm.com

          Carl-Uno Manros
          Xerox
          manros@cp10.es.xerox.com

          7.0 AUTHOR'S ADDRESS

          F.D. (Don) Wright
          Lexmark International
          C14/035-3
          740 New Circle Rd
          Lexington, KY  40511

          Phone: 606-232-4808
          Fax: 606-232-6740
          E-mail: don@lexmark.com













          Wright             draft-wright-ipp-req-00.txt           [Page 8]
                                Expires: May 27, 1997
