


Network Working Group                                             B. Lim
Internet-Draft                                                     C. Ng
Intended status: Informational                                    K. Aso
Expires: May 15, 2008                                          Panasonic
                                                       November 12, 2007


  Verification of Care-of Addresses in Multiple Bindings Registration
                 draft-lim-mext-multiple-coa-verify-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 15, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007).













Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


Abstract

   Using multiple care-of address registration, there is a possibility
   that a malicious mobile node could create multiple care-of address
   bindings that does not belong to the mobile node at its home agent.
   The home agent would accept these bindings without verifying them due
   to the trust relationship it has with the mobile node.  With these
   bindings, the mobile node can launch attacks by asking the home agent
   to flood the victims of these care-of addresses with useless packets.
   To mitigate such a problem, this memo introduces a verification
   mechanism that the home agent would use in order to verify the
   care-of addresses for the mobile node before using them for packet
   routing.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Problem Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Initiating the Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Launching the Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Possible Solution Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Applicable Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17




















Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


1.  Introduction

   IP mobility allows a mobile node to maintain an ongoing communication
   session regardless of where the mobile node roams in the Internet.
   To achieve this constant connectivity, [1] permits the mobile node to
   register a transient IP address (e.g. care-of address) at an
   anchoring point (e.g. home agent).  The mobile node sends a binding
   update (BU) message to the home agent for registering its care-of
   address.  With this registration, the home agent could then forward
   any packets addressed to the mobile node at the mobile node's care-of
   address.

   Security has always been a key consideration in user communications.
   This is especially so in IP mobility where the mobile node frequently
   changes its point of attachment.  One such attack in IP mobility is
   the registration of an invalid care-of address at the home agent.
   Such registration allows the attacker to direct its traffic to other
   nodes.  Such an attack is previously ignored since the attacker can
   only use one fake care-of address, thereby losing communications with
   its home agent once the fake address is registered.  However, [2]
   permits the registration of multiple care-of addresses by means of
   using an identification number called Binding Unique Identification
   (BID) number to distinguish between multiple bindings to a home
   address.  Unless proper security methodologies are implemented, the
   use of multiple care-of address registration heightens the chances of
   allowing an invalid care-of address to be registered at the home
   agent.

   This document first expands on the problem briefly described in [3]
   in Section 2 and explains the security threat with the binding of
   fake care-of addresses.  Next, possible approaches to mitigate such
   threat is analyzed in Section 3.



















Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


2.  Problem Scope

   For Mobile IPv6, it is assumed that the mobile node and its home
   agent establish some form of mutual authentication such that the home
   agent trusts the mobile node and will hence accept the registration
   of any care-of address that the mobile node presents to the home
   agent.  This trust relationship is further strengthened when one
   assume that ingress filtering is being used such that when the home
   agent receives a binding update message from the mobile node stating
   its care-of address as the source address, the home agent trusts that
   the incoming packets do indeed originate from the specified source
   address.  In addition, the home agent also trusts the routing
   infrastructure that packets forwarded by the home agent would be sent
   to the intended destination.

   However, such a trust is no longer valid when the mobile node
   utilizes a single binding update message to register its multiple
   care-of address at the home agent.  This technique is explained in
   [2] with the aim of introducing some optimization when registering
   multiple care-of address for a mobile node.  Such optimization
   technique is useful in scenarios when resources (e.g. bandwidth) are
   scarce on some of the mobile node's interfaces, since it allows the
   mobile node to send a binding update message containing multiple
   care-of address to the home agent from an interface that does not
   have such resource constraint.  Moreover, in Mobile IPv6, the use of
   the alternate care-of address option permits the mobile node to
   achieve the same effect of registering a care-of address for another
   interface via a specific interface.  This introduces the risk of
   having fake care-of addresses registered at the home agent and
   compromise the security of the network.  One applicable sceanrio that
   might encounter such a problem is the Fourth Generation (4G) cellular
   networks that is being worked on by the Third Generation Partnership
   Program (3GPP).  Details on this scenario is shown in Appendix A.

   There is a fundenmental difference between a mobile node using Mobile
   IPv6 to flood a victim with useless packets and a mobile node using
   Monami6 to flood a victim with useless packets.  The difference lies
   in that using Monami6, the mobile node can bind a real care-of
   address at the home agent and use this care-of address to control the
   flow of attacks to the victims (e.g. to increase the packet
   transmission rate to the vicitm).  In Mobile IPv6, the mobile node
   loses this means of control as the mobile node can only refresh the
   binding at the home agent.  The example in Section 2.2 illustrates
   the esclated threat of Monami6 in more details.







Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


2.1.  Initiating the Attack

   This problem is best understood through a specific example.  Let us
   assume that a malicious mobile node, MN, sends a binding update
   message to its home agent, HA, to register multiple care-of
   addresses.  This is illustrated in the Figure 1 below.


   [Start of packet header]

   Source Address           : CoA
   Destination Address      : HA's address

   [Mobility Options]

   Binding Unique Identifier: BID1

   Binding Unique Identifier: BID2
   Care-of Address          : V1's address

   Binding Unique Identifier: BID3
   Care-of Address          : V2's address

   [End of packet header]


      Figure 1: Binding Update Message for Multiple Care-of Addresses
                               Registration

   CoA is a valid care-of address owned by MN.  MN is attempting to bind
   addresses of two victims, V1 and V2, at HA in order to launch an
   attack towards the victims.  The binding update message is secured
   using an IPsec security association to protect the integrity and
   authenticity.

   When HA receives this binding update message, it will accept this
   binding update message based on the following.  First, the binding
   update message is deemed authorized as the correct IPSec association
   key is used for the message.  Second, the trust relationship that HA
   has with the routing infrastructure allows it to understand that this
   binding update message is sent from MN.  Finally, after the first two
   checks have succeeded, the trust relationship that HA has with the MN
   permits it to trust the care-of addresses that are specified in this
   binding update message.  Hence, the binding cache at HA will record
   three bindings for MN tied to MN's home address (HoA) as shown in
   Figure 2 below.





Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   Binding 1 [HoA, CoA         , BID1]
   Binding 2 [HoA, V1's address, BID2]
   Binding 3 [HoA, V2's address, BID3]


                   Figure 2: Binding Cache at Home Agent

2.2.  Launching the Attack

   With the bindings created at HA, the malicious mobile node can now
   attempt to flood the victims with useless packets.  This type of
   flooding can cause disruption of services at the victims' end as
   their devices will be busy processing these packets for meaningless
   data.  This is illustrated in Figure 3.

                     +-----+
         +----+ aaaa |     |
         | MN |------|  I  |      +----+
         +----+      |  N  |      | CN |
                     |  T  |      +----+
         +----+ bbbb |  E  |       a|b
         | V1 |------|  R  |       a|b
         +----+      |  N  | aaaa +----+
                     |  E  |------| HA |
         +----+ bbbb |  T  | bbbb +----+
         | V2 |------|     |
         +----+      +-----+

                 Figure 3: Packet flooding attack scenario

   The binding cache at HA contains MN's care-of address along with V1's
   and V2's addresses.  MN uses real-time transport protocol (RTP) and
   real-time transport control protocol (RTCP) to initiate a video
   stream from a streaming server (CN).  Furthermore, MN could employ
   flow filtering techniques to assist in the forwarding of packets from
   HA.  Such techniques are described in [4], [5] and [6].

   Prior to starting the video flow, MN uses CoA to set filter rules at
   HA.  One of the filter rule would tell HA that the control packets
   (shown as "a") for the video stream would be forwarded to BID1.
   Another filter rule informs HA that the data packets (shown in "b")
   for the video stream would be multicast to BID2 and BID3.  When HA
   receives packets from CN, it would adhere to the filter rules created
   and forward the packets accordingly.  This would cause V1 and V2 to
   be flooded with unintended data packets.  Furthermore, MN can utilize
   care-of address1 to maintain the attack to V1 and V2 by sending
   binding update message to constantly renew the lifetime of the
   bindings.  Likewise, MN can also use CoA1 to launch new attacks by



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   binding more victim's addresses at HA and modifying the filter rule
   to include them in the reception of the data packets.

   Although both the home agent and the mobile node are mutually
   authenticated, this does not stop an authenticated mobile node from
   acting maliciously.  Given time, the home agent might be able to
   detect that the mobile node is acting maliciously and may then deny
   mobility services to such a mobile node.  One such way is when the
   home agent starts receiving requests from those victims to stop
   forwarding packets to it.  With a substantial amount of such
   requests, the home agent might launch an investigation to determine
   if the mobile node was acting maliciously.  Hence, we see that a home
   agent might not be oblivious to such an attack.

   However, even if the home agent bars a single identity, the attacker
   may have multiple other identities available at his/her disposal.
   Take for example an electronic mail (e-mail) account, an attacker can
   create multiple e-mail accounts with same/different providers.  Such
   creation can be done at any location that provides terminals with
   Internet connectivity (e.g.  Internet cafe, Library) and does not
   require the attacker to log-in his/her actual identity.  Using these
   multiple accounts, the attacker can start a spamming attack by
   flooding victims with useless e-mails.  The attacker knows that
   eventually his/her account would get banned, but the attacker does
   not care.  The purpose of the attacker has been achieved and that is
   to disrupt the services of those victims.  Furthermore, the attacker
   can continue to create more accounts to replace those accounts that
   got banned.  Thus, in this sense, having the identity known does not
   hinder the above problem from occurring.






















Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


3.  Possible Solution Approaches

   Most of the soultions that will be described below assumes some form
   of ingress filtering is performed on the source address of the packet
   sent by the mobile node.  Such assumption can be considered valid
   when we take in account that most operators deploying the 4G cellular
   networks would likely run ingress filtering within their networks as
   a security precaution to reduce the chances of packet spoofing.

   One obvious way to approach the problem described in Section 2 is for
   the care-of addresses to be formed using the cryptographically
   generated addresses (CGA) technique [7].  With CGA in place, it
   permits the home agent to know if the mobile node actually owns that
   particular care-of address listed in the binding update message.
   Thus, the mobile node would be unable to bind fake care-of addresses
   at the home agent.  However, introducing cryptographically generated
   care-of addresses increases the complexity of the mechanism to
   achieve multiple bindings.  It is unclear how a message can contain
   multiple CGA signatures for each of the care-of addresses.
   Furthermore, complexity is increased by the fact that additional
   addresses are not found in the source address field but somewhere in
   the extension header of the packet (i.e. mobility header).  This
   requires substantial integration between the CGA module and Mobility
   Support module in a network stack implementation.  Additionally, each
   CGA Parameters structure which is at least 72 octets in length must
   be added to the binding update message, further increasing its size.
   Finally, the method of using CGA does not prevent the malicious
   mobile node to launch a flooding attack against a subnet by
   generating multiple non-existent care-of addresses in that subnet
   using the mobile node's own public keys.

   Another way to solve the problem could employ the credit-based
   authorization (CBA) technique described in [8].  Here, the home agent
   uses the credits associated to an unverified binding to forward
   packets via that specific routing path.  If that unverified binding
   does not have enough credits left, the home agent would not forward
   packets using that path as long as that binding remains unverified.
   The binding is verified when the home agent receives a packet from
   the mobile node using that care-of address as source.  This technique
   limits the problem of packet flooding to a victim as it restricts the
   amount of data that can be transferred.  For the home agent to fully
   utilize an unverified care-of address for packet routing the home
   agent would need to receive a packet from the unverified care-of
   address.  With the reception of a packet from the unverified care-of
   address, this proves to the home agent that such a care-of address is
   addressable.  However, the packets that the home agent receives from
   these unverified care-of address might not be sent by the mobile
   node.  For example, it is possible that a malicious mobile node uses



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) described in [9] to send
   a request message via its home address to unverified care-of address.
   If this unverified care-of address belongs to a victim, the reception
   of an ICMP request might trigger a response from the victim.  Hence,
   the victim sends a response to the home address which, would be
   received at the home agent.  With the reception of a packet from an
   unverified care-of address, the home agent would assume that the
   packet is sent by the mobile node.  Thus, this verifies that care-of
   address for packet routing at the home agent.  Also, in situations
   where an interface of the mobile node has asymmetrical link
   characteristics (e.g.  General Packet Radio System), that particular
   interface might have resource constraint on its upload path.  Thus,
   such a constraint may make it costly for a mobile node to send a
   packet to its home agent using that particular interface.

   Alternatively, the problem may be tackled by having the home agent
   send some encrypted information to the mobile node via the unverified
   care-of address and expects the mobile node to return the decrypted
   version of the information.  This technique is described in [10]
   where the use of a cookie proves to the home agent that the mobile
   node is addressable at the specified care-of address.  However, the
   optimization benefit of sending multiple care-of address within a
   single binding update is greatly reduced as it would require the
   mobile node to respond via all these care-of addresses.  In this
   case, the mobile node might as well send the binding update message
   individually for each care-of address.

   It is possible to somewhat combine the CBA technique as described in
   [8] along with the cookie information in [10] to remove the
   disadvantages found in each of them.  The cookie provides some
   authenticity for a packet and helps the home agent to know that the
   packet is indeed sent by the mobile node.  To reduce the need for
   mobile node to send at least one packet from each interface, the home
   agent could send a notification to a mobile node via one unverified
   care-of address and ask the mobile node to respond to the reception
   of the notification via another care-of address.  This utilizes the
   concept of multiple care-of addresses whereby the mobile node need
   not respond back using the same path as the reception of the request.
   Such a concept is particularly useful in the event that the mobile
   node has several unverified care-of addresses that needs to be
   tested.  By asking the mobile node to respond via another unverified
   care-of address, in one round trip time, the home agent would be able
   to verify two care-of addresses.  Figure 4 illustrates this.








Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


                     +-----+
                     |     |
          CoA1 ______|  I  |
              /      |  N  |
     Cellular/       |  T  |
         +----+ CoA2 |  E  |    +----+
         | MN |------|  R  |----| HA |
         +----+ GPRS |  N  |    +----+
        WLAN\        |  E  |
             \_______|  T  |
          CoA3       |     |
                     +-----+

                     Figure 4: Operation of Home Agent

   In Figure 4, the mobile node MN has three interfaces.  A first
   interface associates with the cellular system and uses a care-of
   address CoA1 for communication.  A second interface connects to the
   General Packet Radio System (GPRS) and uses a care-of address CoA2
   for communication.  A third interface associates with the 802.11
   Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) and uses a care-of address CoA3
   for communication.  MN sends a binding update message from CoA1 that
   is attempting to register all its care-of addresses at its home
   agent, HA.  Thus, when HA receives the binding update message, it
   binds CoA1 in its binding cache as a valid routing path to MN as it
   has proven to HA that MN is using that care-of address.  However, for
   CoA2 and CoA3, HA would need to verify their addressability before
   using them for packet routing.  Hence, HA uses the notification to
   verify both of these care-of addresses.

   It is possible for the home agent to choose when to perform such
   verification process for the mobile node's bindings.  One way is to
   have the home agent trigger the verification process immediately upon
   the reception of binding update message registering multiple care-of
   address from a mobile node.  This is mostly helpful when it comes to
   supporting the concept of registering multiple care-of addresses.
   The purpose of having multiple care-of addresses is to allow the home
   agent to route packets to the mobile node via any of the multiple
   paths.  Having the home agent perform the verification process
   immediately permits the home agent to quickly utilize all of the
   mobile node's care-of addresses for packet routing.  For example,
   when the home agent receives the binding update message on CoA1 that
   specifies the binding of both CoA2 and CoA3, the home agent can
   choose to immediately verify these care-of addresses in order to
   start using them for packet routing to the mobile node.

   Another way could be that the home agent triggers the verification
   process just before it needs to use an unverified routing path to the



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   mobile node.  This is especially so in the event that the mobile node
   sets a filter rule at the home agent specifying the routing of
   certain packets via the unverified routing path.  When the home agent
   receives packets that match the filter rule condition, the home agent
   would trigger the verification process for the unverified path prior
   to using it.  An example would be that the mobile node specify in a
   filter rule at the home agent that data packets would be routed via
   CoA3.  When the home agent receives such a packet, it notes that CoA3
   has yet been verified.  Thus, the home agent performs the
   verification process to verify CoA3.

   Also, the transmission path of the notification packet from the home
   agent can vary based on how strict the security policy is enforced.
   Strict security policy can forbid the home agent in using an
   unverified care-of address for any packet routing.  In this sense,
   the home agent can only send the notification to the mobile node via
   a verified care-of address.  Such policies are beneficial in
   deterring any such flooding attacks being launch from the mobile
   node.  For example, since CoA1 is the only verified care-of address
   to the mobile node, the home agent would send a message via CoA1 to
   notify the mobile node to respond back via CoA2.  This action will
   cause the mobile node to understand that the home agent is trying to
   verify CoA2.  Hence, the mobile node would send a packet to the home
   agent via CoA2, thereby proving to the home agent that it is
   addressable at CoA2.

   On the other hand, if the home agent employs techniques such as CBA,
   it permits the home agent to route packets to the mobile node via an
   unverified care-of address.  These packets would be limited to the
   amount of credits associated to that particular binding.  The
   advantage of using an unverified path to transmit the notification is
   that it allows the home agent to verify at best two unverified
   care-of addresses.  This is especially useful in the event that the
   mobile node has several unverified care-of addresses that needs to be
   tested.  An example would be that the home agent sends a message via
   CoA2 to notify the mobile node to respond back via CoA3.  This action
   allows the mobile node to understand that the home agent is trying to
   verify both CoA2 and CoA3.  Hence, the mobile node would send a
   packet to the home agent via CoA3, thereby proving to the home agent
   that it is addressable at both CoA2 and CoA3.

   Furthermore, it is possible that the home agent does not specify a
   return unverified care-of address when it notifies the mobile node.
   This would allow the mobile node to respond back to the home agent
   via any of the mobile node's care-of address.  By permitting the
   mobile node to choose the respond path to the home agent, it supports
   the situation where the uplink path maybe resource constraint (e.g.
   limited uplink bandwidth).  In the first place, this could be the



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   reason why the mobile node decides to send a single binding update
   message to bind its multiple care-of address from a path that does
   not limit its resources.  For example, the home agent wants to verify
   that CoA2 is addressable to the mobile node.  Thus, the home agent
   notifies the mobile node via CoA2 to verify this care-of address.
   Since GPRS has limited uplink bandwidth, the mobile node decides to
   send the respond via the cellular path (CoA1).  Hence, upon receiving
   the respond from the mobile node, the home agent is able to verify
   that the mobile node is addressable at CoA2.

   Finally, how the notification information is carried to the mobile
   node may differ at the home agent.  One possible way is that such
   notification is carried using a dedicated message format.  This makes
   the notification packet small in size and easily recognized by the
   mobile node.  On the other hand, since the notification is specifying
   just a care-of address that the mobile node should respond back by,
   an optimization to this would be to have the notification to be
   tagged with data packets that are being sent to the mobile node.  By
   tagging it to existing data packets, the home agent saves on the
   overhead incurred from the transmission the notification packet to
   the mobile node.






























Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


4.  Conclusion

   This draft explains that the use of multiple care-of address
   registration breaks the trust relationship between a home agent and a
   mobile node.  With this relationship broken, it permits a malicious
   mobile node to bind multiple victims' care-of addresses at the home
   agent.  With these bindings, the mobile node can launch attacks by
   flooding the victims with useless packets.  To reduce the chances of
   having such a situation, we briefly analyse three possible solutions
   (CGA, CBA and RR-cookie) that would be able to solve the problem.
   Using the results from the analysis, we observed that a potential way
   to approach the problem is to merge the techniques described in CGA
   and RR-cookie.  The combination of these two techniques provides some
   form of adequate soultion to the problem.  Furthermore, in an attempt
   to optimize this merged solution, we suggest that the home agent send
   a message to the mobile node via one care-of address path and ask the
   mobile node to respond via another care-of address path.  This
   technique not only allows the home agent to know that the mobile node
   owns the care-of address, but it further optimize the the amount of
   messages that the home agent needs to send in order to verify the
   mobile node's care-of addresses.


5.  Security Considerations

   This draft mentions new security requirements when implementing
   Multiple Care-of Address Registration [2].


6.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [2]  Wakikawa, R., "Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration",
        draft-ietf-monami6-multiplecoa-03 (work in progress), July 2007.

7.2.  Informative References

   [3]   Montavont, N., "Analysis of Multihoming in Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-monami6-mipv6-analysis-04 (work in progress),



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


         July 2007.

   [4]   Soliman, H., "Flow Bindings in Mobile IPv6 and Nemo Basic
         Support", draft-soliman-monami6-flow-binding-04 (work in
         progress), March 2007.

   [5]   Larsson, C., "A Filter Rule Mechanism for Multi-access Mobile
         IPv6", draft-larsson-monami6-filter-rules-02 (work in
         progress), March 2007.

   [6]   Mitsuya, K., "A Policy Data Set for Flow Distribution",
         draft-mitsuya-monami6-flow-distribution-policy-04 (work in
         progress), August 2007.

   [7]   Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
         RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [8]   Arkko, J., Vogt, C., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route
         Optimization for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, May 2007.

   [9]   Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", STD 5,
         RFC 792, September 1981.

   [10]  Dupont, F. and J. Combes, "Care-of Address Test for MIPv6 using
         a State Cookie", draft-dupont-mipv6-rrcookie-04 (work in
         progress), January 2007.


Appendix A.  Applicable Scenario

   The shift in the cellular system to utilize the Internet Protocol
   (IP) for communication and signaling implies the need for supporting
   IP mobility.  For cellular operators, it means that a home agent
   would be located within their cellular system in order to support the
   mobile IP signaling (e.g. binding update) to their subscribers'
   mobile nodes.  Within the cellular system, the establishment of a
   trust relationship between the operator and subscribers allows
   operators to provide services to subscribers.  For example, the
   network would trust that the user operating a mobile node is the
   genuine subscriber and not someone who has stolen the subscriber's
   identity.  To strength this trust relationship, operators uses the
   Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) protocol within
   their system to authenticate their subscribers before providing
   services to them.  Furthermore, a business contract (e.g. terms and
   condition) between the operator and subscribers binds subscribers to
   obey the rules dictated by the operator when using the services
   provided by the operator.  Using the terms and conditions, an
   operator is able to terminate services to a subscriber if the



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   operator deems that the subscriber is acting maliciously.  Figure 5
   below illustrates the cellular scenario.


        +----+
        | HA |
        +----+
          ||
       +=======+   +=======+
      /  3GPP   \ / Non 3GPP\
      \ Network / \ Network /
       +=======+   +=======+
              \    /
        CoA.3G \  / CoA.Non-3G
              +----+
              | MN |
              +----+


                          Figure 5: 3GPP scenario

   In this scenario, a mobile node (MN) has two interfaces.  A first
   interface is associated to a 3GPP network (e.g. 3G cellular) and uses
   CoA.3G for communication.  A second interface is associated to a non-
   3GPP network (e.g.  Wireless Local Area Network) and uses CoA.Non-3G
   for communication.  The home agent in this scenario is part of the
   3GPP network and might trust the validity of any packets sent with a
   source address configured in the 3GPP network.  Thus, if MN sends a
   binding update message to HA with the source address as CoA.3G, HA
   would accept this binding as a valid route to the MN.  However, this
   binding update message could further contain a request for HA to bind
   CoA.Non-3G.As HA trusts the packet with a source address CoA.3G, this
   implies that HA would trust its content, which in this case is the
   binding request for CoA.Non-3G. Hence, HA would bind CoA.Non-3G as a
   valid routing path to the MN even though the path has not been
   verified.  This might incur the problem of a malicious MN using the
   HA to flood a victim with useless packets.

   Similarly, in the event that the binding update message contains a
   mixture of care-of addresses that are trusted and not trusted by the
   home agent, the home agent could identify those trusted care-of
   addresses and omit performing the verification process for such
   addresses.  When binding of a care-of address that is trusted by the
   home agent, the verification process could be skipped and the state
   of such a binding would immediately be set to the verified state.
   The reason that the home agent trusts this care-of address could be
   that the home agent understands that the prefix used to create the
   care-of address is unique to the mobile node.  Another reason could



Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


   be that the care-of address is assigned by a trusted address
   allocation server (e.g.  DHCP server).  To be able to distinguish
   between trusted and non-trusted care-of addresses, policies could be
   installed at the home agent to assist in such identification process.
   If the home agent receives a binding update message that has a
   mixture of care-of addresses that are trusted and not trusted by the
   home agent, using the policy, the home agent would then be able to
   identify which care-of address requires verification and which does
   not.  This reduces the chance of the home agent having to perform
   redundant care-of address verification on those trusted care-of
   address.


Authors' Addresses

   Benjamin Lim
   Panasonic Singapore Laboratories Pte Ltd
   Block 1022 Tai Seng Ave #06-3530
   Tai Seng Industrial Estate
   Singapore  534415
   SG

   Phone: +65 65505478
   Email: benjamin.limck@sg.panasonic.com


   Chan-Wah Ng
   Panasonic Singapore Laboratories Pte Ltd
   Blk 1022 Tai Seng Ave #06-3530
   Tai Seng Industrial Estate
   Singapore  534415
   SG

   Phone: +65 65505420
   Email: chanwah.ng@sg.panasonic.com


   Keigo Aso
   Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. (Panasonic)
   5-3 Hikarino-oka
   Yokosuka, Kanagawa  239-0847
   JP

   Phone: +81 46 840 5123
   Email: asou.keigo@jp.panasonic.com






Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Verifying Multiple CoA Bindings       November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Lim, et al.               Expires May 15, 2008                 [Page 17]

