


ANCP Working Group                                           H. Moustafa
Internet-Draft                                            France Telecom
Intended status: Informational                             H. Tschofenig
Expires: April 16, 2007                                          Siemens
                                                           S. De Cnodder
                                                                 Alcatel
                                                        October 13, 2006


 Security Threats and Security Requirements for the Access Node Control
                            Protocol (ANCP)
              draft-moustafa-ancp-security-threats-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The Access Node Control Protocol (ANCP) aims to communicate QoS-,
   service- and subscriber-related operations between a Network Access
   Server (NAS) and an Access Node (e.g., a Digital Subscriber Line
   Access Multiplexer (DSLAM)).  The main goal of this protocol is to



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   configure and manage access equipments and allow them to report
   information to the NAS in order to enable and optimize configuration.

   This document investigates security threats that all ANCP nodes could
   encounter, developing a threat model for ANCP security aiming to
   decide which security functions are required at the ANCP level.
   Based on this, security requirements regarding the Access Node
   Control Protocol are defined.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   3.  System Overview and Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   4.  Objectives of Attackers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   5.  Potential Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Message Modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  Replay of Signaling Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.3.  Denial of Service Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.4.  Traffic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.5.  Downgrading Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.6.  Man-in-the-Middle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.7.  Network Snooping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   6.  Attacks Against ANCP Defined Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Dynamic Access Loop Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Access Loop Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.3.  Remote Connectivity Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.4.  Multicast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   7.  Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   10. Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15


















































Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


1.  Introduction

   The Access Node Control Protocol (ANCP) aims to communicate QoS-,
   service- and subscriber-related operations between a Network Access
   Server (NAS) and an Access Node (e.g., a Digital Subscriber Line
   Access Multiplexer (DSLAM)).

   [I-D.ooghe-ancp-framework] illustrates the framework, usage scenarios
   and general requirements.  This document focuses on description of
   security threats and derives security requirements from the Access
   Node Control Protocol.  Security policy negotiation, including
   authentication and authorization to define the per-subscriber policy
   at the policy/AAA server, is out of the scope of this work.  As a
   high-level summary, the following aspects need to be considered:
   Message Protection:

      Signaling message content can be protected against eavesdropping,
      modification, injection and replay while in transit.  This applies
      both to ANCP payloads, and ANCP should also provide such
      protection as a service to the different service parameters
      between the two peers.

   Prevention again Impersonation:

      It is important that signaling messages are delivered to the
      correct nodes, and nowhere else.

   Prevention of Denial of Service Attacks:

      ANCP nodes and the network have finite resources (state storage,
      processing power, bandwidth).  Exhaustion attacks against these
      resources and not allow ANCP nodes to be used to launch attacks on
      other network elements is of importance.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119], with the
   qualification that unless otherwise stated they apply to the design
   of the Access Node Control Protocol (ANCP), not its implementation or
   application.

   The relevant components are described in Section 3.






Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


3.  System Overview and Threat Model

   As described in [I-D.ooghe-ancp-framework] and schematically shown in
   Figure 1, the Access Node Control system consists of the following
   components:
   Network Access Server (NAS):

      A NAS provides access to a service (e.g., network access) and
      operates as a client of the AAA protocol.  The client is
      responsible for passing authentication information to designated
      AAA servers and then acting on the response that is returned.

   Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (AAA) server:

      A AAA server is responsible for authentication users, for
      authorizing access to services, and for returning authorization
      information including configuration parameters back to the AAA
      client to deliver service to the user.  As a consequence of
      service usage accounting might be enabled and information about
      the user's resource usage will be sent to the AAA server.

   Access Node (AN):

      The AN is a network device, usually located at a service provider
      central office or street cabinet, that terminates Access Loop
      connections from subscribers.  In case the Access Loop is a
      Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), this is often referred to as a DSL
      Access Multiplexer (DSLAM).

   Customer Premises Equipment (CPE):

      A CPE is a device and associated equipment located inside a
      subscriber's premise and connected with a carrier's
      telecommunication channel(s) at the demarcation point ("demarc").
      The demarc is a point established in a building or complex to
      separate customer equipment from the equipment of the access
      network provider (e.g., a telephone company).

   Home Gateway (HGW):

      The HGW connects the different Customer Premises Equipment (CPE)
      to the Access Node and the access network.  In case of DSL, the
      HGW is a DSL Network Termination (NT) that could either operate as
      a layer 2 bridge or as a layer 3 router.  In the latter case, such
      a device is also referred to as a Routing Gateway (RG).

   For the threat analysis the protocol communication between the Access
   Node and the NAS is important whereas the other component, such as



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   HGW, CPE, AAA server only play a role in the understanding of the
   system architecture.  Note that the NAS and the AN might belong to
   two different administrative realms.


                                                +--------+
                                                | AAA    |
                                                | Server |
                                                +--------+
                                                     |
                                                     |
   +-----+   +-----+   +--------+                 +-----+   +----------+
   | CPE |---| HGW |---|        |                 |     |   |          |
   +-----+   +-----+   | Access |                 |     |   | Internet |
                       | Node   |-----------------| NAS |---|          |
   +-----+   +-----+   | (AN)   |                 |     |   |          |
   | CPE |---| HGW |---|        |                 |     |   |          |
   +-----+   +-----+   +--------+                 +-----+   +----------+

                         Figure 1: System Overview

   In the absence of an attack, the NAS receives configuration
   information from the AAA server related to a CPE attempting to access
   the network.  A number of parameters, including Quality of Service
   information, need to be conveyed to the Access Node in order to
   become effective.  The Access Node Control Protocol is executed
   between the NAS and the AN to initiate control requests.  The AN
   returns responses to these control requests and provides information
   reports.

   For this to happen, the following individual steps must occur:
   o  The AN discovers the NAS.
   o  The AN needs to start the protocol communication with the NAS to
      announce its presence.
   o  The AN and the NAS perform a capability exchange.
   o  The NAS sends requests to the AN.
   o  The AN processes these requests, authorizes the actions and
      responds with the appropriate answer.  In order to fulfill the
      commands it might be necessary for the AN to communicate with the
      HGW or other nodes, for example as part of a keep alive mechanism.
   o  The AN provides status reports to the NAS.

   Attackers can be:

   o  off-path, i.e., it cannot see packets between the AN and the NAS;
   o  on-path, i.e., they can see the message exchange between the AN
      and the NAS.




Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   Both off-path and on-path attackers can be:

   o  passive, i.e., they do not participate in the network but rather
      listen to all transfer to obtain the maximum possible information;
   o  active, i.e., they participate to the network and can inject
      falsify packets.

   We assume the following threat model:
   o  An off-path adversary located at the CPE or the HGW.
   o  An off-path adversary located on the Internet or a regional
      network that connects one or more NAS and associated Access
      Networks to Network Service Providers (NSPs) and Application
      Service Providers (ASPs).
   o  An on-path adversary located at network elements between the AN
      and the NAS.
   o  An adversary that took control over the NAS.
   o  An adversary that took control over the AN.


4.  Objectives of Attackers

   Attackers may direct their efforts either against an individual
   entity or against a large portion of the access network.  Attacks
   against an individual entity fall into three classes:
   o  attacks to disrupt the communication for individual customers
   o  attacks to disrupt the communication of a large fraction of
      customers in an access network
   o  attacks to grain profit for the attacker (e.g., by modifying the
      QoS settings)

   Attackers against the access network or a portion of it fall into
   three classes:
   o  attacks to disrupt the network services
   o  attacks to destruct the network functioning
   o  attacks to intercept subscribers-related data to increase the QoS
      of a subscriber(e.g., by replaying old packets, an attacker can
      configure a better QoS profile on its own DSL line increasing its
      own benefit)


5.  Potential Attacks

5.1.  Message Modification

   This type of threat involves integrity violations, whereby an
   adversary modifies signaling messages (e.g., by acting as a man-in-
   the-middle) in order to cause unexpected network behavior.  Possible
   actions an adversary might consider for its attack are reordering,



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   delaying, dropping, injecting, truncating, and otherwise modifying
   messages.  An adversary might, for example, inject a signaling
   message to request allocation of QoS resources.  As a consequence,
   other user's traffic might be impacted.

5.2.  Replay of Signaling Messages

   This threat scenario covers the case in which an adversary
   eavesdrops, collects signaling messages, and replays them at a later
   time (or at a different place, or uses parts of them at a different
   place or in a different way; e.g., cut-and-paste attacks).  Doing
   this an adversary might mount man-in-the-middle, denial of service,
   and theft of service attacks.

5.3.  Denial of Service Attacks

   A number of denial of service (DoS) attacks can cause ANCP nodes to
   malfunction.  Other attacks that could lead to DoS, such as man-in-
   the-middle attacks, replay attacks, and injection or modification of
   signaling messages, etc., are mentioned throughout this document.

   When state is established or certain functions are performed without
   requiring prior authorization there is a chance to mount denial of
   service attacks.  An adversary can utilize this fact to transmit a
   large number of signaling messages to allocate state at nodes and to
   cause resource consumption.

   When the ANCP allows the AN to dynamically discovery the NAS then a
   man-in-the-middle vulnerablity is introduced.  An adversary can use
   the discovery mechanisms to convince one entity to signal information
   to another entity, or to cause the discovery process to fail.  In the
   first case, the signaling protocol could appear to continue
   correctly, except that a number of ANs might contact a single NAS or
   a wrong NAS.  For the AN this could mean that the protocol failed for
   unknown reasons.

   Faked Error or Response Messages: An adversary may be able to inject
   false error or response messages as part of a DoS attack.  This could
   be at the signaling protocol level, at the level of the specific
   service parameters (e.g., QoS information), or the transport layer.
   An adversary might cause unexpected protocol behavior or might
   succeed with a DoS attack.  The discovery protocol, especially,
   exhibits vulnerabilities with regard to this threat scenario (see the
   above discussion on discovery).







Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


5.4.  Traffic Analysis

   This section covers threats whereby an adversary is able to eavesdrop
   on signaling messages.  The signaling packets collected may allow
   traffic analysis or be used later to mount replay attacks.  The
   eavesdropper might learn QoS parameters, communication patterns,
   policy rules for firewall traversal, policy information, application
   identifiers, user identities, NAT bindings, authorization objects,
   network configuration and performance information, and more.

5.5.  Downgrading Attack

   Protocols may be useful in a variety of scenarios with different
   security and functional requirements.  Different parts of a network
   (e.g., within a building, across a public carrier's network, or over
   a private microwave link) may need different levels of protection.
   It is often difficult to meet these (sometimes conflicting)
   requirements with a single mechanism or fixed set of parameters, so
   often a selection of mechanisms and parameters is offered.
   Therefore, a protocol is required to agree on certain (security)
   mechanisms and parameters.  An insecure parameter exchange or
   security negotiation protocol can help an adversary to mount a
   downgrading attack to force selection of mechanisms weaker than those
   mutually desired.  Thus, without binding the negotiation process to
   the legitimate parties and protecting it, ANCP might only be as
   secure as the weakest mechanism provided (e.g., weak authentication),
   and the benefits of defining configuration parameters and a
   negotiation protocol are lost.

5.6.  Man-in-the-Middle Attack

   An adversary might claims to be an NAS or a AN to acts a man-in-the-
   middle to later initiate faked configuration parameters and to flood
   other nodes with signaling messages.  The consequence can range from
   DoS to fraud.

5.7.  Network Snooping

   An adversary, a sniffer, can be placed at the NAS or the AN or any
   other network element between the AN and the NAS capturing all
   traversed packets in this network portion.  This can be an effective
   way for Traffic Analysis mentioned in Section 5.4.  Adversaries can
   carryout Network Snooping to gather information relevant to the
   network and then use this information in gaining unauthorized access.
   This attack is also called Sniffing and it can help adversaries in
   other malicious purposes, as for example capturing control messages
   sent from the AN to the NAS announcing that a DSL line is up and
   containing some information related to the connected client,



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   indicating the client's existence at home.


6.  Attacks Against ANCP Defined Use Cases

   ANCP is susceptible to security threats, causing disruption/
   unauthorized access to network services, manipulation of the
   transferred data, and interference with network functions.  Based on
   the threat model given in Section 3 and the potential attacks
   presented in Section 5, this section describes the possible attacks
   for the 4 ANCP use cases defined in [I-D.ooghe-ancp-framework].

   Although ANCP protocol is not involved in the communication between
   the NAS and the AAA/policy server, the secure communication between
   the NAS and the AAA/policy server is important for ANCP security.
   Since this point is out-of-scope of ANCP, it is not discussed in this
   document.

6.1.  Dynamic Access Loop Attributes

   This use case concerns the communication of Access Loop attributes
   for dynamic access line topology discovery.  Since the Access Loop
   rate may change overtime, advertisement is beneficial to the NAS to
   gain knowledge about the topology of the access network for QoS
   scheduling.  Besides data rates and Access Loop links identification,
   other information may also be transferred from the AN to the NAS
   (examples in case of DSL Access Loop are: DSL Type, Maximum
   achievable data rate, and maximum data rate configured for the Access
   Loop).  This use case is thus vulnerable to a number of on-path and
   off-path attacks that can be either active or passive.

   On-path attacks can take place as follows:
   o  Between the AN and the NAS during the Access Loop attributes
      transfer.

   These attacks may be: i) Passive, only learning these attributes.
   The main attacks here are caused by network snooping through
   capturing information about the clients'connection state and thus
   impacting their privacy protection, or traffic analysis that can be
   used in later unauthorized access. ii) Active, acting on the
   transferred attributes and/or injecting falsify packets.  Man-in-the-
   middle attack is a possible major attack in such case causing Access
   Loop attributes transfer between a forged AN or a forged NAS which
   can directly cause faked attributes, message modification, and DoS
   through signaling replay.

   Off-path attacks can take place as follows:




Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   o  On the Internet affecting the Access Loop attributes sharing
      between the NAS and the policy server.

   Those attacks may be: i) Passive as eavesdropping, traffic analysis,
   and network snooping gaining information of the access loop
   attributes that can be used later in initiating replay attacks or
   unauthorized access to the NAS or the policy server. ii) Active as
   DoS through flooding the communication links to the policy server
   causing service disruption, and man-in-the-middle attack causing
   access loop configuration data retrieval from the policy server by an
   illegitimate NAS.

6.2.  Access Loop Configuration

   This use case concerns the dynamic local loop line configuration
   through allowing the NAS to change the access loop parameters (e.g.
   rate) in a dynamic fashion.  This allows for centralized subcriber-
   related service data.  This dynamic configuration can be achieved for
   instance through profiles that are pre-configured on ANs.  This use
   case is vulnerable to the following attacks:
   o  Downgrading attack is possible during the update of the Access
      Loop configuration, where an on-path adversary on the NAS, the AN
      or between them can actively force other parameters than the
      selected ones.
   o  DoS attacks can take place by an on-path active attacker, through
      replaying of the Configure Request messages.
   o  Damaging clients' profiles at ANs can take place by on-path active
      hackers that gained control on the network through discovery of
      users information from a previously network snooping.
   o  On-path active adversary can replay old packets related to a
      privileged client profile (having more services), so that to
      configure this profile on its own DSL line which is less
      privileged.  In order that the attacker do not expose its
      identity, it may also replay packets related to the privileged
      client profile to configure a number of illegitimate DSL lines.
   o  Off-path passive adversaries on the Internet can exert eaves-
      dropping during the Access Loop configuration retrieval by the NAS
      from the policy server.
   o  Off-path active adversary on the Internet can threaten the
      centralized subscribers-related service data in the policy server,
      through for instance making subscribers records inaccessible.

6.3.  Remote Connectivity Test

   In this use case, the NAS can carryout Remote Connectivity Test using
   ANCP to initiate an Access Loop test between the AN and the HGW.
   Thus, multiple Access Loop technologies can be supported.  This use
   case is vulnerable to the following attacks, where most of the



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   attacks in this use case concern the network functionality:
   o  On-path Man-in-the-middle attack can occur during the NAS
      triggering to the AN to carryout the test.  An active adversary
      can inject falsify signals instead or can truncate the triggering.
   o  On-path Man-in-the-middle attack can take place during the
      Subscriber Response message transfer from the AN to the NAS
      announcing the test results.
   o  Off-path DoS attack can take place, in case of ATM based Access
      Loop, when the AN generates loopback cells during the Access Loop
      test, by an active adversary replaying these generated cells.
      Message truncating can also occur by an off-path active adversary,
      leading to service disruption due to test failures assumption.

6.4.  Multicast

   In this use case, ANCP could be used in exchanging information
   between the AN and the NAS allowing the AN to perform replication
   inline with the policy and configuration of the subscriber.  Also,
   this allows the NAS to follow each subscriber's multicast group
   memebership.  Attacks that can occur in this case are mostly on-path
   active attacks, which are as follows:
   o  Damaging proxy functionality in the AN, aggregation node(s) or the
      NAS through DoS or through signaling truncating.
   o  DoS during the information exchange between the NAS and the AN on
      the subscriber's policy and multicast traffic configuration.
   o  Man-in-the-middle attack during the multicast replication process
      at the AN, aggregation node(s) and the NAS that can cause
      modification of the multicast group memebership either for service
      disruption or for adversary benefit (e.g. subscriber's policy
      illegitimate change).


7.  Security Requirements

   The following list represents a list of requirements motivated by the
   threats in Section 5:
   o  The protocol solution MUST offer authentication of the AN to the
      NAS.
   o  The protocol solution MUST offer authentication of the NAS to the
      AN.
   o  The protocol solution MUST allow authorization to take place at
      the NAS and the AN.
   o  The protocol solution MUST offer replay protection.
   o  The protocol solution MUST provide data origin authentication.
   o  The protocol solution SHOULD offer confidentiality protection.
   o  The protocol solution MUST be robust against denial of service
      attacks.




Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


   o  The protocol solution SHOULD provide mutual authentication between
      different communicating entities.
   o  The protocol solution SHOULD distinguish the control messages from
      the data.
   o  The protocol solution SHOULD provide privacy protection.


8.  Security Considerations

   This document focuses on security threats deriving a threat model for
   ANCP and presenting the security requirements to be considered.


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.


10.  Acknowledgment

   The authors would like to thank Antoine Delafoy and Philippe Niger
   for their useful comments.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

11.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ooghe-ancp-framework]
              Ooghe, S., "Framework and Requirements for an Access Node
              Control Mechanism in Broadband  Multi-Service Networks",
              draft-ooghe-ancp-framework-00 (work in progress),
              June 2006.













Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Hassnaa Moustafa
   France Telecom
   38-40 rue du General Leclerc
   Issy Les Moulineaux,   92794 Cedex 9
   France

   Email: hassnaa.moustafa@orange-ftgroup.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bavaria  81739
   Germany

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.com


   Stefaan De Cnodder
   Alcatel
   Copernicuslaan 50
   B-2018 Antwerp,
   Belgium

   Phone: +32 3 240 85 15
   Email: stefaan.de_cnodder@alcatel.be






















Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                ANCP Threats                  October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 15]


