

Network Working Group                                       M. Wasserman
Internet-Draft                                                ThingMagic
Expires: April 25, 2005                                        L. Daigle
                                                                 VeriSign
                                                         October 25, 2004


       Structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
                     draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-01.txt

Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
    of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
    author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
    which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
    which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
    RFC 3668.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as
    Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2005.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

    This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
    Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
    the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
    responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
    (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD) and ISOC in the fiscal
    and administrative support of the IETF standards process.  It also



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    defines how the IAOC will be comprised and selected.

Table of Contents

    1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
    2.  Structure of the IASA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
      2.1   IAD Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
      2.2   IAD Committees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
      2.3   IAOC Responsibilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
      2.4   Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership . . .  6
      2.5   IAOC Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
    3.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability  . . . . . . . .  7
      3.1   Initial IAOC Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
    4.  IASA Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
    5.  IASA Budget Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
    6.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
    7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    10.   Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    11.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
    11.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
    11.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 15


























Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


1.  Introduction

    This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
    Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
    the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
    responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
    (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD) and ISOC in the fiscal
    and administrative support of the IETF standards process.  It also
    defines how the IAOC is comprised and selected.

    The IETF undertakes its technical activities as an ongoing, open,
    consensus-based process.  The Internet Society has long been a part
    of the IETF's standards process, and this document does not affect
    the ISOC-IETF working relationship concerning standards development
    or communication of technical advice.  The purpose of this document
    is to define an administrative support activity that is responsive to
    the administrative needs of the IETF technical community, as well as
    consistent with ISOC's operational, financial and fiduciary
    requirements.

    The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) provides the
    administrative structure required to support the IETF standards
    process and to support the technical activities of the IETF,
    including the IESG, the IAB, IETF working groups and the IRTF.  This
    includes, as appropriate, undertaking or contracting for the work
    described in [RFC3716], including IETF document and data management,
    IETF meetings, and any operational agreements or contracts with the
    RFC Editor and IANA.  The IASA is also responsible for the financial
    activities associated with IETF administrative support such as
    collecting IETF meeting fees, paying invoices, managing budgets and
    financial accounts, etc.

    The IASA is responsible for ensuring that the IETF's administrative
    needs are met and met well; it is not expected that the IASA will
    undertake the bulk of this work directly, but rather that IASA will
    contract this work from others, and manage the contractual
    relationships in line with key operating principles such as
    efficiency, transparency and cost effectiveness.

    The IASA is distinct from other IETF-related technical functions,
    such as the RFC Editor, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
    (IANA), and the IETF standards process itself.  The IASA has no
    influence on the technical decisions of the IETF or on the technical
    contents of IETF work.

2.  Structure of the IASA

    The IASA will be structured to allow accountability and transparency



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    of the IETF administrative and fiscal activities to the IETF
    community.  The IASA will be directed and overseen by the IETF
    Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC).  The IAOC will consist of
    volunteers, all chosen directly or indirectly by the IETF community,
    as well as appropriate ex officio appointments from ISOC and IETF
    leadership.  The IAOC will be accountable to the IETF community for
    the effectiveness, efficiency and transparency of the IASA.

    The IASA will initially consist of a single full-time ISOC employee,
    the IETF Administrative Director (IAD), who will have executive-level
    responsibility for the IASA.  The IAD will require a variety of
    financial, legal and administrative support, and it is expected that
    this support will be provided by ISOC support staff or consultants
    following an expense and/or allocation model determined by ISOC in
    consultation with the IAOC.

    Although the IAD will be an ISOC employee, he or she will work under
    the direction of the IAOC.  The IAD will be selected and hired by a
    committee of the IAOC.  The members of this committee will be
    appointed by the IAOC, and will consist minimally of the ISOC
    President and the IETF Chair.  This same committee will be
    responsible for periodically reviewing the performance of the IAD and
    determining any changes to his or her employment and compensation.

    Most IETF administrative functions will be outsourced via
    well-defined contracts or equivalent instruments.  The IAD will be
    responsible for negotiating and maintaining those contracts, as well
    as providing any coordination that is necessary to make sure the IETF
    administrative support functions are properly covered.

2.1  IAD Responsibilities

    The IAD will be responsible for working with the IAOC and others to
    understand the administrative requirements of the IETF and for
    managing the IASA to meet those needs.  This will include determining
    the structure of the IASA effort, establishing an operating budget,
    negotiating contracts with service providers, managing the business
    relationship with those providers and establishing mechanisms to
    track their performance.  The IAD may also manage ISOC support staff
    or other IASA-related contractors or employees, as necessary.

    The IAD will be responsible for running IASA in an open and
    transparent manner and for producing regular (monthly, quarterly and
    annual) financial and operational updates for IAOC and IETF community
    review.

    The IAD will be responsible for administering the IETF finances,
    managing a separate financial account for the IASA, and establishing



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    and administering the IASA budget.  While it is understood that ISOC
    will need to put some financial controls in place to protect ISOC's
    fiscal stability, the IAD (with IAOC approval, as appropriate) should
    have signing authority consistent with carrying out IASA work
    effectively, efficiently and independently.  If there are any
    problems regarding the level of financial approval granted to the
    IAD, the IAOC and ISOC commit to working out a policy that is
    mutually agreeable.

    Service contracts will be negotiated by the IAD (with input from any
    other appropriate bodies) and reviewed, as appropriate, by the IAOC.
    It is expected that the IAOC will establish guidelines for what level
    of review is expected based on contract type, size, cost and/or
    duration.  The contracts will be executed by ISOC, on behalf of the
    IASA, after whatever review ISOC requires in order to ensure that the
    contracts meet ISOC's legal and financial requirements.

    Although the approval of the ISOC President/CEO or ISOC Board of
    Trustees may be required for some contracts, their review should be
    limited to protecting ISOC's liabilities and financial stability.
    The IAD and IAOC are responsible for making all business decisions
    regarding the IASA.  In particular, the ISOC Board of Trustees will
    not have direct influence over the choice of IASA contractors or IETF
    meeting sponsors.  This restriction is meant to enforce the
    separation between fund raising and the actual operation of the
    standards process.

    The IAD will prepare an annual budget, which will be reviewed and
    approved by the IAOC.  The IAD will be responsible for presenting
    this budget to the ISOC Board of Trustees, as part of ISOC's annual
    financial planning process.  The IAOC is responsible for ensuring the
    suitability of the budget for meeting the IETF community's
    administrative needs, but the IAOC does not bear fiduciary
    responsibility for ISOC.  Therefore, the ISOC Board also needs to
    review and understand the budget and planned activity in enough
    detail to properly carry out their fiduciary responsibility.  Each
    year, the complete IASA budget will published to the IETF community.

    Unless explicitly delegated with the consent of the IAOC, the IAD
    will also fill the role of the IETF Executive Director, as described
    in various IETF process BCPs.

2.2  IAD Committees

    The IAD may constitute special-purpose, chartered committees to bring
    in expertise (e.g., financial, IETF process, tools), engage
    volunteers in IASA activities and/or benefit from additional
    perspectives.  These committees may consist of subsets of the IAOC,



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    IAB or IESG, selected IETF participants, or external experts,
    depending on the need.  These committees are advisory in nature --
    the IAD is responsible for the outcome, including presenting and
    supporting any decisions or work items to the IAOC and the IETF
    community, as appropriate.

2.3  IAOC Responsibilities

    The role of the IAOC is to provide appropriate direction to the IAD,
    review the IAD's regular reports, and oversee the IASA functions to
    ensure that the administrative needs of the IETF community are being
    properly met.  The IAOC is not expected to be regularly engaged in
    the day-to-day administrative work of IASA, but rather to provide
    appropriate direction, oversight and approval.

    Therefore, the IAOC's responsibilities are:

    o  Select the IAD and provide high-level review and direction for his
       or her work.  It is expected that this task will be handled by a
       sub-committee, as described above.

    o  Review the IAD's plans and contracts to ensure that they will meet
       the administrative needs of the IETF.  Track whether the IASA
       functions are meeting the IETF community's administrative needs,
       and work with the IAD to determine a plan for corrective action if
       they are not.

    o  Review the IAD's budget proposals to ensure that they will meet
       the IETF's needs, and review the IAD's regular financial reports.

    o  Ensure that the IASA is run in a transparent and accountable
       manner.  While the work may be delegated to the IAD and others,
       the IAOC is responsible for ensuring that IASA finances and
       operational status are appropriately tracked and that monthly,
       quarterly and annual financial and operational reports are
       published to the IETF community.

    The IAOC's role is to direct and review, not perform, the work of the
    IAD and IASA.  It is expected the IAOC will have periodic
    teleconferences and face-to-face meetings, as needed to efficiently
    and effectively carry out their duties.

2.4  Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership

    The IAOC will be directly accountable to the IETF Community.
    However, the nature of the IAOC's work will involve treating the IESG
    and IAB as internal customers.  The IAOC and the IAD should not
    consider their work successful unless the IESG and IAB are satisfied



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    with the administrative support that they are receiving.

2.5  IAOC Decision Making

    The IAOC attempts to reach all decisions unanimously.  If unanimity
    cannot be achieved, the IAOC chair may conduct informal polls to
    determine the consensus of the group.  In cases where it is
    necessary, some decisions may be made by voting.  For the purpose of
    judging consensus or voting, only full members of the IAOC (including
    ex officio members, but not liaisons) will be counted.

    Decisions of IAOC members or the entire IAOC are subject to appeal
    using the procedures described in RFC 2026 [RFC2026].  Appeals of
    IAOC decisions will go to the IESG and continue up the chain as
    necessary (to the IAB and the ISOC Board).  The IAOC will play no
    role in appeals of WG Chair, IESG or IAB decisions.

3.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability

    The IAOC will consist of seven voting members who will be selected as
    follows:

    o  2 members chosen by the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom)

    o  1 member chosen by the IESG

    o  1 member chosen by the IAB

    o  1 member chosen by the ISOC Board of Trustees

    o  The IETF Chair (ex officio)

    o  The ISOC President/CEO (ex officio)

    There will also be two non-voting, ex officio liaisons:

    o  The IAB Chair

    o  The IETF Administrative Director

    [Note: There is some question about whether the IAB Chair should be a
    liaison or a full member of the IAOC.  There are multiple trade-offs
    here, and this should be discussed by the community.]

    The members of the IAOC will typically serve two year terms.  IAOC
    terms will normally end at the first IETF meeting of a year, similar
    to IAB and IESG terms.




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    The members of the IAOC will choose their own chair each year using a
    consensus mechanism of their choosing.  Any appointed member of the
    IAOC may serve as the IAOC Chair (i.e., not the IETF Chair, the ISOC
    President/CEO or a liaison).  The role of the IAOC Chair is to
    organize the IAOC.  The IAOC Chair has no formal duties for
    representing the IAOC, except as directed by IAOC consensus.

    The two NomCom selected members will be selected using the procedures
    described in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  For the initial IAOC selection, the
    IESG will provide the list of desired qualifications for these
    positions.  In later years, this list will be provided by the IAOC.
    The IESG will serve as the confirming body for IAOC appointments.

    While there are no hard rules regarding how the IAB and the IESG
    should select members of the IAOC, it is not expected that they will
    typically choose current IAB or IESG members, if only to avoid
    overloading the existing leadership.  They should choose people with
    some knowledge of contracts and financial procedures who are familiar
    with the administrative support needs of the IAB, the IESG and/or the
    IETF standards process.  It is suggested that a fairly open process
    be followed for these selections, perhaps with an open call for
    nominations and/or a period of public comment on the candidates.  The
    IAB and IESG are encouraged to look at the procedure for IAB
    selection of ISOC Trustees for an example of how this might work.
    After we gain some experience with IAOC selection, these selection
    mechanisms should be more formally documented.

    Although the IAB, IESG and ISOC BoT will choose some members of the
    IAOC, those members will not directly represent the bodies that chose
    them.  All members of the IAOC are accountable directly to the IETF
    community.  To receive direct feedback from the community, the IAOC
    will hold an open meeting at least once per year at an IETF meeting.
    This may take the form of an open IAOC plenary or a working meeting
    held during an IETF meeting slot.  The form and contents of this
    meeting are left to the discretion of the IAOC Chair.  The IAOC
    should also consider open mailing lists or other means to establish
    open communication with the community.

    In the event that an IAOC member abrogates his duties or acts against
    the bests interests of the IETF community, IAOC members are subject
    to recall.  Any appointed IESG member, including those appointed by
    the IAB, IESG or ISOC Board of Trustees, may be recalled using the
    recall procedure defined in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  IAOC members are not
    subject to recall by the body that appointed them.

3.1  Initial IAOC Selection

    The initial IAOC selection will start after this document is approved



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    as a BCP by the IESG and accepted by the ISOC Board of Trustees.  The
    IESG, IAB and ISOC should make their selections within 45-days of BCP
    approval, and the NomCom should make their selections as quickly as
    possible while complying with the documented NomCom procedures.  The
    IAOC will become active as soon as a majority (three or more) of the
    appointed members are selected.

    Initially, the IESG and ISOC Board will make one-year appointments,
    the IAB will make a two-year appointment, and the NomCom will make
    one one-year appointment and one two-year appointment to establish a
    pattern where approximately half of the IAOC is selected each term.

4.  IASA Funding

    The IASA is supported financially in 3 ways:

    1.  IETF meeting revenues.  The IAD, in consultation with the IAOC,
        sets the meeting fees as part of the budgeting process.  All
        meeting revenues go into the IASA account.

    2.  Designated ISOC donations.  The IETF and IASA undertake no fund
        raising activities; this maintains separation between fund
        raising and standards activities.  Any organization interested in
        supporting the IETF activity will continue to be directed to
        ISOC, and any funds ISOC receives specifically for IETF
        activities (as part of any ISOC program that allows for specific
        designations) will also be put into the IASA account.

    3.  Other ISOC support.  ISOC will deposit in the IASA account, each
        quarter, other funds that ISOC has committed to providing as part
        of the IASA budget (where the meeting revenues and specific
        donations do not cover the budget).

    Note that the goal is to achieve and maintain a viable IETF support
    function based on meeting fees and specified donations, and the IAOC
    and ISOC are expected to work together to attain that goal.  (I.e.,
    dropping the meeting fees to $0 and expecting ISOC to pick up the
    slack is not desirable; nor is raising the meeting fees to
    prohibitive levels to fund all non-meeting-related activities).

    In normal operating circumstances, the IASA would look to have an
    operating reserve for its activities sufficient to cover 6-months of
    non-meeting operational expenses, plus twice the recent average for
    meeting contract guarantees.  Rather than having the IASA attempt to
    accrue that reserve in its separate account, the IASA looks to ISOC
    to build and provide that operational reserve (through whatever
    mechanisms ISOC deems appropriate -- line of credit, financial
    reserves, meeting cancellation insurance, etc).  Such reserves do not



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    appear instantaneously; the goal is to reach this level of reserves
    by 3 years after the creation of the IASA.  It is not expected that
    any funds associated with such reserve will be held in the IASA
    account, just that ISOC will have them on-hand for use in the event
    of IETF meeting cancellation or other unexpected fiscal emergencies.

5.  IASA Budget Process

    While the IASA sets a budget for the IETF's administrative needs, its
    budget process clearly needs to be closely coordinated with ISOC's.
    The specific timeline will be established each year.  A general
    annual timeline for budgeting will  be:

    July 1: The IAD presents a budget proposal (for the following fiscal
       year, with 3 year projections) to the IAOC.

    August 1: The IAOC approves the budget proposal for IETF purposes,
       after any appropriate revisions.  As the ISOC President is part of
       the IAOC, the IAOC should have a preliminary indication of how the
       budget will fit with ISOC's own budgetary expectations.  The
       budget proposal is passed to the ISOC Board of Trustees for review
       in accordance with their fiduciary duty.

    September 1: The ISOC Board of Trustees approves the budget proposal
       provisionally.  During the next 2 months, the budget may be
       revised to be integrated in ISOC's overall budgeting process.

    November 1: Final budget to the ISOC Board for approval.

    The dates described above are subject to change, and will most likely
    be modified based on the dates of the summer and fall IETF meetings.

    The IAD will provide monthly accountings of expenses, and will update
    forecasts of expenditures quarterly.  This may necessitate the
    adjustment of the IASA budget.  The revised budget will need to be
    approved by the IAOC, the ISOC President/CEO and, if necessary, the
    ISOC Board of Trustees.

6.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA

    Within ISOC, support for the IASA should be structured to meet the
    following goals:

    Transparency: The IETF community should have complete visibility into
       the financial and legal structure of the ISOC standards activity.
       In particular, the IETF community should have access to a detailed
       budget for the entire standards activity, quarterly financial
       reports and audited annual financials.  In addition, key contract



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


       material and MOUs should be publicly available.  Most of these
       goals are already met by ISOC today.  The IAOC will be responsible
       for providing the IETF community with regular overviews of the
       state of affairs.

    Unification: As part of this arrangement, ISOC's sponsorship of the
       RFC Editor, IAB and IESG will be managed as part of the IASA under
       the IAOC.

    Independence: The IASA should be financially and legally distinct
       from other ISOC activities.  IETF meeting fees should be deposited
       in a separate IETF-specific financial account and used to fund the
       IASA under the direction and oversight of the IAOC.  Any fees or
       payments collected from IETF meeting sponsors should also be
       deposited into this account.  This account will be administered by
       the IAD and used to fund the IASA in accordance with a budget and
       policies that are developed as described above.

    Support: ISOC may, from time to time, choose to transfer other funds
       into this account to fund IETF administrative projects or to cover
       IETF meeting revenue shortfalls.  There may also be cases where
       ISOC chooses to loan money to the IASA to help with temporary cash
       flow issues.  These cases should be carefully documented and
       tracked on both sides.  ISOC will work to provide the operational
       reserve for IASA functioning described above.

    Removability: While there is no current plan to transfer the legal
       and financial home of the IASA to another corporation, the IASA
       should be structured to enable a clean transition in the event
       that the IETF community decides, through BCP publication, that
       such a transition is required.  In that case, the IAOC will give
       ISOC a minimum of six-months notice before the transition formally
       occurs.  During that period, the IAOC and ISOC will work together
       to create a smooth transition that does not result in any
       significant service outages or missed IETF meetings.  All
       contracts that are executed by ISOC as part of the IASA should
       either include a clause allowing termination or transfer by ISOC
       with six months notice, or should be transferrable to another
       corporation in the event that the IASA is transitioned away from
       ISOC in the future.  Any accrued funds, and IETF-specific
       intellectual property rights (concerning administrative data
       and/or tools) would also be expected to be transitioned to the new
       entity, as well.

    Within the constraints outlined above, all other details of how to
    structure this activity within ISOC (e.g.  as a cost center, a
    department or a formal subsidiary) shall be determined by ISOC in
    consultation with the IAOC.



Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


7.  Security Considerations

    This document describes the structure of the IETF's administrative
    support activity.  It introduces no security considerations for the
    Internet.

8.  IANA Considerations

    This document has no IANA considerations in the traditional sense.
    However, some of the information in this document may affect how the
    IETF standards process interfaces with IANA, so IANA may be
    interested in the contents.

9.  Acknowledgements

    The authors would like to thank the following people for their
    feedback on the original "Scenario O" e-mail message and/or
    intermediate versions of this document: Harald Alvestrand, Brian
    Carpenter, Dave Crocker, Tony Hain, Joel Halpern, Eliot Lear, Bert
    Wijnen

    This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
    2629 [RFC2629].

10.  Change Log

    This document was produced as part of the overall IETF Administrative
    Restructuring (AdminRest) effort.  Information about the effort and
    related documents can be found at:

    http://www.alvestrand.no/ietf/adminrest

    We are using an issue tracker to track the editorial and substantive
    feedback on this document.  It can be found at:

    https://rt.psg.com (user: ietf, password: ietf, queue: scenario-o).

    Changes in the -01 Version:

    o  Tuned the IAD job description to make it clear that the IAD has
       executive-level responsibility for IASA, serving under the
       direction (not day-to-day management) of the IAOC.

    o  Added the concept of IAD committees, taken from the original
       AdminRest proposal.

    o  Added text about the initial IAOC selection.




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


    o  Editorial clean-up.

    Origination of the -00 Version:

    The -00 version was derived from an e-mail message written by the
    authors and posted to the IETF by Leslie Daigle.  The original
    message can be found at:

    http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ietf/current/msg31326.html

    This document was derived from the "Draft BCP" portion of that
    message and has been updated based on comments received.

11.  References

11.1  Normative References

    [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
               3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

    [RFC3716]  Advisory, IAB., "The IETF in the Large: Administration and
               Execution", RFC 3716, March 2004.

    [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
               Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
               Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.

11.2  Informative References

    [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
               June 1999.

    [RFC3667]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC
               3667, February 2004.

    [RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
               Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.














Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


Authors' Addresses

    Margaret Wasserman
    ThingMagic
    One Broadway, 14th Floor
    Cambridge, MA  02142
    USA

    Phone: +1 617 758-4177
    EMail: margaret@thingmagic.com
    URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com


    Leslie Daigle
    VeriSign
    21355 Ridgetop Circle
    Dulles, VA  20176
    USA

    EMail: leslie@verisignlabs.com, leslie@thinkingcat.com































Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA                October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
    made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
    on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
    found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
    such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
    http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
    ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
    OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
    ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
    INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
    INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
    to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
    except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
    Internet Society.




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 15]

