

   NSIS Working Group                                                   
   Internet Draft                                     Hannes Tschofenig 
   Document: draft-tschofenig-nsis-threats-                  Siemens AG 
   01.txt 
   Expires: December 2002                                     July 2002 
 
 
                               NSIS Threats 
                 <draft-tschofenig-nsis-threats-01.txt> 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    

























                Informational - Expires December 2002               1 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
Abstract 
    
   As the work in the NSIS working has begun to describe requirements 
   and the framework people started thinking about possible security 
   implication. This document should provide a starting point for the 
   discussion at the NSIS working group mailing list regarding the 
   security issues that have to be addressed by a protocol or within 
   the framework. This document does not describe vulnerabilities of a 
   particular protocol or threats of published NSIS framework 
   proposals. This memo is furthermore meant to create awareness for 
   security issues within the NSIS group. Security requirements related 
   to the threat scenarios are described in [1].  
 
1  Introduction 
    
   It is often argued that QoS signaling protocols are similar to other 
   signaling protocols and one might re-use their security mechanisms 
   for avoiding reengineering overhead. This is true up to some point: 
   A QoS signaling protocol might borrow many security mechanisms from 
   other protocols but different trust assumptions, and different 
   protocol processing may demand different solutions or adaptations. 
   This document tries to show threats that need to be addressed by the 
   designers of a QoS signaling protocol. Although the base protocol 
   might be sure, some extensions may cause problems when used in a 
   particular environment. We think that it is necessary to investigate 
   the context in which a QoS protocol is integrated and in which 
   sequence protocols are executed (when combined together with other 
   protocols). A particular focus of QoS signaling protocols should be 
   given to the interaction with accounting and charging solutions: 
   Without an appropriate integration of QoS and accounting protocols 
   there is no good incentive for network operators to deploy them. The 
   interaction between the protocols is subject of a framework. Some of 
   these issues are therefore found in [5].  
    
   Independent of the threat scenarios described in Section 3 we 
   identify the following structural pieces, which require different 
   security protection because of different trust relationships.  The 
   sub-parts are: access network part, intra and inter-domain part, and 
   finally end-to-end communication between the two signaling end-
   points. These parts are briefly described. The threat scenarios in 
   Section 3 can be assigned to the individual parts.  
    
   a) Access Network  
 
   This section addresses threats that arise when the QoS Initiator 
   (QI) is attached to access network and transmits and receives QoS 
   signaling messages. In many mobility environments it is difficult to 
   assume the existence of a pre-established trust relationship between 
   a user and the access network.  
    
   Threat scenarios dealing with initial QoS security association 
   setup, replay attacks, lack of confidentiality, denial of service, 
   integrity violation, identity spoofing and fraud are applicable. 

     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                2 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   From a security point of view this part of the network causes the 
   most problems.  
 
   b) Intra-Domain 
    
   After receiving a QoS signaling message and verifying the request 
   somewhere in the access network the signaling messages traverse the 
   network within the same administrative domain. Since the request has 
   already been authenticated and authorized threats might likely be 
   different compared to those described in the previous section. To 
   differentiate the end-node-to-access network interface with the 
   intra-domain communication (i.e. communication internally within one 
   administrative domain) we assume that no user hosts are attached to 
   the core-network. (That is: the interface between any host and the 
   first router is part of the access network). We furthermore assume 
   that nodes within one administrative domain have a stronger trust 
   relationship between each other.  
    
   c) Inter-Domain 
    
   The security protection between the borders of different 
   administrative domains largely depends on how accounting is done. If 
   one domain transmits forged QoS reservations (for example stating a 
   higher QoS reservation than a aggregated number of user did) to next 
   domain then it is likely that the originating network domain has 
   also has to pay for the reservation. Hence in this case, there is no 
   real benefit for the first network domain to forge a QoS 
   reservation. But if an end-node is directly charged by intermediate 
   domains then this kind of attack may be reasonable.  Security 
   protection of messages transmitted between different administrative 
   domains is still necessary to tackle attacks like spoofing, 
   integrity violation, denial of service etc. The lower number of 
   networks and higher trust relationship (compared in the access 
   network case) usually causes fewer problems for the key management.  
    
   d) End-to-End  
 
   In our opinion end-to-end security for QoS signaling messages (in 
   addition to hop-by-hop security) is rarely required if we assume 
   that end-to-end issues like charging and the selection which user 
   has to pay for a reservation is already securely negotiated by 
   preceding upper layer protocols (for example SIP). Information 
   carried within a QoS signaling protocol for the purpose of charging 
   is therefore assumed opaque to the QoS protocol itself and 
   appropriately protected as part of the AAA interaction. For 
   accounting data, the QoS signaling protocol is therefore only used 
   as a transport mechanism. Note however that this assumption strongly 
   depends on the chosen solution of a protocol interaction with AAA, 
   QoS and application layer protocol. It is however possible to select 
   a charging solution that requires end-to-end protection of 
   information delivered within the QoS signaling protocol. The 
   following example requires some sort of end-to-end protection: Alice 
   wants Bob to pay for the QoS reservation (reverse charging). Bob 
   wants to be assured that the QoS signaling message he receives was 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                3 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   transmitted by Alice because he is only willing to pay for 
   particular users and not for everyone. Hence Bob requires Alice to 
   protect the reservation request.   
    
   Regarding end-to-end security one additional issue needs to be 
   clarified. Whenever a signaling protocol travels end-to-end and a 
   node along the path acts on behalf of the other endpoint then 
   further investigation is required how to solve this delegation 
   issue.  
    
2  Terminology 
 
   Some threat scenarios in this document use the entity user instead 
   of the QoS Initiator (as introduced in [1]). This is mainly due to 
   the fact that security protocols allow a differentiation between 
   entities being hosts or users (based on the identities used). Since 
   the QoS Initiator as used in [1] also allows to act on behalf of 
   various entities including a network it is reasonable to distinguish 
   between these identities.  
    
   We use the term access network for a network to which a mobile node 
   is attached. Other terms often used in this context are foreign or 
   visited network. The missing direct trust relationship between the 
   mobile node and the access network is characteristic for such an 
   interface and complicates authentication and key agreement. Usually 
   AAA protocols (like Radius or Diameter) are used to provide the 
   initial authentication and key establishment. These protocols take 
   advantage of the infrastructure (AAAL, AAAH, Broker, etc.) and trust 
   relationships between the access network and the user's home 
   network. This trust relationship is usually based on some sort of 
   contract and hence it can be seen as symmetric whereas the 
   dynamically established trust relationship between the mobile node 
   and the access network is asymmetric. The mobile node has to trust 
   the access network in many regards. The access network usually does 
   not trust attached end-hosts.  
    
   The term security association is used to describe established 
   security-relevant data structure between two entities. This data 
   structure consists of keys, algorithms including their parameters, 
   values used for replay protection etc. Using this information two 
   (or more) nodes are able to protect QoS signaling messages.  
     
3  Threat Scenarios 
    
   This section provides threat scenarios that are applicable to the 
   quality of service signaling protocols. 
 
3.1 Man-in-the-Middle Attacks 
 
   This Section describes man-in-the-middle attacks of the following 
   type: During the process of establishing a security association an 
   adversary fools the QI with respect to the entity to which it has to 
   authenticate. The man-in-the-middle adversary is able to modify 
   signaling messages transmitted to the real network requesting 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                4 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   different QoS parameters. The QI wrongly believes that it talks to 
   the ôrealö network whereas it is actually attached to an adversary. 
   Note that a solution for protecting QoS signaling messages does not 
   necessarily need to establish a "long-lasting" security association. 
   Performance reasons may however require to create one.  
    
   For this attack to be successful, pre-conditions have to hold which 
   are described with the two scenarios below:  
    
   a) No authentication 
    
   The first case considers the case that no authentication between the 
   QI and other entity (access network, other networks, a single node) 
   takes places: Without authentication the QI is unable to detect an 
   adversary. It may seem to be strange why someone does not consider 
   to protect QoS signaling messages. However in some cases protection 
   available might be difficult to accomplish in a practical 
   environment either because the other end-point of the communication 
   is unknown, because of a failure in the network configuration or 
   because of misbelieved trust relationships in parts of the network. 
   If one of the communication endpoints is unknown then for some 
   security protocols it is not possible or difficult to select the 
   appropriate key. Regarding an assumed trust relationship, which is 
   not present in some environments, some network administrators refuse 
   to consider security protection of intra-domain signaling messages 
   because of various reasons. Such a configuration sometimes allows a 
   compromised node in the network to interfere the communication of 
   other nodes although it was never intended to actively participate 
   in the signaling.  
    
   b) Unilateral authentication 
    
   In case of only unilateral authentication (that is, a missing 
   authentication of the access network to the QI) the QI is not able 
   to discover the man-in-the-middle adversary. In the 
   telecommunication world this type of attack is known as the false 
   base-station attacks (if the unilateral authentication is executed 
   between a user and the access network). 
    
   The two threats described above are a general problem of network 
   access without appropriate authentication, not only for QoS 
   signaling protocol. Still these issues need to be correctly 
   addressed in a proposed protocol since the impacts may reach beyond 
   the local network. No authentication or unilateral authentication is 
   not only applicable for signaling messages transmitted between a QI 
   and the access network but also between all other nodes.  
    
3.2 Missing real-time notifications of QoS reservation costs (cost 
    control) 
    
   This type of threat is addresses a deployment problem when using QoS 
   signaling in a real-world environment. It is not a particular 
   attack. A large number of service providers with complex roaming 
   agreements create a non-transparent cost-structure. Using AAA 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                5 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   protocols in a subscription-based scenario (i.e. user is registered 
   with his home service provider) the user does not learn the identity 
   of the network using a regular message exchange. The user is only 
   authenticated to the home network (and possibly vice versa). The 
   identity of the access network is possibly not revealed. When 
   issuing a reservation request to the network the end-user does not 
   know the cost of such a reservation. Furthermore due to mobility and 
   route changes along the path the costs for a reservation and for 
   transmitted data packets might not be acceptable for the end-user. 
   However a missing protocol between the user and the network and 
   without the possibility for the user to interact with the network to 
   commit the credit withdrawal costs can reach unexpected amounts.  
    
  When selecting a new point of attachment in case of roaming the end-
  host does not currently have an option to query the network for a 
  reservation cost. Some proposals which try to merge mobility 
  protocols with QoS signaling probe the access network up to the 
  cross-over router for the possibility making a QoS reservation 
  (without actually making the reservation itself). Without such a 
  mechanism to provide network providers a user cannot take reservation 
  costs into consideration when choosing between different networks. 
  Hence the user is unable to refuse the more expensive service 
  provider. The choice for selecting different providers might be 
  available not only because of overlapping frequency ranges but also 
  because of different access technologies (either using a WLAN card to 
  access the local network or to use UMTS/UTRAN based technology).  
    
   Although real-time notifications of quality of service reservation 
   costs (cost control) to the user are outside the scope of a quality 
   of service signaling protocol itself some interactions might be 
   required.  
    
3.3 Eavesdropping and Traffic Analysis 
 
   This Section covers two threats: The first scenario is related to 
   privacy concerns whereas the second addresses problems caused by 
   weak authentication mechanisms and the increased risk of 
   eavesdropping on the wireless link in absence of appropriate 
   confidentiality protection.  
    
   The first threat case covers adversaries that are unable to actively 
   participate in the QoS signaling (passive adversary) but eavesdrop 
   messages. The collected signaling packets may serve for the purpose 
   of traffic analysis or to later mount replay attacks as described in 
   the next Section. By eavesdropping an adversary might violate a 
   userÆs privacy preference. Especially QoS signaling messages provide 
   information that may be interesting for an adversary since the 
   messages include user and/or application identities, policy 
   information, information about the desired QoS reservation, etc. The 
   information gathered by an adversary can be to learn usage patterns 
   of users requesting resources and track QoS reservations.  
    
   An adversary who is able to actively participate in the signaling 
   might be able to use the signaling protocol to discover the topology 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                6 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   of a network (e.g. using record route). Additionally it might be 
   possible to obtain diagnostic information usually used for network 
   monitoring and administration. Other options might allow an 
   adversary to route signaling messages specifically along a 
   particular route similar to source routing.  
 
   The second threat case addresses weak authentication mechanisms 
   whereby information transmitted within the QoS signaling protocol 
   may leak passwords and may allow offline dictionary attacks. This 
   threat is not specific to QoS signaling protocols by may also be 
   applicable and countermeasures must be taken. 
    
3.4 Adversary being able to replay signaling messages 
    
   This threat scenario covers the case where an adversary eavesdrops 
   and collects signaling messages and replays them at a latter point 
   in time (or at a different place, or uses parts of them at a 
   different place or in a different way û e.g. cut and paste attacks). 
   The adversary may use this technique in absence of appropriately 
   protected messages to mount denial of service attacks. Furthermore 
   also theft of service is possible.  
 
   A more difficult attack that may cause problems even in case of 
   replay protection requires the adversary to crash a QoS aware node 
   (router, broker, etc.) to lose synchronization and to be able to 
   replay old QoS signaling messages.  
    
   Additionally it should be mentioned that the interaction between 
   different protocols based on authorization tokens requires some 
   care. Using such an authorization token it is possible to link state 
   information between different protocols. When returning an 
   authorization token to the end-host based for example on a SIP 
   message exchange eavesdropping an replay could allow an adversary to 
   steal resources without proper protection of the token delivery and 
   without verification of the hopefully protected content of the 
   token. The functionality and structure of such an authorization 
   token for RSVP is described in [3] and in [4]. 
    
3.5 Identity Spoofing 
 
   An adversary with the capability to spoof the identity may mount the 
   following attacks: 
     
   Eve, acting as an adversary, claims to be the registered user Alice 
   by spoofing the identity of Alice. Thereby Eve causes the network to 
   charge Alice for the consumed network resources. Using unprotected 
   signaling messages Eve may experience no particular problems in 
   succeeding. This attack can be classified as theft of service.  
    
   In case that the signaling request is properly protected the 
   adversary has to spent considerable more effort. This threat tries 
   to address possible problems with traffic classification based on 
   some identifiers (IP addresses, transport protocol id, ports, flow 
   label [6] and [7], etc.). Additionally concerns might occur if the 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                7 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   end-host performs the traffic marking for example by using a DSCP. 
   When the ingress router uses the DSCP of the incoming data traffic 
   then the situation might be worse since this field is not protected 
   by IPSec AH (and also by IPSec ESP). Issues of DiffServ and IPSec 
   protection are described in Section 6.2 of [RFC2745]. Other security 
   issues related to denial of service attacks are described in Section 
   6.1 of [RFC2745].  
    
   The following paragraph describes a possible threat caused by 
   identity spoofing of transmitted data traffic. After the network 
   receives a properly protected reservation request, transmitted by 
   the legitimate user Alice, traffic filters are installed at edge 
   devices. These traffic filters allow data traffic originated from a 
   given address to be assigned to a particular QoS class. The 
   adversary Eve now spoofs the IP address of the Alice (or whatever 
   identifier is used in the flow classification). Additionally AliceÆs 
   host may be crashed by the adversary as a result of a denial of 
   service attack or lost connectivity for a variety of other reasons. 
   If both nodes are located at the same link and use the same IP 
   address then obviously the usage of a duplicate IP address will be 
   detected. Assuming that only Eve is available at the link then she 
   is now able to receive and transmit data (for example RTP data 
   traffic), that receives preferential QoS treatment, using AliceÆs IP 
   address (or whatever identifier is used in the flow classification). 
   Assuming the soft state paradigm where periodical refresh messages 
   are required the absence of Alice will not be detected until the 
   next signaling message appears and forces Eve to respond with a 
   protected signaling message. Again this issue is not only applicable 
   to QoS traffic but the existence of QoS reservation causes more 
   difficulties since this type of traffic is more expensive.  
 
3.6 Adversary being able to inject/modify messages 
    
   The next type of threat is caused by an integrity violation: An 
   adversary modifies signaling messages (e.g. by acting as a man-in-
   the-middle) to achieve an unexpected network behavior with the bogus 
   request. Possible actions are reordering, delaying, dropping, 
   injecting and modifying.  
    
   Using a different identity the adversary may forward a modified a 
   QoS signaling message requesting a large amount of resources (using 
   a different identity). If granted it causes other user's resource-
   request not to be successful and a different initiator (for example 
   a user) to pay for the QoS reservation. This attack is only 
   successful in absence of signaling message protection.  
 
3.7 Missing Non-Repudiation Property 
 
   Repudiation in this context refers to a problem where one party 
   later denies to have made a reservation. This issue comes in two 
   flavors:  
    
   From a service provider point-of-view the following threat may be 
   worth an investigation because a user may deny to have issued 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                8 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   reservation requests for which it was charged. A service provider 
   may then like to prove that a particular user issued the reservation 
   request.  
    
   The same threat can be interpreted from the users point-of-view. A 
   service provider claims to have received a number of reservation 
   requests. The user in question thinks that he never issued those 
   requests and wants to have a proof for correct service usage for a 
   given set of QoS parameters. 
    
   In todayÆs telecommunication networks non-repudiation is not 
   provided. The user has to trust the network operator to correctly 
   meter the traffic, collect and merge accounting data and that no 
   unforeseen problems occur. If a signaling protocol is used to 
   establish QoS reservations with a higher volume (for example service 
   level agreements) then this issue might have a major impact on the 
   design of a protocol.  
    
3.8 Malicious Edge-Router 
 
   Network elements within a domain (intra-domain) experience a 
   different trust relationship with regard to the security protection 
   of signaling messages compared to edge routers. We assume that edge 
   routers have the responsibility to perform cryptographic processing 
   (authentication, integrity and replay protection, authorization and 
   accounting). If however an adversary manages to take over an edge 
   router then the security of the entire network is affected. An 
   adversary is then able to launch a number of attacks including 
   denial of service, integrity violation, replay attacks etc. Note 
   that this problem is not only restricted to QoS signaling protocols. 
   The chain-of-trust principle applied in the hop-by-hop security 
   protection does not prevent the network from being vulnerable. An 
   adversary with full access to the edge router is then also able to 
   access the keys used to secure messages to other nodes.  
    
   Thus the edge router is a critical component that requires strong 
   security protection. This does not necessarily imply that all 
   routers within the core network do not need to cryptographically 
   verify signaling messages and that these routers cannot cause 
   security problems when acting maliciously. If the chain-of-trust 
   principle is deployed then the security protection of the path (in 
   this case within the network of a single administrative domain) is 
   as strong as the weakest link. In our case the edge router is the 
   most critical component of this network that may also act as a 
   security gateway/firewall for incoming/outgoing traffic. For 
   outgoing traffic this device has to act according to the security 
   policy of the local domain to apply the appropriate security 
   protection.  
    
3.9 Denial of Service in a two phase reservation 
    
   This threat tries to address potential denial of service attacks 
   when the reservation setup is split into two phases i.e. path and 
   reservation (as for example used in receiver based reservation 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002                9 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   setup). For this example we assume that the node transmitting the 
   path message is not charged for the path message itself (only for a 
   reservation) and is able to issue a high number of reservation 
   request (possibly in a distributed fashion). The reservations are 
   however never intended to be successful because of various reasons: 
   the destination node cannot be reached; it is not responding node or 
   simply rejects the reservation. An adversary can benefit from the 
   fact that resources are already consumed along the path for various 
   processing tasks including path pinning.  
    
3.10    Denial of Service with a bogus signaling request  
    
   With a resource reservation request received at a network element 
   (for example by the first QoS aware router) processing is required 
   for authentication and authorization. Processing by other nodes 
   including policy servers, LDAP servers, etc. is also possible 
   depending on the network configuration. The verification of the 
   provided credentials requires computations and resources to be 
   allocated for state maintenance, setting timers, additional messages 
   transmitted to other nodes, cryptographic computations). If an 
   adversary is able to transmit a large number of reservation request 
   (flooding) with bogus credentials and assuming that the verification 
   is expensive in terms of resource consumption then the verifying 
   node may not be able to process further reservation messages by 
   legitimate user. 
    
3.11    Disclosing the networking structure 
    
   In some architectural environments there is a desire by the network 
   provider not to reveal the internal network structure (or other 
   related information) to the outside world. An adversary might be 
   able to use NSIS messages for network mapping (e.g. discovering 
   which nodes exist, which use NSIS, what version, what resources are 
   allocated, capabilities of nodes along a paths etc.). This 
   requirement might conflict with a protocol solution that provides a 
   mean to automatically discover NSIS aware nodes and their identity.  
    
3.12    Modification of subsequent reservation request 
    
   An adversary might be able to modify an existing reservation which 
   had already been established within the network as a result of a 
   previous QoS signaling message. This means that a QoS signaling 
   message that modifies established state must be subject to security 
   protection comparable to the original signaling message setting up 
   the reservation.  
    
   Furthermore it might be necessary to provide assurance for a correct 
   binding to a specific reservation state. Such a property can be 
   designated as reservation ownership. This threat addresses 
   operations for the reservation state established along the path. The 
   reservation state at routers which is created by signaling messages 
   is identified by a Reservation ID. The concept of the Reservation ID 
   is described in [5]. Whenever a signaling message has to refresh, 
   modify or delete a reservation it is necessary to process previously 
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002               10 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
   created state. Therefore the newly transmitted signaling messages 
   have to be associated with an existing reservation. Hence there is a 
   requirement that it must not be possible for someone to use an 
   arbitrary Reservation ID to modify state where no ownership exits. 
   Especially in a roaming scenario where a mobile node retransmits 
   signaling messages from a different point of attachment it must be 
   assured that the routers along the path are able to verify whether 
   the entity transmitting the signaling messages is allowed to modify 
   the established state.  
    
   Potential problems caused by this threat are denial of service, 
   theft of service, service disruption, etc.  
    
3.13    Faked Error/Response messages 
    
  An adversary may be able to use false error/response messages as part 
  of a denial of service attack. This could be either at the 
  reservation level or at the protocol level.  
 
4  Security Considerations 
    
   This entire memo discusses security issues. Some additional threats 
   are applicable for a framework where a NSIS protocol is used. Some 
   of these threats are described in [2].  
    
5  References 
    
   [1]  Brunner, M., "Requirements for QoS Signaling Protocols", draft-
   ietf-nsis-req-02.txt, Work In Progress, May 2002. 
    
   [2]  Kempf, J., Nordmark, E.: ôThreat Analysis for IPv6 Public 
   Multi-Access Linksö, <draft-kempf-ipng-netaccess-threats-01.txt>, 
   (work in progress), December, 2002. 
    
   [3]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B., Broda, M., Kosinski, B., Shieh, H.: 
   ôSession Authorization for RSVPö, <draft-ietf-rap-rsvp-authsession-
   02.txt>, (work in progress), February, 2002. 
    
   [4]  Hamer, L-N., Gage, B., Shieh, H.: ôFramework for session set-up 
   with media authorizationö, <draft-ietf-rap-session-auth-03.txt>, 
   (work in progress), February, 2002. 
 
   [5]  Freytsis, I., Hancock, R., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., Van 
   den Bosch, S.: ôNext Steps in Signaling: A Framework Proposalö, 
   <draft-hancock-nsis-fw-00.txt>, (work in progress), June, 2002. 
   [RFC2745]     
    
   [6]   Partridge, C.: "Using the Flow Label Field in IPv6", RFC               
   1809, June, 1995. 
    
   [7]  Rajahalme, J., Conta, A., Carpenter, B., Deering, S.: "IPv6 
   Flow Label Specification", <draft-ietf-ipv6-flow-label-02.txt>, (work 
   in progress), June, 2002. 
    
     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002               11 
                             NSIS Threats                    July 2002 
    
 
6  Acknowledgments 
    
   I would like to thank (in alphabetical order) Marcus Brunner, Jorge 
   Cuellar, Mehmet Ersue, Xiaoming Fu and Robert Hancock for their 
   comments to this draft. Jorge and Robert gave me an extensive list 
   of comments and provided information on additional threats.  
     
7  Author's Addresses 
    
   Hannes Tschofenig  
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munich 
   Germany 
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@mchp.siemens.de 
    





































     
   Tschofenig    Informational - Expires August 2002               12 