

  Internet Draft                                       J. Kempf, Editor 
  Document: draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-req-04.txt        August, 2006 
                                                                  
                                                                  
  Expires: Feburary, 2007                               
      
      
        Goals for Network-based Localized Mobility Management (NETLMM) 
                    (draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-req-04.txt) 
      
  Status of this Memo 
   
     By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
     applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
     have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
     aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.  
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months  and  may  be  updated,  replaced,  or  obsoleted  by  other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress." 
      
     The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can  be  accessed  at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
      
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
  Contributors 
      
     Gerardo Giaretta, Kent Leung, Katsutoshi Nishida, Phil Roberts, and 
     Marco Liebsch all contributed major effort to this document. Their 
     names are not included in the authors' section due to the RFC 
     Editor's limit of 5 names. 
      
  Abstract 
   
     In this document, design goals for a network-based localized 
     mobility management protocol are discussed.  
   
  Table of Contents 
   
     1.0  Introduction............................................2 
     2.0  Goals for Localized Mobility Management.................2 
     3.0  IANA Considerations....................................10 
     4.0  Security Considerations................................10 
     5.0  Acknowledgements.......................................11 
      
     Kempf, editor               Expires December, 2006       [Page 1] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     6.0  Author's Addresses.....................................11 
     7.0  Informative References.................................12 
     8.0  Appendix: Gap Analysis.................................13 
     9.0  IPR Statements.........................................23 
     10.0 Disclaimer of Validity.................................23 
     11.0 Copyright Notice.......................................23 
   
  1.0    Introduction 
         
     In [9], the basic problems that occur when a global mobility 
     protocol is used for managing local mobility are described, and two 
     basic approaches to localized mobility management - the host-based 
     approach that is used by most IETF protocols, and the proprietary 
     WLAN switch approach used between WLAN switches in different 
     subnets - are examined. The conclusion from the problem statement 
     document is that none of the approaches has a complete solution to 
     the problem. While the WLAN switch approach is most convenient for 
     network operators and users because it requires no software on the 
     mobile  node  other  than  the  standard  drivers  for  WiFi,  the 
     proprietary nature limits interoperability and the restriction to a 
     single wireless link type and wired backhaul link type restricts 
     scalability. The IETF host-based protocols require host software 
     stack changes that may not be compatible with all global mobility 
     protocols,  and  also  require  specialized  and  complex  security 
     transactions with the network that may limit deployability. The use 
     of an IGP to distribute host routes has scalability and deployment 
     limitations.  
      
     This document develops more detailed goals for a network-based 
     localized mobility management protocol. In Section 2.0, we review a 
     list of goals that are desirable in a network-based localized 
     mobility management solution. Section 3.0 briefly outlines security 
     considerations. More discussion of security can be found in the 
     threat analysis document [20]. The architecture of the NETLMM 
     protocol for which the goals in this document have been formulated 
     is described in Section 5 of [9]. 
      
  1.1 Terminology 
      
     Mobility terminology in this draft follows that in RFC 3753 [13] 
     and in [9].  
      
  2.0    Goals for Localized Mobility Management 
      
     Section 2 of [9] describes three problems with using a global 
     mobility management protocol for localized mobility management. Any 
     localized mobility management protocol must naturally address these 
     three problems. In addition, the side effects of introducing such a 
     solution into the network need to be limited. In this section, we 
     address goals on a localized mobility solution including both 

      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 2] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     solving the basic problems (Goals 1, 2, 3) and limiting the side 
     effects (Goals 4+). 
      
     Some basic goals of all IETF protocols are not discussed in detail 
     here, but any solution is expected to satisfy them. These goals are 
     fault tolerance, robustness, interoperability, scalability, and 
     minimal specialized network equipment. A good discussion of their 
     applicability to IETF protocols can be found in [3]. 
      
     Out of scope for the initial goals discussion are QoS, multicast, 
     and dormant mode/paging. While these are important functions for 
     mobile nodes, they are not part of the base localized mobility 
     management  problem.  In  addition,  mobility  between  localized 
     mobility management domains is not covered here. It is assumed that 
     this is covered by the global mobility management protocols. 
       
  2.1 Handover Performance Improvement (Goal #1) 
      
     Handover packet loss occurs because there is usually latency 
     between when the wireless link handover starts and when the IP 
     subnet  configuration  and  global  mobility  management  signaling 
     completes. During this time the mobile node is unreachable at its 
     former topological location on the old link where correspondents 
     are sending packets and to which they are being forwarded. Such 
     misrouted packets are dropped. This aspect of handover performance 
     optimization has been the subject of an enormous amount of work, 
     both in other SDOs, to reduce the latency of wireless link 
     handover, in the IETF and elsewhere, to reduce the latency in IP 
     handover. Many solutions to this problem have been proposed at the 
     wireless link layer and at the IP layer. One aspect of this goal 
     for localized mobility management is that the processing delay for 
     changing the forwarding after handover must approach as closely as 
     possible the sum of the delay associated with link layer handover 
     and the delay required for active IP layer movement detection, in 
     order to avoid excessive packet loss. Ideally, if network-side link 
     layer support is available for handling movement detection prior to 
     link handover or as part of the link handover process, the routing 
     update should complete within the time required for wireless link 
     handover. This delay is difficult to quantify, but for voice 
     traffic, the entire handover delay including Layer 2 handover time 
     and IP handover time should be between 40-70 ms to avoid any 
     degradation in call quality. 
      
     A goal of the protocol is to reduce the loss of accurate forwarding 
     to reduce interruptions which may cause user-perceptible service 
     degradation for real time traffic such as voice. 
      
  2.2 Reduction in Handover-related Signaling Volume (Goal #2) 
      
     Considering Mobile IPv6 as the global mobility protocol (other 
     mobility protocols require about the same or somewhat less), if a 
     mobile  node  using  address  autoconfiguration  is  required  to 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 3] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     reconfigure on every move between links, the following signaling 
     must be performed: 
      
     1) Link layer signaling required for handover and reauthentication. 
        For example, in 802.11 [6] this is the Reassociate message 
        together with 802.1x [7] reauthentication using EAP. 
     2) Active   IP   level   movement   detection,   including   router 
        reachability.    The    DNA    protocol    [4]    uses    Router 
        Solicitation/Router Advertisement for this purpose. In addition, 
        if SEND [1] is used and the mobile node does not have a 
        certificate cached for the router, the mobile node must use 
        Certification Path Solicitation/Certification Path Advertisement 
        to obtain a certification path.  
     3) Two Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) [19] REPORT messages, one 
        for each of the solicited node multicast addresses corresponding 
        to the link local address and the global address, 
     4) Two Neighbor Solicitation (NS) messages for duplicate address 
        detection, one for the link local address and one for the global 
        address. If the addresses are unique, no response will be 
        forthcoming. 
     5) Two NS messages from the router for address resolution of the 
        link local and global addresses, and two Neighbor Advertisement 
        messages in response from the mobile node, 
     6) Binding Update/Binding Acknowledgement between the mobile node 
        and home agent to update the care of address binding, 
     7) Return routability signaling between the correspondent node and 
        mobile node to establish the binding key, consisting of one Home 
        Test Init/Home Test and Care of Test Init/Care of Test, 
     8) Binding Update/Binding Acknowledgement between the correspondent 
        node and mobile node for route optimization. 
      
     Note that Steps 1-2 may be necessary, even for intra-link mobility, 
     if the wireless link protocol doesn't provide much help for IP 
     handover.  Step  3-5  will  be  different  if  stateful  address 
     configuration is used, since additional messages are required to 
     obtain the address. Steps 6-8 are only necessary when Mobile IPv6 
     is used. The result is approximately 18 messages at the IP level, 
     where the exact number depends on various specific factors such as 
     whether the mobile node has a router certificate cached or not, 
     before a mobile node can be ensured that it is established on a 
     link and has full IP connectivity.  
      
     The goal is that handover signaling volume from the mobile node to 
     the network should be no more than what is needed for the mobile 
     node to perform secure IP level movement detection, in cases where 
     no link layer support exists. If link layer support exists for IP 
     level movement detection, the mobile node may not need to perform 
     any additional IP level signaling after handover. 
      
  2.3 Location privacy (Goal #3) 
      

      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 4] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     Although  location  privacy  issues  for  Mobile  IPv6  have  been 
     discussed in [12], the location privacy referred to here focuses on 
     the IP layer. In most wireless IP network deployments, different IP 
     subnets are used to cover different geographical areas. It is 
     therefore possible to derive a topological to geographical map, in 
     which particular IPv6 subnet prefixes are mapped to particular 
     geographical locations. The precision of the map depends on the 
     size of the geographic area covered by a particular subnet: if the 
     area is large, then knowing the subnet prefix won't provide much 
     information about the precise geographical location of a mobile 
     node within the subnet. 
      
     When  a  mobile  node  moves  geographically,  it  also  moves 
     topologically between subnets. In order to maintain routability, 
     the mobile node must change its local IP address when it moves 
     between subnets. If the mobile node sources packets with its local 
     IP address in the clear, for example through route optimization in 
     Mobile IPv6, the correspondent node or an eavesdropper can use the 
     topological to geographical map to deduce in real time where a 
     mobile node - and therefore its user - is located. Depending on how 
     precisely  the  geographical  location  can  be  deduced,  this 
     information could be used to compromise the privacy or even cause 
     harm to the user. The geographical location information should not 
     be revealed to nor be deducible by the correspondent node or an 
     eavesdropper without the authorization of the mobile node's owner.  
      
     The threats to location privacy come in a variety of forms. One is 
     a man in the middle attack in which traffic between a correspondent 
     and the mobile node is intercepted and the mobile node's location 
     is deduced from that. Others are attacks in which the correspondent 
     itself is the attacker, and the correspondent deliberately starts a 
     session with the mobile node in order to track its location by 
     noting the source address of packets originating from the mobile 
     node. Note that the location privacy referred to here is different 
     from the location privacy discussed in [12]. The location privacy 
     discussed in these drafts primarily concerns modifications to the 
     Mobile IPv6 protocol to eliminate places where an eavesdropper 
     could track the mobile node's movement by correlating home address 
     and care of address.  
      
     In order to reduce the risk from location privacy compromises as a 
     result of IP address changes, the goal for NETLMM is to remove the 
     need to change IP address as mobile node moves across links. 
     Keeping the IP address fixed removes any possibility for the 
     correspondent node to deduce the precise geographic location of the 
     mobile node without the user's authorization. Note that keeping the 
     address constant doesn't completely remove the possibility of 
     deducing the geographical location, since a local address still is 
     required. However, it does allow the network to be deployed such 
     that the mapping between the geographic and topological location is 
     considerably less precise. If the mapping is not precise, an 
     attacker can only deduce in real time that the mobile node is 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 5] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     somewhere  in  a  large  geographic  area,  like,  for  example,  a 
     metropolitan region or even a small country, reducing reducing the 
     granularity of the location information.  
      
  2.4 Efficient Use of Wireless Resources (Goal #4) 
      
     Advances in wireless physical layer and medium access control layer 
     technology  continue  to  increase  the  bandwidth  available  from 
     limited wireless spectrum, but even with technology increases, 
     wireless spectrum remains a limited resource. Unlike wired network 
     links, wireless links are constrained in the number of bits/Hertz 
     by their coding technology and use of physical spectrum, which is 
     fixed by the physical layer. It is not possible to lay an extra 
     cable if the link becomes increasingly congested as is the case 
     with wired links.  
      
     While header compression technology can remove header overhead, it 
     does not come without cost. Requiring header compression on the 
     wireless access points increases the cost and complexity of the 
     access points, and increases the amount of processing required for 
     traffic across the wireless link. Header compression also requires 
     special software on the host, which may or may not be present. 
     Since the access points tend to be a critical bottleneck in 
     wireless access networks for real time traffic (especially on the 
     downlink),  reducing  the  amount  of  per-packet  processing  is 
     important. While header compression probably cannot be completely 
     eliminated, especially for real time media traffic, simplifying 
     compression to reduce processing cost is an important goal. 
      
     The goal is that the localized mobility management protocol should 
     not introduce any new signaling or increase existing signaling over 
     the air.  
      
  2.5 Limit the Signaling Overhead in the Network (Goal #5) 
      
     While bandwidth and router processing resources are typically not 
     as constrained in the wired network, access networks tend to have 
     somewhat stronger bandwidth and router processing constraints than 
     the backbone. These constraints are a function of the cost of 
     laying fiber or wiring to the wireless access points in a widely 
     dispersed geographic area. Therefore, any solutions for localized 
     mobility management should minimize signaling within the wired 
     network as well.  
      
  2.6 No Extra Security Between Mobile Node and Network (Goal #6) 
      
     Localized mobility management protocols that have signaling between 
     the mobile node and network require a security association between 
     the mobile node and the network entity that is the target of the 
     signaling. Establishing a security association specifically for 
     localized  mobility  service  in  a  roaming  situation  may  prove 
     difficult,  because  provisioning  a  mobile  node  with  security 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 6] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     credentials for authenticating and authorizing localized mobility 
     service in each roaming partner's network may be unrealistic from a 
     deployment perspective. Reducing the complexity of mobile node to 
     network security for localized mobility management can therefore 
     reduce barriers to deployment. 
      
     If the access router deduces mobile node movement based on active 
     IP-level movement detection by the mobile node, then authentication 
     is required for the IP-level movement detection messages from the 
     mobile node to ensure that the mobile node is authorized to possess 
     the address used for the movement detection. The authorization may 
     be at the IP level or it may be tied to the original network access 
     authentication and wireless link layer authorization for handover. 
     Some wireless link layers, especially cellular protocols, feature 
     full support and strong security for handover at the link level, 
     and require no IP support for handover. If such wireless link 
     security is not available, however, then it must be provided at the 
     IP level. Security threats to the NETLMM protocol are discussed in 
     [20]. 
      
     In summary, ruling out mobile node involvement in local mobility 
     management simplifies security by removing the need for service-
     specific credentials to authenticate and authorize the mobile node 
     for localized mobility management in the network. This puts 
     localized mobility management on the same level as basic IP 
     routing. Hosts obtain this service as part of their network access.  
      
     The goal is that support for localized mobility management should 
     not require security between the mobile node and the network other 
     than that required for network access or local link security (such 
     as SEND [1]). 
      
  2.7 Wireless Link Technology Agnostic (Goal #7) 
      
     The number of wireless link technologies available is growing, and 
     the growth seems unlikely to slow down. Since the standardization 
     of a wireless link physical and medium access control layers is a 
     time consuming process, reducing the amount of work necessary to 
     interface a particular wireless link technology to an IP network is 
     necessary. A localized mobility management solution should ideally 
     require  minimal  work  to  interface  with  a  new  wireless  link 
     technology. 
      
     In addition, an edge mobility solution should provide support for 
     multiple wireless link technologies. It is not required that the 
     localized mobility management solution support handover from one 
     wireless link technology to another without change in IP address, 
     but this possibility should not be precluded. 
      
     The goal is that the localized mobility management protocol should 
     not use any wireless link specific information for basic routing 

      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 7] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     management, though it may be used for other purposes, such as 
     identifying a mobile node.  
      
      
  2.8 Support for Unmodified Mobile Nodes (Goal #8) 
      
     In the wireless LAN switching market, no modification of the 
     software on the mobile node is required to achieve localized 
     mobility management. Being able to accommodate unmodified mobile 
     nodes enables a service provider to offer service to as many 
     customers as possible, the only constraint being that the customer 
     is authorized for network access. 
       
     Another advantage of minimizing mobile node software for localized 
     mobility management is that multiple global mobility management 
     protocols can be supported. There are a variety of global mobility 
     management  protocols  that  might  also  need  support,  including 
     proprietary or wireless link technology-specific protocols needing 
     support for backward compatibility reasons. Within the Internet, 
     both HIP [14] and Mobike [5] are likely to need support in addition 
     to Mobile IPv6, and Mobile IPv4 support may also be necessary. 
      
     Note that this goal does NOT mean that the mobile node has no 
     software at all associated with mobility or wireless. The mobile 
     node must have some kind of global mobility protocol if it is to 
     move from one domain of edge mobility support to another and 
     maintain session continuity, although no global mobility protocol 
     is required if the mobile node only moves within the coverage area 
     of  the  localized  mobility  management  protocol  or  no  session 
     continuity is required during global movement. Also, every wireless 
     link protocol requires handover support on the mobile node in the 
     physical  and  medium  access  control  layers,  typically  in  the 
     wireless interface driver. Information passed from the medium 
     access control layer to the IP layer on the mobile node may be 
     necessary to trigger IP signaling for IP handover. Such movement 
     detection support at the IP level may be required in order to 
     determine  whether  the  mobile  node's  default  router  is  still 
     reachable after the move to a new access point has occurred at the 
     medium access control layer. Whether or not such support is 
     required depends on whether the medium access control layer can 
     completely hide link movement from the IP layer. For a wireless 
     link protocol such as the 3G protocols, the mobile node and network 
     undergo an extensive negotiation at the medium access control layer 
     prior to handover, so it may be possible to trigger routing update 
     without any IP protocol involvement. However, for a wireless link 
     protocol such as IEEE 802.11 in which the decision for handover is 
     entirely in the hands of the mobile node, IP layer movement 
     detection signaling from the mobile node may be required to trigger 
     a routing update.    
      
     The goal is that the localized mobility management solution should 
     be able to support any mobile node that joins the link and that has 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 8] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     a wireless interface that can communicate with the network, without 
     requiring localized mobility management software on the mobile 
     node. 
      
  2.9 Support for IPv4 and IPv6 (Goal #9) 
      
     While most of this document is written with IPv6 in mind, localized 
     mobility management is a problem in IPv4 networks as well. A 
     solution for localized mobility that works for both versions of IP 
     is desirable, though the actual protocol may be slightly different 
     due to the technical details of how each IP version works. From 
     Goal #8 (Section 2.8), minimizing mobile node support for localized 
     mobility means that ideally no IP version-specific changes would be 
     required on the mobile node for localized mobility, and that global 
     mobility protocols for both IPv4 and IPv6 should be supported. Any 
     IP version-specific features would be confined to the network 
     protocol. 
      
  2.10 Re-use of Existing Protocols Where Sensible (Goal #10) 
      
     Many existing protocols are available as Internet Standards upon 
     which the NETLMM protocol can be built. The design of the protocol 
     should have a goal to re-use existing protocols where it makes 
     architectural and engineering sense to do so. The design should 
     not, however, attempt to re-use existing protocols where there is 
     no real architectural or engineering reason. For example, the suite 
     of Internet Standards contains several good candidate protocols for 
     the transport layer, so there is no real need to develop a new 
     transport protocol specifically for NETLMM.  Re-use is clearly a 
     good  engineering  decision  in  this  case,  since  backward 
     compatibility with existing protocol stacks is important. On the 
     other  hand,  the  network-based,  localized  mobility  management 
     functionality  being  introduced  by  NETLMM  is  a  new  piece  of 
     functionality, and therefore any decision about whether to re-use 
     an existing global mobility management protocol should carefully 
     consider whether re-using such a protocol really meets the needs of 
     the functional architecture for network-based localized mobility 
     management. The case for re-use is not so clear in this case, since 
     there is no compelling backward compatibility argument. 
      
  2.11 Localized Mobility Management Independent of Global Mobility 
       Management  
      
     Localized  mobility  management  should  be  implementable  and 
     deployable  independently  of  any  global  mobility  management 
     protocol. This enables the choice of local and global mobility 
     management to be made independently of particular protocols that 
     are implemented and deployed to solve the two different sorts of 
     mobility management problems. The operator can choose a particular 
     localized mobility management protocol according to the specific 
     features of their access network. It can subsequently upgrade the 
     localized mobility management protocol on its own, without even 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 9] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     informing the mobile nodes. Similarly, the mobile nodes can use a 
     global  mobility  management  protocol  that  best  suits  their 
     requirements, or even not use one at all. Also, a mobile node can 
     move into a new access network without having to check that it 
     understands the localized mobility management  protocol being used 
     there.  
      
     The goal is that the implementation and deployment of the localized 
     mobility management protocol should not restrict, or be restricted 
     by, the choice of global mobility management protocol.  
      
  2.12 Configurable Data Plane Forwarding between Mobility Anchor and 
       Access Router  
      
     Different  network  operators  may  require  different  types  of 
     forwarding options between the mobility anchor and the access 
     routers for mobile node data plane traffic. An obvious forwarding 
     option  that  has  been  used  in  past  IETF  localized  mobility 
     management  protocols  is  IP-IP  encapsulation  for  bidirectional 
     tunneling. The tunnel endpoints could be the mobility anchor and 
     the access routers. But other options are possible. Some network 
     deployments may prefer routing-based solutions. Others may require 
     security tunnels using IPsec ESP encapsulation if part of the 
     localized mobility management domain runs over a public access 
     network and the network operator wants to protect the traffic.  
      
     A goal of the NETLMM protocol is to allow the forwarding between 
     the mobility anchor and access routers to be configurable depending 
     on the particulars of the network deployment. Configurability is 
     not expected to be dynamic as in controlled by the arrival of a 
     mobile node; but rather, configuration is expected to be similar in 
     time scale to configuration for routing. The NETLMM protocol may 
     designate a default forwarding mechanism. It is also possible that 
     additional work may be required to specify the interaction between 
     a particular forwarding mechanism and the NETLMM protocol, but this 
     work is not in scope of the NETLMM base protocol.  
      
      
       
  3.0    IANA Considerations 
      
     There are no IANA considerations for this document. 
    
  4.0    Security Considerations 
      
     There are two kinds of security issues involved in network-based 
     localized mobility management: security between the mobile node and 
     the network, and security between network elements that participate 
     in the network-based localized mobility management protocol 
      
     Security between the mobile node and the network itself consists of 
     two parts: threats involved in localized mobility management in 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 10] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     general,  and  threats  to  the  network-based  localized  mobility 
     management from the host. The first is discussed above in Sections 
     2.3 and 2.6. The second is discussed in the threat analysis 
     document [20].   
      
     For threats to network-based localized mobility management, the 
     basic threat is an attempt by an unauthorized party to signal a 
     bogus mobility event. Such an event must be detectable. This 
     requires proper mutual authentication and authorization of network 
     elements that participate in the network-based localized mobility 
     management  protocol,  and  data  origin  authentication  on  the 
     signaling traffic between network elements.  
      
      
  5.0    Acknowledgements 
      
     The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  following  for 
     particularly diligent reviewing: Vijay Devarapalli, Peter McCann, 
     Gabriel  Montenegro,  Vidya  Narayanan,  Pekka  Savola,  and  Fred 
     Templin. 
      
      
  6.0    Author's Addresses 
         
        James Kempf 
        DoCoMo USA Labs 
        181 Metro Drive, Suite 300 
        San Jose, CA 95110 
        USA 
        Phone: +1 408 451 4711 
        Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com 
         
        Kent Leung 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        170 West Tasman Drive 
        San Jose, CA 95134 
        USA 
        EMail: kleung@cisco.com 
         
        Phil Roberts 
        Motorola Labs 
        Schaumberg, IL 
        USA 
        Email: phil.roberts@motorola.com 
         
        Katsutoshi Nishida 
        NTT DoCoMo Inc. 
        3-5 Hikarino-oka, Yokosuka-shi 
        Kanagawa,  
        Japan 
        Phone: +81 46 840 3545 
        Email: nishidak@nttdocomo.co.jp 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 11] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
         
        Gerardo Giaretta 
        Telecom Italia Lab  
        via G. Reiss Romoli, 274   
        10148 Torino  
        Italy  
        Phone: +39 011 2286904  
        Email: gerardo.giaretta@tilab.com 
         
        Marco Liebsch  
        NEC Network Laboratories  
        Kurfuersten-Anlage 36 
        69115 Heidelberg  
        Germany  
        Phone: +49 6221-90511-46  
        Email: marco.liebsch@ccrle.nec.de 
         
  7.0    Informative References 
      
       [1] Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and Nikander, P., "SEcure 
           Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March, 2005. 
       [2] Campbell, A., Gomez, J., Kim, S., Valko, A., and Wan, C., 
           "Design, Implementation and Evaluation of Cellular IP", IEEE 
           Personal Communications, June/July 2000. 
       [3] Carpenter, B., "Architectural Principles of the Internet," 
           RFC 1958, June, 1996. 
       [4] Choi, J, and Daley, G., "Goals of Detecting Network 
           Attachment in IPv6", Internet Draft, Work in Progress. 
       [5] Eronen, P., editor, "IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming Protocol 
           (MOBIKE)", RFC 4555, June 2006. 
       [6] IEEE, "Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC)and Physical 
           Layer (PHY) specifications", IEEE Std. 802.11, 1999. 
       [7] IEEE, "Port-based Access Control", IEEE LAN/MAN Standard 
           802.1x, June, 2001. 
       [8] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and Arkko, J., "Mobility Support in 
           IPv6", RFC 3775. 
       [9] Kempf, J., editor, "Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility," 
           Internet Draft, Work in Progress. 
      [10] Kempf, J., and Koodli, R., "Distributing a Symmetric FMIPv6 
           Handover Key using SEND", Internet Draft, Work in Progress. 
      [11] Koodli, R., editor, "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 
           4068, July, 2005. 
      [12] Koodli, R., " IP Address Location Privacy and Mobile IPv6:  
           Problem Statement", Internet Draft, Work in Progress. 
      [13] Manner, J., and Kojo, M., "Mobility Related Terminology", RFC 
           3753, June, 2004. 
      [14] Moskowitz, R., and Nikander, P., "Host Identity Protocol 
           (HIP) Architecture", RFC 4423, May, 2006.  
      [15] Narayanan, V., Venkitaraman, N., Tschofenig, H., Giaretta,  
           G., and Bournelle, J., "Handover Keys Using AAA", Internet 
           Draft, Work in Progress. 

      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 12] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
      [16] Ramjee, R., La Porta, T., Thuel, S., and Varadhan, K., 
           "HAWAII: A domain-based approach for supporting mobility in 
           wide-area wireless networks", in Proceedings of the 
           International Conference on Networking Protocols (ICNP), 
           1999. 
      [17] Soliman, H., Tsirtsis, G., Devarapalli, V., Kempf, J., 
           Levkowetz, H., Thubert, P, and Wakikawa, R. "Dual Stack 
           Mobile IPv6 (DSMIPv6) for Hosts and Routers", Internet Draft, 
           Work in Progress. 
      [18] Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El Malki, K., and Bellier, L., 
           "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)", RFC 
           4140, August, 2005. 
      [19] Vida, R., and Costa, L., " Multicast Listener Discovery 
           Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004. 
      [20] Vogt, C., and Kempf, J., "Security Threats to Network-based 
           Localized Mobillity Management", Internet Draft, Work in 
           Progress. 
         
  8.0   Appendix: Gap Analysis 
      
     This section discusses a gap analysis between existing proposals 
     for solving localized mobility management and the goals in Section. 
     2.0. 
      
  8.1  Mobile IPv6 with Local Home Agent 
      
     One option is to deploy Mobile IPv6 with a locally assigned home 
     agent in the local network. This solution requires the mobile node 
     to somehow be assigned a home agent in the local network when it 
     boots up. This home agent is used instead of the home agent in the 
     home network. The advantage of this option is that no special 
     solution is required for edge mobility - the mobile node reuses the 
     global mobility management protocol for that purpose - if the 
     mobile node is using Mobile IPv6.   
      
     The analysis of this approach against the goals above is the 
     following. 
      
     Goal #1 Handover Performance Improvement: If the mobile node does 
     not perform route optimization, this solution reduces, but does not 
     eliminate, IP handover related performance problems. 
       
     Goal #2 Reduction in Handover-related Signaling Volume: Similarly 
     to Goal #1, signaling volume is reduced if no route optimization 
     signaling is done on handover.  
      
     Goal  #3  Location  privacy:  Location  privacy  is  preserved  for 
     external correspondents as long as all of the mobile node's traffic 
     is routed through the local HA. 
      
     Goal #4 Efficient Use of Wireless Resources: If traffic is not 
     route optimized, the mobile node still pays for an over-the-air 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 13] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     tunnel to the locally assigned home agent. The overhead here is 
     exactly the same as if the mobile node's home agent in the home 
     network is used and route optimization is not done. 
      
     Goal #5 Limit the Signaling Overhead in the Network: If the 
     localized mobility management domain is large, the mobile node may 
     suffer from unoptimzed routes. RFC 3775 [8] provides no support for 
     notifying a mobile node that another localized home agent is 
     available for a more optimized route, or for handing over between 
     home agents. A mobile node would have to perform the full home 
     agent bootstrap procedure, including establishing a new IPsec SA 
     with the new home agent. 
      
     Goal #6 No Extra Security Between Mobile Node and Network: A local 
     home agent in a roaming situation requires the guest mobile node to 
     have the proper credentials to authenticate with the local home 
     agent in the serving network. The credentials used for network 
     access  authentication  could  also  be  used  for  mobile  service 
     authentication and authorization if the local home agent uses EAP 
     over IKEv2 to authenticate the mobile node with its home AAA 
     server. This may require additional authorization between the home 
     and visited networks to use the same credentials for a different 
     service, however. In addition, as in Goal #3, if binding updates 
     are done in cleartext over the access network or the mobile node 
     has become infected with malware, the local home agent's address 
     could be revealed to attackers and the local home agent could 
     become the target of a DoS attack. So a local home agent would 
     provide no benefit for this goal. 
      
     Goal #7 Support for Heterogeneous Wireless Link Technologies: This 
     solution supports multiple wireless technologies with separate IP 
     subnets for different links. No special work is required to 
     interface a local home agent to different wireless technologies. 
      
     Goal #8 Support for Unmodified Mobile Nodes: The mobile node must 
     support Mobile IPv6 in order for this option to work. So mobile 
     node changes are required and other IP mobility protocols are not 
     supported.  
       
     Goal #9 Support for IPv4 and IPv6: The Mobile IPv6 working group is 
     working on modifying the protocol to allow registration of IPv4 
     care of addresses in an IPv6 home agent, and also to allow a mobile 
     node to have an IPv4 care of address [17]. 
      
     Goal #10 Re-use of Existing Protocols Where Sensible: This solution 
     re-uses an existing protocol, Mobile IPv6. 
      
     Goal  #11  Localized  Mobility  Management  Independent  of  Global 
     Mobility  Management:  This  solution  merges  localized  mobility 
     management and global mobility management, so it does not support 
     the goal. 
           
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 14] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
  8.2  Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) 
      
     HMIPv6  [18]  provides  the  most  complete  localized  mobility 
     management  solution  available  today.  In  HMIPv6,  a  localized 
     mobility anchor called a MAP serves as a routing anchor for a 
     regional care of address. When a mobile node moves from one access 
     router to another, the mobile node changes the binding between its 
     regional care of address and local care of address at the MAP. No 
     global mobility management signaling is required, since the care of 
     address seen by correspondents does not change. This part of HMIPv6 
     is similar to the solution outlined in Section 8.1; however, HMIPv6 
     also allows a mobile node to hand over between MAPs. 
      
     Handover between MAPs and MAP discovery requires configuration on 
     the routers. MAP addresses are advertised by access routers. 
     Handover happens by overlapping MAP coverage areas so that, for 
     some number of access routers, more than one MAP may be advertised. 
     Mobile nodes need to switch MAPs in the transition area, and then 
     must  perform  global  mobility  management  update  and  route 
     optimization to the new regional care of address, if appropriate. 
      
     The analysis of this approach against the goals above is the 
     following. 
      
     Goal #1 Handover Performance Improvement: This solution shortens, 
     but does not eliminate, the latency associated with IP handover, 
     since it reduces the amount of signaling and the length of the 
     signaling paths.  
      
     Goal #2 Reduction in Handover-related Signaling Volume: Signaling 
     volume is reduced simply because no route optimization signaling is 
     done on handover within the coverage area of the MAP.  
      
     Goal  #3  Location  privacy:  Location  privacy  is  preserved  for 
     external correspondents. 
      
     Goal #4 Use of Wireless Resources: The mobile node always pays for 
     an over-the-air tunnel to the MAP. If the mobile node is tunneling 
     through a global home agent or VPN gateway, the wired link 
     experiences double tunneling. Over-the-air tunnel overhead can be 
     removed by header compression, however. 
      
     Goal #5 Limit the Signaling Overhead in the Network: From Goal #1 
     and Goal #4, the signaling overhead is no more or less than for 
     mobile nodes whose global mobility management anchor is local. 
     However, because MAP handover is possible, forwarding across large 
     localized mobility management domains can be improved thereby 
     improving wired network resource utilization by using multiple MAPs 
     and  handing  over,  at  the  expense  of  the  configuration  and 
     management overhead involved in maintaining multiple MAP coverage 
     areas.  
      
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 15] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     Goal #6 Extra Security Between Mobile Node and Network: In a 
     roaming situation, the guest mobile node must have the proper 
     credentials to authenticate with the MAP in the serving network. In 
     addition, since the mobile node is required to have a unicast 
     address for the MAP that is either globally routed or routing 
     restricted  to  the  local  administrative  domain,  the  MAP  is 
     potentially a target for DoS attacks across a wide swath of network 
     topology. 
      
     Goal #7 Support for Heterogeneous Wireless Link Technologies: This 
     solution supports multiple wireless technologies with separate IP 
     subnets for different links. 
      
     Goal #8 Support for Unmodified Mobile Nodes: This solution requires 
     modification to the mobile nodes. In addition, the HMIPv6 design 
     has been optimized for Mobile IPv6 mobile nodes, and is not a good 
     match for other global mobility management protocols.  
      
     Goal #9 Currently, there is no IPv4 version of this protocol; 
     although there is an expired Internet draft with a design for a 
     regional registration protocol for Mobile IPv4 that has similar 
     functionality.  It  is  possible  that  the  same  IPv4  transition 
     solution as used for Mobile IPv6 could be used [17] above. 
      
     Goal #10 Re-use of Existing Protocols Where Sensible: This solution 
     re-uses an existing protocol, HMIPv6. 
      
     Goal  #11  Localized  Mobility  Management  Independent  of  Global 
     Mobility  Management:  While  HIMPv6  is  technically  a  separate 
     protocol from MIPv6 and could in principle be implemented and 
     deployed  without  MIPv6,  the  design  is  very  similar  and 
     implementation and deployment would be easier if the mobile nodes 
     supported MIPv6. 
      
      
  8.3  Combinations of Mobile IPv6 with Optimizations 
      
     One approach to local mobility that has received much attention in 
     the past and has been thought to provide a solution is combinations 
     of protocols. The general approach is to try to cover gaps in the 
     solution provided by MIPv6 by using other protocols. In this 
     section, gap analyses for MIPv6 + FMIPv6 and HMIPv6 + FMIPv6 are 
     discussed.  
      
  8.3.1 MIPv6 with local home agent + FMIPv6 
      
     As discussed in Section 8.1, the use of MIPv6 with a dynamically 
     assigned, local home agent cannot fulfill the goals. A fundamental 
     limitation is that Mobile IPv6 cannot provide seamless handover 
     (i.e. Goal #1). FMIPv6 [11] above has been defined with the intent 
     to improve the handover performance of MIPv6. For this reason, the 

      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 16] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     combined usage of FMIPv6 and MIPv6 with a dynamically assigned 
     local home agent has been proposed to handle local mobility.  
      
     Note that this gap analysis only applies to localized mobility 
     management, and it is possible that MIPv6 and FMIPv6 might still be 
     acceptable for global mobility management. 
      
     The analysis of this combined approach against the goals follows.  
      
     Goal  #1  Handover  Performance  Improvement:  FMIPv6  provides  a 
     solution for handover performance improvement that should fulfill 
     the goals raised by real-time applications in terms of jitter, 
     delay and packet loss. The location of the home agent (in local or 
     home domain) does not affect the handover latency.  
      
     Goal #2 Reduction in Handover-related Signaling Volume: FMIPv6 
     requires the mobile node to perform extra signaling with the access 
     router (i.e. exchange of RtSolPr/PrRtAdv and FBU/FBA). Moreover, as 
     in standard MIPv6, whenever the mobile node moves to another link, 
     it must send a Binding Update to the home agent. If route 
     optimization  is  used,  the  mobile  node  also  performs  return 
     routability and sends a Binding Update to each correspondent node. 
     Nonetheless, it is worth noting that FMIPv6 should result in a 
     reduction of the amount of IPv6 Neighbor Discovery signaling on the 
     new link.  
      
     Goal #3 Location privacy: The mobile node maintains a local care of 
     address. If route optimization is not used, location privacy can be 
     achieved using bi-directional tunneling. 
      
     Goal #4 Use of Wireless Resources: As stated for Goal #2, the 
     combination of MIPv6 and FMIPv6 generates extra signaling overhead. 
     For data packets, in addition to the Mobile IPv6 over-the-air 
     tunnel, there is a further level of tunneling between the mobile 
     node and the previous access router during handover. This tunnel is 
     needed to forward incoming packets to the mobile node addressed to 
     the previous care of address. Another reason is that, even if the 
     mobile node has a valid new care of address, the mobile node cannot 
     use the new care of address directly with its correspondents 
     without performing route optimization to the new care of address. 
     This implies that the transient tunnel overhead is in place even 
     for route optimized traffic.  
      
     Goal #5 Limit the Signaling Overhead in the Network: FMIPv6 
     generates extra signaling overhead between the previous access 
     router  and  the  new  access  router  for  the  HI/HAck  exchange. 
     Concerning data packets, the use of FMIPv6 for handover performance 
     improvement implies a tunnel between the previous access router and 
     the mobile node that adds some overhead in the wired network. This 
     overhead has more impact on star topology deployments, since 
     packets are routed down to the old access router, then back up to 
     the aggregation router and then back down to the new access router.  
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 17] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
      
     Goal #6 Extra Security Between Mobile Node and Network: In addition 
     to the analysis for Mobile IPv6 with local home agent in Section 
     8.1, FMIPv6 requires the mobile node and the previous access router 
     to  share  a  security  association  in  order  to  secure  FBU/FBA 
     exchange. Two solutions have been proposed: a SEND-based solution 
     [10] above and an AAA-based solution [15]. Both solutions require 
     additional support on the mobile node and in the network beyond 
     what is required for network access authentication. 
      
     Goal #7 Support for Heterogeneous Wireless Link Technologies: MIPv6 
     and FMIPv6 support multiple wireless technologies, so this goal is 
     fulfilled.  
      
     Goal #8 Support for Unmodified Mobile Nodes: The mobile node must 
     support both MIPv6 and FMIPv6, so it is not possible to satisfy 
     this goal. 
      
     Goal #9 Support for IPv4 and IPv6: Work is underway to extend MIPv6 
     with the capability to run over both IPv6-enabled and IPv4-only 
     networks [17] above. FMIPv6 only supports IPv6. Even though an IPv4 
     version of FMIP has been recently proposed, it is not clear how it 
     could be used together with FMIPv6 in order to handle fast 
     handovers across any wired network.  
      
     Goal #10 Re-use of Existing Protocols Where Sensible: This solution 
     re-uses existing protocols, Mobile IPv6 and FMIPv6. 
      
     Goal  #11  Localized  Mobility  Management  Independent  of  Global 
     Mobility  Management:  This  solution  merges  localized  mobility 
     management and global mobility management, so it does not support 
     the goal. 
      
  8.3.2 HMIPv6 + FMIPv6  
      
     HMIPv6 provides several advantages in terms of local mobility 
     management. However, as seen in Section 8.2, it does not fulfill 
     all the goals identified in Section 2.0. In particular, HMIPv6 does 
     not completely eliminate the IP handover latency. For this reason, 
     FMIPv6 could be used together with HMIPv6 in order to cover the 
     gap.  
      
     Note that even if this solution is used, the mobile node is likely 
     to need MIPv6 for global mobility management, in contrast with the 
     MIPv6 with dynamically assigned local home agent + FMIPv6 solution. 
     Thus, this solution should really be considered MIPv6 + HMIPv6 + 
     FMIPv6.  
      
     The analysis of this combined approach against the goals follows.         
      
     Goal #1 Handover Performance Improvement: HMIPv6 and FMIPv6 both 
     shorten the latency associated with IP handovers. In particular, 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 18] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     FMIPv6 is expected to fulfill the goals on jitter, delay and packet 
     loss raised by real-time applications. 
      
     Goal #2 Reduction in Handover-related Signaling Volume: Both FMIPv6 
     and HMIPv6 require extra signaling compared with Mobile IPv6. As a 
     whole the mobile node performs signaling message exchanges at each 
     handover that are RtSolPr/PrRtAdv, FBU/FBA, LBU/LBA and BU/BA. 
     However, as mentioned in Section 8.2, the use of HMIPv6 reduces the 
     signaling overhead since no route optimization signaling is done 
     for intra-MAP handovers. In addition, naive combinations of FMIPv6 
     and HMIPv6 often result in redundant signaling. There is much work 
     in the academic literature and the IETF on more refined ways of 
     combining signaling from the two protocols to avoid redundant 
     signaling.    
      
     Goal #3 Location privacy: HMIPv6 may preserve location privacy, 
     depending on the dimension of the geographic area covered by the 
     MAP.   
      
     Goal #4 Use of Wireless Resources: As mentioned for Goal #2, the 
     combination of HMIPv6 and FMIPv6 generates a lot of signaling 
     overhead in the network. Concerning payload data, in addition to 
     the over-the-air MIPv6 tunnel, a further level of tunneling is 
     established between mobile node and MAP. Notice that this tunnel is 
     in place even for route optimized traffic. Moreover, if FMIPv6 is 
     directly applied to HMIPv6 networks, there is a third temporary 
     handover-related tunnel between the mobile node and previous access 
     router. Again, there is much work in the academic literature and 
     IETF on ways to reduce the extra tunnel overhead on handover by 
     combining HMIP and FMIP tunneling.  
      
     Goal #5 Limit the Signaling Overhead in the Network: The signaling 
     overhead in the network is not reduced by HMIPv6, as mentioned in 
     Section 8.2. Instead, FMIPv6 generates extra signaling overhead 
     between the previous access router and new access router for 
     HI/HAck exchange. For payload data, the same considerations as for 
     Goal #4 are applicable.  
      
     Goal #6 Security Between Mobile Node and Network: FMIPv6 requires 
     the mobile node and the previous access router to share a security 
     association in order to secure the FBU/FBA exchange. In addition, 
     HMIPv6 requires that the mobile node and MAP share an IPsec 
     security association in order to secure LBU/LBA exchange. The only 
     well understood approach to set up an IPsec security association is 
     the use of certificates, but this may raise deployment issues. 
     Thus, the combination of FMIPv6 and HMIPv6 doubles the amount of 
     mobile node to network security protocol required, since security 
     for both FMIP and HMIP must be deployed. 
      
     Goal #7 Support for Heterogeneous Wireless Link Technologies: 
     HMIPv6 and FMIPv6 support multiple wireless technologies, so this 
     goal is fufilled.  
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 19] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
      
     Goal #8 Support for Unmodified Mobile Nodes: The mobile node must 
     support both HMIPv6 and FMIPv6 protocols, so this goal is not 
     fulfilled. 
      
     Goal #9 Support for IPv4 and IPv6: Currently there is no IPv4 
     version of HMIPv6. There is an IPv4 version of FMIP but it is not 
     clear how it could be used together with FMIPv6 in order to handle 
     fast handovers across any wired network.  
      
     Goal #10 Re-use of Existing Protocols Where Sensible:  This 
     solution re-uses existing protocols, HMIPv6 and FMIPv6.  
      
     Goal  #11  Localized  Mobility  Management  Independent  of  Global 
     Mobility  Management:  While  HIMPv6  is  technically  a  separate 
     protocol from MIPv6 and could in principle be implemented and 
     deployed  without  MIPv6,  the  design  is  very  similar  and 
     implementation and deployment would be easier if the mobile nodes 
     supported MIPv6. 
      
  8.4  Micromobility Protocols 
      
     Researchers  have  defined  some  protocols  that  are  often 
     characterized as micromobility protocols. Two typical protocols in 
     this category are Cellular-IP [2] and HAWAII [16]. Researchers 
     defined these protocols before local mobility optimizations for 
     Mobile IP such as FMIP and HMIP were developed, in order to reduce 
     handover latency. Cellular-IP and HAWAII were proposed in the IETF 
     for standardization, but after some study in the IRTF, were 
     dropped. There are many micromobility protocols defined in the 
     academic literature, but in this document, the term is used 
     specifically to refer to Cellular-IP and HAWAII. 
      
     The  micromobility  approach  to  localized  mobility  management 
     requires  host  route  propagation  from  the  mobile  node  to  a 
     collection  of  specialized  routers  in  the  localized  mobility 
     management domain along a path back to a boundary router at the 
     edge of the localized mobility management domain. A boundary router 
     is  a  kind  of  localized  mobility  management  domain  gateway. 
     Localized mobility management is authorized with the access router, 
     but reauthorization with each new access router is necessary on 
     link movement, in addition to any reauthorization for basic network 
     access. The host routes allow the mobile node to maintain the same 
     IP address when it moves to a new link, and still continue to 
     receive packets on the new link. 
      
     Cellular IP and HAWAII have a few things in common.  Both are 
     compatible with Mobile IP and are intended to provide a higher 
     level of handover performance in local networks than was previously 
     available with Mobile IP without such extensions as HMIP and FMIP.  
     Both use host routes installed in a number of routers within a 
     restricted routing domain. Both define specific messaging to update 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 20] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     those  routes  along  the  forwarding  path  and  specify  how  the 
     messaging is to be used to update the routing tables and forwarding 
     tables along the path between the mobile and a micromobility domain 
     boundary router at which point Mobile IP is to used to handle 
     global mobility in a scalable way. Unlike the FMIP and HMIP 
     protocols, however, these protocols do not require the mobile node 
     to obtain a new care of address on each access router as it moves; 
     but rather, the mobile node maintains the same care of address 
     across the micromobility domain. From outside the micromobility 
     domain, the care of address is routed using traditional longest 
     prefix matching IP routing to the domain's boundary router, so the 
     care of address is conceptually withain the micromobility domain 
     boundary router's subnet. Within the micromobility domain, the care 
     of address is routed to the correct access router using host 
     routes. 
      
     Micromobility  protocols  have  some  potential  drawbacks  from  a 
     deployment and scalability standpoint. Both protocols involve every 
     routing element between the mobile device and the micromobility 
     domain boundary router in all packet forwarding decisions specific 
     to care of addresses for mobile nodes. Scalability is limited 
     because each care of address corresponding to a mobile node 
     generates a routing table entry, and perhaps multiple forwarding 
     table entries, in every router along the path. Since mobile nodes 
     can have multiple global care of addresses in IPv6, this can result 
     in a large expansion in router state throughout the micromobility 
     routing  domain.  Although  the  extent  of  the  scalability  for 
     micromobility protocols is still not clearly understood from a 
     research standpoint, it seems certain that they will be less 
     scalable than the Mobile IP optimization enhancements, and will 
     require more specialized gear in the wired network. 
      
     The following is a gap analysis of the micromobility protocols 
     against the goals in Section 2.0: 
      
     Goal  #1  Handover  Performance  Improvement:  The  micromobility 
     protocols reduce handover latency by quickly fixing up routes 
     between the boundary router and the access router. While some 
     additional latency may be expected during host route propagation, 
     it is typically much less than experienced with standard Mobile IP.  
      
     Goal  #2  Reduction  in  Handover-related  Signaling  Volume:  The 
     micromobility protocols require signaling from the mobile node to 
     the access router to initiate the host route propagation, but that 
     is a considerable reduction over the amount of signaling required 
     to configure to a new link. 
      
     Goal #3 Location privacy: No care of address changes are exposed to 
     correspondent nodes or the mobile node itself while the mobile node 
     is moving in the micromobility-managed network.  
      

      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 21] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     Goal #4 Use of Wireless Resources: The only additional over-the-air 
     signaling is involved in propagating host routes from the mobile 
     node to the network upon movement. Since this signaling would be 
     required for movement detection in any case, it is expected to be 
     minimal. Mobile node traffic experiences no overhead. 
      
     Goal #5 Limit the Signaling Overhead in the Network: Host route 
     propagation is required throughout the wired network. The volume of 
     signaling could be more or less depending on the speed of mobile 
     node movement and the size of the wired network. 
      
     Goal #6 Security Between Mobile Node and Network: The mobile node 
     only requires a security association of some type with the access 
     router. Because the signaling is causing routes to the mobile 
     node's  care  of  address  to  change,  the  signaling  must  prove 
     authorization to hold the address. 
      
     Goal #7 Support for Heterogeneous Wireless Link Technologies: 
     HMIPv6  The  micromobility  protocols  support  multiple  wireless 
     technologies, so this goal is satisfied. 
      
     Goal #8 Support for Unmodified Mobile Nodes: The mobile node must 
     support some way of signaling the access router on link handover, 
     but this is required for movement detection anyway. The nature of 
     the signaling for the micromobility protocols may require mobile 
     node software changes, however. 
      
     Goal #9 Re-use of Existing Protocols Where Sensible: Support for 
     IPv4 and IPv6: Most of the work on the micromobility protocols was 
     done in IPv4, but little difference could be expected for IPv6. 
      
     Goal #10 This solution does not reuse an existing protocol because 
     there is currently no Internet Standard protocol for micromobility. 
      
     Goal  #11  Localized  Mobility  Management  Independent  of  Global 
     Mobility Management: This solution separates global and local 
     mobility management, since the micromobility protocols only support 
     localized mobility management. 
      
  8.5  Summary 
      
     The following table summarizes the discussion in Section 9.1 
     through 9.5. In the table, a "M" indicates that the protocol 
     completely meets the goal, a "P" indicates that it partially meets 
     the goal, and an "X" indicates that it does not meet the goal. 
      
      
      
     Protocol     #1   #2   #3   #4   #5   #6   #7   #8   #9   #10 
     --------     --   --   --   --   --   --   --   --   --   --- 
      
     MIPv6        P    X     X    X    X    X    M    X    M    M 
      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 22] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
      
     HMIPv6       P    X     X    X    P    X    M    X    X    M 
      
     MIPv6 + 
     FMIPv6       M    X     X    X    P    X    M    X    P    M 
      
     HMIPv6 + 
     FMIPv6       M    X     X    X    X    X    M    X    X    M 
      
     Micro.       M    M     M    M    P    M    M    M    P    X 
   
        
  9.0    IPR Statements 
   
     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
     to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
     in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
     rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
     it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
     Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
     documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
      
     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
     of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
     at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
      
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
     ipr@ietf.org. 
       
  10.0   Disclaimer of Validity 
   
     This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
     an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
     THE  INTERNET  ENGINEERING  TASK  FORCE  DISCLAIM  ALL  WARRANTIES, 
     EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
     THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
     ANY  IMPLIED  WARRANTIES  OF  MERCHANTABILITY  OR  FITNESS  FOR  A 
     PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
      
  11.0   Copyright Notice 
   



      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 23] 
     Internet Draft              NETLMM Goals                June, 2006 
      
   
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is 
     subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 
     78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their 
     rights. 
      















































      
     Kempf, editor            Expires December 2006            [Page 24] 