

Email Address Internationalization (EAI WG)                 Edmon Chung 
Internet Draft                                                  Afilias 
<draft-ietf-eai-mailinglist-00.txt>                                     
                                                          June 19, 2006 
 

 
          Mailing Lists and Internationalized Email Addresses 
 

 
STATUS OF THIS MEMO 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The reader is cautioned not to depend on the values that appear in 
   examples to be current or complete, since their purpose is primarily 
   educational.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Intellectual Property Rights Statement 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes considerations for mailing-lists with the 
   introduction of internationalized email addressing capabilities.  
   Different scenarios involving interaction between mailing-lists and 
   internationalized email addresses are examined.  Furthermore, 
   mailing-list header fields will be discussed. 
    
Conventions Used In This Document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
    
    
    

  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 1] 
EAI-Mailinglist                                               JUNE 2006 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
   2. Scenarios Involving Mailing-Lists...............................3 
   2.1 Pure Case Scenarios............................................4 
   2.2 Mixed Case Scenarios...........................................4 
   3. Mailing List Header Fields......................................5 
   4. Managing Mailing Lists with Internationalized Email Address.....5 
   5. Further Discussion..............................................6 
   6. IANA Considerations.............................................6 
   7. Security Considerations.........................................6 
   8. Copyright Statement.............................................6 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Mailing-lists are an important part of email usage and collaborative 
   communications.  The introduction of internationalized email 
   addresses must take into consideration impact on mailing-list 
   functionality.  The consideration of mailing-lists in the context of 
   internationalized email addresses includes three main areas: (1) 
   transport protocol; (2) message headers; and (3) mailing-list 
   operation policies. 
    
   Mailing-lists are generally deployed either as a mass mailer client 
   or act in essence like a mail relay.  In the case of a mailer client, 
   the mailing-list program is activated when it receives an email to 
   the mailing-list email account.  The message is then sent to the 
   members on the mailing-list.  In a relay model, the mail server upon 
   receipt of mail to the mailing-list account, relays the mail to all 
   members.  Under both models, the mailing-list program usually 
   rewrites the return-path of the email to the corresponding mailing-
   list.  This allows recipients to observe the original sender of the 
   email, and be able to reply to the mailing-list conveniently. 
    
   In essence, the mail transport protocol does not differ between 
   regular email accounts and mailing-list accounts.  Discussion on the 
   different scenarios involving mailing-lists and internationalized 
   email addresses are included in Section 2. 
    
   In terms of message headers, internationalized email address 
   considerations are required for the return-path rewrite as well as 
   internationalized email addresses in list fields as specified in 
   RFC2369 -- The Use of URLs as Meta-Syntax for Core Mail List Commands 
   and their Transport through Message Header Fields [RFC2369] and 
   RFC2919 -- List-Id: A Structured Field and Namespace for the 
   Identification of Mailing Lists [RFC2919].  This will be described in 
   Section 3. 
    
   A brief discussion on some key considerations for mailing-list 
   operation in an internationalized email address environment is 
   proposed in Section 4.  This is followed by further discussions in 
   Section 5. 
  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 2] 
EAI-Mailinglist                                               JUNE 2006 
 
 
    
2. Scenarios Involving Mailing-Lists 
    
   Expanding from Sections 2.3 and 2.6 of the Scenarios document [EAI-
   Scenarios], this section will provide an overview of the different 
   scenarios involving mailing-lists and internationalized email 
   addresses. 
    
   What is worth noting is that generally, for mailing-lists, each 
   message is transported between a sender email address and a recipient 
   mailing-list address or a sending mailing-list address and a 
   receiving member.  A multi-recipient message is usually only a result 
   of situations where a sender includes additional addresses in the 
   "To" or "CC" fields while sending (or replying) to a mailing-list.  
    
   The following diagram summarizes the conceptual working of a mailing-
   list (Pure Case): 
    
                                                (b) 
                                               -----> User1@exmaple.tld 
                       (a)                    / (c) 
   User1@example.tld ------> mailing@list.tld ------> User2@example.tld 
                                              \ (d) 
                                               -----> ... 
    
    
   As observed above, the mail transport transactions (a), (b), (c) and 
   (d) all involves two parties, that is: 1. The mailing-list account; 
   and, 2. The user / member account.  These scenarios are essentially 
   the same as those already described in Sections 2.1 and 2.4 of the 
   Scenarios document [EAI-Scenarios]. 
    
   Multiple recipients are involved usually only when one (or more) 
   additional account(s) is (are) included (Mixed Case): 
    
                                              
                                               -----> User1@exmaple.tld 
                       (a)                    / 
   User1@example.tld ---+--> mailing@list.tld ------> User2@example.tld 
                        |              ^      \ (d) 
                        |              |       -----> ... 
                        |              |                      | 
                        v              |  (e)                 | 
                  cc@example.tld <-----+-------------(reply)--+ 
    
    
   Under this situation, scenarios (a) and (e) resemble the situations 
   already described in Sections 2.2 and 2.5 of the Scenarios document 
   [EAI-Scenarios].  More specific discussions based on these two 
   general cases are included below. 
    


  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 3] 
EAI-Mailinglist                                               JUNE 2006 
 
 
2.1 Pure Case Scenarios 
    
   In the Pure Case described above, the following are possible for (a): 
    
       User1@example.tld    mailing@list.tld 
   (1)       ASCII               ASCII 
   (2)     non-ASCII             ASCII 
   (3)       ASCII             non-ASCII 
   (4)     non-ASCII           non-ASCII 
    
   Among this set, (1) is simply the conventional case without involving 
   any internationalized email address. (2) and (3) are scenarios 
   described in Section 2.4 -- One i18nmail user sends to one ASCII user 
   -- of the Scenarios document, whereas (4) is described in Section 2.1 
   -- Two i18nmail users [EAI-Scenarios]. 
    
   For (d) -- generalizing (b) and (c) -- it may be branched further 
   where: 
     (i) Mailing-list contains only ASCII email addresses 
     (ii) Mailing-list contains at least one internationalized email 
   address 
    
   For (ii), as the mailing-list is sending out to its members, its MTA 
   may encounter a situation where a downgrade [EAI-Downgrade] may be 
   called for.  In order for a downgrade to be possible, the mailing-
   list (and/or its MTA) must therefore have the alt-address or atomic 
   information.  In general, it may be prudent for mailing-list 
   operators to pre-obtain this for all its member accounts.  This will 
   ensure that mailing-list transactions within members will be able to 
   be delivered and replied to.  Further discussion on mailing-list 
   policy considerations is included in section 4 of this document. 
    
   In the specific case where a non-member with an internationalized 
   email address is sending to a mailing-list, and that mailing-list is 
   UTF8SMTP-aware, and the path to a constituent member calls for a 
   downgrade, the mailing-list (and/or its MTA) may not have the alt-
   address or atomic information of the non-member’s internationalized 
   email address, therefore failing to deliver the mail.  Nevertheless, 
   this is not unique for mailing-lists.  Mail relays that are UTF8SMTP-
   aware will potentially encounter the same situation.  Further 
   discussions are included in section 5 of this document. 
    
2.2 Mixed Case Scenarios 
    
   The Mixed Case scenarios are essentially a combination of the 
   discussion in section 2.1 above, plus those described in Section 2.2 
   -- Three i18nmail users -- and, Section 2.5 -- An i18mail user sends 
   to one ascii user and one i18nmail user -- of the Scenarios [EAI-
   Scenarios] document. 
    
   Similar issues arise with regards to members versus non-members, 
   especially non-members with an internationalized email address, as 
   discussed in the above section. 
  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 4] 
EAI-Mailinglist                                               JUNE 2006 
 
 
    
3. Mailing List Header Fields 
    
   A number of header fields specifically for mailing-lists have been 
   introduced in RFC2369 and RFC2919.  These include, for example: 
   List-Id: List Header Mailing List <list-header.nisto.com> 
   List-Help: <mailto:list@host.com?subject=help> (List Instructions) 
   List-Unsubscribe: <mailto:list@host.com?subject=unsubscribe> 
   List-Subscribe: <mailto:list@host.com?subject=subscribe> 
   List-Post: <mailto:list@host.com> 
   List-Owner: <mailto:listmom@host.com> (Contact Person for Help) 
   List-Archive: <mailto:archive@host.com?subject=index%20list> 
    
   As described in RFC2369, "The contents of the list header fields 
   mostly consist of angle-bracket ('<', '>') enclosed URLs, with 
   internal whitespace being ignored." [RFC2369]  Whereas RFC2919 
   specifies that, "The list identifier will, in most cases, appear like 
   a host name in a domain of the list owner." [RFC2919] 
    
   By and large, the data contained in these mailing-list header fields 
   are URLs which contain email addresses.  The same mechanism should be 
   used for these fields as with other fields specifically discussed in 
   the UTF8-Headers document [EAI-UTF8Headers].  Generally therefore, 
   for fields that contain an internationalized email address, it could 
   be expressed as a UTF8 string. 
    
   Downgrading provisions should also follow the chosen mechanism based 
   on the Downgrading document [EAI-Downgrade]. 
    
   Because the email addresses will be expressed in URL format, further 
   specifications for presentation and inclusion of the alt-address and 
   atomic information may be necessary, other than simply following 
   RFC3987 Internationalized Resource Identifier (IRI) [RFC3987] 
   specifications.  This will be further discussed in Section 5. 
    
4. Managing Mailing Lists with Internationalized Email Address  
    
   Given the need potentially to deal with non-UTF8SMTP-aware MTAs in 
   the path of delivery for different members, it is advisable that 
   mailing-list operators obtain from all members their alt-address or 
   atomic information before setting up the mailing-list (or adding a 
   member with an internationalized email address) 
    
   In consideration for consistent delivery to all members in a mailing-
   list, a mailing-list may want to consider rejecting (or otherwise 
   obtaining alt-address or atomic information from) a non-member who is 
   interacting with the mailing-list with an internationalized email 
   address.  This is further discussed in Section 5. 
    
   Furthermore, operators should take caution to avoid setting up of an 
   MTA that is UTF8SMTP-aware with a mailing-list program that is non-
   aware.  This is especially important for mailing-list programs that 
   are based on a mail client and not directly integrated into an MTA.  
  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 5] 
EAI-Mailinglist                                               JUNE 2006 
 
 
   The reverse may be less harmful but nevertheless should also be 
   avoided. 
    
    
5. Further Discussion 
    
   While generally speaking, mailing-lists do not create additional 
   complexity for the deployment of internationalized email address 
   functionalities, the study in this document does uncover a couple of 
   relevant areas for further consideration.  Nevertheless, neither 
   items are entirely unique to mailing-lists. 
    
   1. Obtaining Downgrade Information -- for a mailing-list, or mail 
   relay server for that matter, that is EAI-aware, receiving email from 
   an internationalized email address, the alt-address or atomic 
   information is not required from the sending MTA for the transport to 
   be complete.  Thereupon when the mailing-list "relays" or "explodes" 
   the mail to all its members, it may encounter paths where a downgrade 
   is called for.  In order to mitigate this situation, the mailing-list 
   may perhaps decide to reject all incoming mail from any non-member 
   internationalized email address or that alt-address or atomic 
   information is not provided.  Alternatively, it may be useful to 
   consider having a mechanism, such as an additional SMTP command, for 
   the receiving MTA (in this case the mailing-list) to request for alt-
   address or atomic information from the sender.  This may be useful in 
   other scenarios as well, such as those concerning multiple 
   recipients. 
    
   2. Downgrading Considerations for mailto URLs -- downgrading 
   specifications may have to be specified particularly for mailto URLs 
   to take into consideration the presentation of alt-address or atomic 
   information.  The UTF8 Headers document [EAI-UTF8Headers] suggests 
   including a parameter within the angled brackets of an email address 
   (e.g. <non-ascii@domain, alt-ascii@domain>).  In the case of a mailto 
   URL, it may be possible to use the same mechanism, for example, 
   <mailto:non-ascii@example.tld?subject=help, alt-ascii@domain>, 
   however this should be further studied.  Other places where an 
   internationalized email address could appear in a URL may also 
   require further examination. 
    
6. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document does not make any request to IANA. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   Extensive security considerations have been included in the Framework 
   document [EAI-Framework]. 
    
    


  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 6] 
EAI-Mailinglist                                               JUNE 2006 
 
 
8. Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
References 
    
   [EAI-Framework] J. Klensin and Y. Ko, "Overview and Framework for 
   Internationalized Email", draft-ietf-eai-framework-00.txt, May 24, 
   2006 
    
   [EAI-Scenarios] H. Alvestrand, "Internationalized Email Addresses: 
   Scenarios",draft-ietf-eai-scenarios-00.txt  , May 12, 2006 
    
   [EAI-SMTPEXT] J. Yao and W. Mao, "SMTP extension for 
   internationalized email address", draft-ietf-eai-smtpext-00.txt, May 
   12, 2006 
    
   [EAI-UTF8Headers] J. Yeh, "Internationalized Email Headers", draft-
   ietf-eai-utf8headers-00.txt, May 30, 2006 
    
   [EAI-Downgrade] Y. YONEYA and K. Fujiwara, "Downgrading mechanism for 
   Internationalized eMail Address (IMA)", draft-ietf-eai-downgrade-
   00.txt, May 26, 2006 
    
   [RFC2369] G. Neufeld and J. Baer, "The Use of URLs as Meta-Syntax for 
   Core Mail List Commands and their Transport through Message Header 
   Fields", July 1998 
    
   [RFC2919] R. Chandhok and G. Wenger, "List-Id: A Structured Field and 
   Namespace for the Identification of Mailing Lists", March 2001 
    
   [RFC3987] M. Duerst and M. Suignard,"Internationalized Resource 
   Identifiers (IRIs)", January 2005 
    
Authors' Address: 
    
   Edmon Chung 
   Afilias 
   Suite 204, 4141 Yonge Street, 
   Toronto, Ontario, 
   Canada M2P 2A8 
   edmon@afilias.info 

  
Edmon Chung                                                    [Page 7] 
