

MIP6 Working Group                                             F. Dupont
Internet-Draft                                                    Point6
Expires: July 11, 2005                                       J-M. Combes
                                                     France Telecom DR&D
                                                        January 10, 2005


        Using IPsec between Mobile and Correspondent IPv6 Nodes
                     draft-ietf-mip6-cn-ipsec-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 11, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   Mobile IPv6 uses IPsec to protect signaling between the mobile node
   and the home agent.  This document defines how IPsec can be used
   between the mobile node and correspondent nodes, including home
   address option validation (aka.  triangular routing), protection of
   mobility signaling for routing optimization and suitable
   configurations.



Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


1.  Introduction

   Mobile IPv6 documents [RFC3775][RFC3776] specifies IPsec [RFC2401]
   for the protection of the signaling between the mobile node (MN) and
   its home agent (HA), and the return routability procedure between the
   mobile node and its correspondent nodes (CN) for routing
   optimization.  But any stronger mechanism (i.e., more secure than the
   return routability procedure) MAY be used, including of course IPsec
   (cf.  [RFC3775] Appendix 3 "New Authorization Methods").

   This document specifies which IPsec configurations can be useful in a
   Mobile IPv6 context and how they can validate home address options
   (enabling triangular routing) and protect mobility signaling
   (enabling routing optimization).  It gives detailed IKE
   [RFC2409][IKEv2] configuration guidelines for common cases.

   This document uses the "MUST", "SHOULD", "MAY", ..., key words
   according to [RFC2119].  IKE terminology is copied from IKEv2
   [IKEv2].

2.  IPsec in a Mobile IPv6 context

   This document considers only suitable IPsec security associations,
   i.e., anything which does not fulfill the following requirements is
   out of scope:
   -  IPsec security association pairs MUST be between the mobile node
      and one of its correspondent nodes.
   -  authentication, integrity and anti-replay services MUST be
      selected.
   -  the traffic selectors MUST match exclusively the home address of
      the mobile node and an address of the correspondent node (the
      address used for communication between peers).
   -  the transport mode MUST be used.
   -  for routing optimization, the mobility header "upper protocol"
      with at least binding update (BU) and acknowledgment (BA) message
      type MUST be accepted by the traffic selectors.

   The purpose of the first three requirements is to allow to use IPsec
   as a proof of origin.

3.  Home address option validation

   This document amends the Mobile IPv6 [RFC3775] section 9.3.1 by
   adding a second way (other than binding cache entry check) to provide
   home address option validation.

   When a packet carrying a home address option is protected by a
   suitable IPsec security association, the home address option SHOULD



Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


   be considered as validated.

   A way to implement this is to mark the home address option as "to be
   validated" when it is processed.  When the upper protocol is reached,
   in order either:
   -  an IPsec header was processed according to [RFC2401] section 5.2.1
      with a suitable IPsec security association, or
   -  a binding cache entry check is successfully performed, or
   -  the packet contains a binding update, or
   -  the packet MUST be dropped.

   Note this enables triangular routing from any unicast routable
   care-of address, i.e., half optimization without any mobility
   signaling.

4.  Routing Optimization

   A suitable IPsec security association can protect binding updates and
   acknowledgments.  In binding updates the new requirements are:
   -  the H (home registration) and K (key management mobility
      capability) bits MUST be cleared.
   -  Nonce indices and binding authorization data options SHOULD NOT be
      sent by the mobile node and MUST be ignored by the correspondent
      node.
   -  when an alternate care-of address option is present and is not
      checked using the state cookie mechanism [cookie], the alternate
      care-of address MUST match the source address in the IP header or
      the home address itself.  Any binding update which does not
      fulfill this requirement MUST be rejected.
   -  as ESP can only protect the payload, an alternate care-of address
      option MUST be used in conjunction with ESP (cf [RFC3775] section
      11.7.1).

   In binding acknowledgments the new requirements are:
   -  the K (key management mobility capability) bit MUST be cleared.
   -  Binding authorization data option SHOULD NOT be sent by the
      correspondent node and MUST be ignored by the mobile node.
   -  "long" lifetime compatible with the IPsec policy (i.e., by default
      up to the IPsec security association lifetime) MAY be granted.

   As explained in [bombing], ingress filtering either is not used and
   bombing attacks are possible without the "help" of any Mobile IPv6
   mechanism, or is used and provides protection against fake care-of
   addresses from a rogue mobile node.  So the only constraint is to
   accept real alternate care-of addresses only when they are
   successfully checked using the state cookie mechanism.

   This mechanism [cookie] MUST NOT be used when the new care-of address



Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


   is the home address, MUST be used when the alternate care-of address
   is a real one, i.e., is not the same than the source address in the
   IPv6 header nor the home address.  It MAY be used in other cases but
   in general in the context of this document the mobile node is enough
   trusted to make this check not necessary or even not useful.

5.  IKE configurations

   This document considers only IKE where it is used for mobility
   purpose.  Peer addresses (addresses IKE runs over) are the addresses
   seen at the transport or application layers, i.e., when the mobile
   node uses its home address as the source of an IKE message, the
   source address in the IP header can (should!) be a care-of address.

   IKE MUST be run over the home address for the mobile node side when
   the home address is usable.  In special circumstances where the home
   address can be unusable, IKE MUST be run over a care-of address but
   this has many known drawbacks:
   -  a care-of address can not be used for authentication nor
      authorization.
   -  security associations do not survive handoffs.
   -  the establishment of transport mode IPsec security association
      using the home address as the mobile node traffic selector raises
      a policy / authorization issue.
   The home address MAY be used in (phase 1) mobile node Identification
   payloads.  But this does not work well with dynamic home addresses,
   so when it is acceptable by the correspondent node policy, name based
   Identification (i.e., of type ID_FQDN or ID_RFC822_ADDR, [IKEv2]
   section 3.5) payloads SHOULD be used by the mobile node.

   When the home address is bound to a public key, for instance when the
   home address is a Cryptographically Generated Addresses [CGA], the
   strong authentication MAY be replaced by an address ownership proof.
   In this case the public key MAY be transported by IKE from the mobile
   node to the correspondent node, for instance in a Certificate payload
   of type 11 ([IKEv2] section 3.6).  Auxiliary parameters MAY be
   transported in an Identification payload of type ID_KEY_ID...

   The IKE peer policy MAY restrict IPsec security associations to the
   protection of Mobile IPv6 signaling, i.e., restrict the traffic
   selectors to the mobility header "upper protocol" with at least
   binding update and acknowledgment message types.  This SHOULD be the
   default policy when authentication or authorization can be considered
   as being weak, for instance when the previous paragraph is applied.

6.  Security Considerations

   IPsec is far more secure than the return routability procedure, thus



Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


   it should be used where it is applicable.  So this document can
   increase at least the overall security of Mobile IPv6.  Note that
   some operators can not propose Mobile IPv6 based services knowing
   that the Mobile IPv6 security is based on assumptions.

   Two points are worthy of special considerations:
   -  no care-of address test is required when ingress filtering can
      reject fake care-of addresses from a rogue mobile node but a
      correspondent node can use the return routability state cookie
      procedure to get extra insurance as well as the support of real
      alternate care-of addresses.
   -  in order to avoid granting any extra privilege by a side effect of
      using IPsec, the peers (i.e., the mobile and correspondent nodes)
      may restrict the traffic selectors to the protection of mobility
      signaling only.  This should be applied to any dubious cases,
      including by default when security administration is known to be
      too light.

7.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank many people for believing in IPsec as
   a right way to secure Mobile IPv6.  Special thanks to Wassim Haddad
   and Claude Castelluccia for keeping our attention to special cases
   where home addresses are derived from public keys.

   Thanks to the Mobile IPv6 IETF working group for discussions about
   the third party bombing issue, including for no convincing arguments
   in favor of a requirement for the care-of address test in all cases.
   No thanks to router vendors who do not support ingress filtering with
   reasonable performance on some models, and to Internet service
   provider managers who could enable ingress filtering but do not.

8.  Changes from previous versions

   The care-of address test annex was moved to its own document
   [cookie].

   Peer address clarification (thanks to Mohan Parthasarathy).  Change
   SHOULD/MAY to MUST/MUST for mobile node peer address.

9.  References

9.1  Normative References

   [IKEv2]    Kaufman, C., Ed., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2)
              Protocol", draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-17.txt (work in
              progress), September 2004.




Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, BCP 14, March 1997.

   [RFC2401]  Kent, S. and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998.

   [RFC2409]  Harkins, D. and D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange
              (IKE)", RFC 2409, November 1998.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C. and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC3776]  Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V. and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to
              Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and
              Home Agents", RFC 3776, June 2004.

   [cookie]   Dupont, F. and J-M. Combes, "Care-of Address Test for
              MIPv6 using a State Cookie",
              draft-dupont-mipv6-rrcookie-00.txt (work in progress),
              January 2005.

9.2  Informative References

   [CGA]      Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              draft-ietf-send-cga-06.txt (work in progress), April 2004.

   [bombing]  Dupont, F., "A note about 3rd party bombing in Mobile
              IPv6", draft-dupont-mipv6-3bombing-01.txt (work in
              progress), January 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Francis Dupont
   Point6
   c/o GET/ENST Bretagne
   2 rue de la Chataigneraie
   CS 17607
   35576 Cesson-Sevigne Cedex
   France

   Fax:   +33 2 99 12 70 30
   EMail: Francis.Dupont@enst-bretagne.fr








Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


   Jean-Michel Combes
   France Telecom DR&D
   38/40 rue du General Leclerc
   92794 Issy-les-Moulineaux Cedex 9
   France

   Fax:   +33 1 45 29 65 19
   EMail: jeanmichel.combes@francetelecom.com











































Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Using IPsec between MN and CN          January 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Dupont & Combes          Expires July 11, 2005                  [Page 8]


