
Open Pluggable Edge Services                                   A. Barbir
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Expires: June 1, 2004                                        A. Rousskov
                                                 The Measurement Factory
                                                        December 2, 2003


                  OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations
                         draft-ietf-opes-iab-04

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 1, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   IETF Internet Architecture Board (IAB) expressed nine
   architecture-level considerations for the Open Pluggable Edge
   Services (OPES) framework.  This document describes how OPES
   addresses those considerations.










Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Consideration (2.1) 'One-party consent'  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Consideration (2.2) 'IP-layer communications'  . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Notification Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.1 Notification versus trace  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.2 An example of an OPES trace for HTTP . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.3 Consideration (3.1) 'Notification' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.4 Consideration (3.2) 'Notification' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Consideration (3.3) 'Non-blocking' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Consideration (4.1) 'URI resolution' . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Consideration (4.2) 'Reference validity' . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.  Consideration (4.3) 'Addressing extensions'  . . . . . . . . . 16
   10. Consideration (5.1) 'Privacy'  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   11. Consideration 'Encryption' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   12. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   13. Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 25



























Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


1. Introduction

   The Open Pluggable Edge Services (OPES) architecture
   [I-D.ietf-opes-architecture], enables cooperative application
   services (OPES services) between a data provider, a data consumer,
   and zero or more OPES processors.  The application services under
   consideration analyze and possibly transform application-level
   messages exchanged between the data provider and the data consumer.

   In the process of chartering OPES, the IAB made recommendations on
   issues that OPES solutions should be required to address. These
   recommendations were formulated in the form of a specific IAB
   considerations document [RFC3238].  In that document, IAB emphasized
   that its considerations did not recommend specific solutions and did
   not mandate specific functional requirements. Addressing an IAB
   consideration may involve showing appropriate protocol mechanisms or
   demonstrating that the issue does not apply. Addressing a
   consideration does not necessarily mean supporting technology implied
   by the consideration wording.

   The primary goal of this document is to show that all IAB
   recommendations are addressed by OPES, to the extent that those
   considerations can be addressed by an IETF working group. The
   limitations of OPES working group to address certain aspects of IAB
   considerations are also explicitly documented.

   There are nine IAB considerations [RFC3238] that OPES has to address.
   In the core of this document are the corresponding nine
   "Consideration" sections. For each IAB consideration, its section
   contains general discussion as well as references to specific OPES
   mechanisms relevant to the consideration.




















Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


2. Terminology

   This document does not introduce any new terminology but uses
   terminology from other OPES documents it quotes.















































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


3. Consideration (2.1) 'One-party consent'

   "An OPES framework standardized in the IETF must require that the use
   of any OPES service be explicitly authorized by one of the
   application-layer end-hosts (that is, either the content provider or
   the client)."[RFC3238]

   OPES architecture requires that "OPES processors MUST be consented to
   by either the data consumer or data provider application"
   [I-D.ietf-opes-architecture]. This requirement alone cannot prevent
   consent-less introduction of OPES processors. In
   [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm], the OPES architecture enables concerned
   parties to detect unwanted OPES processors by examining OPES traces.
   The use of traces in OPES is mandatory.

   A tracing mechanism on its own cannot detect processors that are in
   violation of OPES specifications.  Examples include OPES processors
   operating in stealth mode.  However, the OPES architecture allows the
   use of content signature to verify the authenticity of performed
   adaptations. Content signatures is a strong but expensive mechanism
   that can detect any modifications of signed content provided that the
   content provider is willing to sign the data and that the client is
   willing to either check the signature or relay received content to
   the content provider for signature verification.

   OPES adaptations may include copying and other forms of non-modifying
   access to content. These kinds of adaptations cannot be detected by
   the above mentioned mechanisms. Thus, "passive" OPES processors can
   operate on the content without the data consumer or provider consent.
   If presence of such processors is a concern, then content encryption
   can be used. A passive processor is no different from a proxy or an
   intermediary operating outside of OPES framework.  No OPES mechanism
   (existing or foreseeable) can prevent non-modifying access to
   content.

















Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


4. Consideration (2.2) 'IP-layer communications'

   "For an OPES framework standardized in the IETF, the OPES
   intermediary must be explicitly addressed at the IP layer by the end
   user."[RFC3238]

   The OPES architecture requires that "OPES processors MUST be
   addressable at the IP layer by the end user (data consumer
   application)" [I-D.ietf-opes-architecture]. The IAB and the
   architecture documents mention an important exception: addressing the
   first OPES processor in a chain of processors is sufficient. That is,
   a chain of OPES processors is viewed as a single OPES "system" at the
   address of the first chain element.

   The notion of a chain is not strictly defined by IAB. For the purpose
   of addressing this consideration, a group of OPES processors working
   on a given application transaction is considered. Such a group would
   necessarily form a single processing chain, with a single "exit" OPES
   processor (i.e., the processor that adapted the given message last).
   The OPES architecture essentially requires that last OPES processor
   to be explicitly addressable at the IP layer by the data consumer
   application. The chain formation, including its exit point may depend
   on an application message and other dynamic factors such as time of
   the day or system load.

   Furthermore, if OPES processing is an internal processing step at a
   data consumer or a data provider application side, then the last OPES
   processor may reside in a private address space and may not be
   explicitly addressable from the outside. In such situations, the
   processing side must designate an addressable point on the same
   processing chain. That designated point may not be, strictly
   speaking, an OPES processor, but it will suffice as such as far as
   IAB considerations are concerned -- the data consumer application
   will be able to address it explicitly at the IP layer and it will
   represent the OPES processing chain to the outside world.

   Designating an addressable processing point avoids the conflict
   between narrow interpretation of the IAB consideration and real
   system designs. It is irrational to expect a content provider to
   provide access to internal hosts participating in content generation,
   whether OPES processors are involved or not. Moreover, providing such
   access would serve little practical purpose because internal OPES
   processors are not likely to be able to answer any data consumer
   queries, being completely out of content generation context. For
   example, an OPES processor adding customer-specific information to
   XML pages may not understand or be aware of any final HTML content
   that the data consumer application receives and may not be able to
   map end user request to any internal user identification. Since OPES



Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


   requires the end of the message processing chain to be addressable,
   the conflict does not exist. OPES places no requirements on the
   internal architecture of data producer systems while requiring the
   entire OPES-related content production "system" to be addressable at
   the IP layer.

   Private Domain    | Public Domain     | Private Domain
                     |                   |
   +--------------+  |             +-------------+      +--------+
   | Data         |  |             | OPES System |      |Data    |
   | Consumer     |<--- network -->| with public |<---->|Provider|
   | Application  |  |             | IP address  |      |App     |
   +--------------+  |             +-------------+      +--------+
                     |                   |
                     |                   |

                                Figure 1


































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


5. Notification Considerations

   This section discusses how OPES framework addresses IAB Notification
   considerations 3.1 and 3.2.

5.1 Notification versus trace

   Before specific considerations are discussed, the relationship
   between IAB notifications and OPES tracing has to be explained. OPES
   framework concentrates on tracing rather than notification. The OPES
   Communications specification [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm] defines "OPES
   trace" as information about OPES adaptations that is embedded in an
   application message. Thus, OPES trace follows the application message
   it traces. The trace is for the recipient of the application message.
   Traces are implemented as extensions of application protocols being
   adapted and traced.

   As opposed to an OPES trace, provider notification (as implied by
   IAB) notifies the sender of the application message rather than the
   recipient. Thus, notifications propagate in the opposite direction of
   traces. Supporting notifications directly would require a new
   protocol. Figure 2 illustrates the differences between a trace and
   notification from a single application message point of view.
   sender --[message A]--> OPES --[message A']--> recipient
      ^                       V                             [with trace]
      |                       |
      +-<-- [notification] ---+

                                Figure 2

   Since notifications cannot be piggy-backed to application messages,
   they create new messages and may double the number of messages the
   sender has to process. The number of messages that need to be proceed
   is larger if several intermediaries on the message path generate
   notifications). Associating notifications with application messages
   may require duplicating application message information in
   notifications and may require maintaining a sender state until
   notification is received. These actions increase the performance
   overhead of notifications.

   The level of available details in notifications versus provider
   interest in supporting notification is another concern.  Experience
   shows that content providers often require very detailed information
   about user actions to be interested in notifications at all. For
   example, Hit Metering protocol [RFC2227] has been designed to supply
   content providers with proxy cache hit counts, in an effort to reduce
   cache busting behavior which was caused by content providers desire
   to get accurate site "access counts". However, the Hit Metering



Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


   protocol is currently not widely deployed because the protocol does
   not supply content providers with information such as client IP
   addresses, browser versions, or cookies.

   Hit Metering experience is relevant because Hit Metering protocol was
   designed to do for HTTP caching intermediaries what OPES
   notifications are meant to do for OPES intermediaries. Performance
   requirements call for state reduction via aggregation of
   notifications while provider preferences call for state preservation
   or duplication. Achieving the right balance when two sides belong to
   different organizations and have different optimization priorities
   may be impossible.

   Thus, instead of explicitly supporting notifications at the protocol
   level, OPES concentrates on tracing facilities. In essence, OPES
   supports notifications indirectly, using tracing facilities. In other
   words, the IAB choice of "Notification" label is interpreted as
   "Notification assistance" (i.e.  making notifications meaningful) and
   is not interpreted as a "Notification protocol".

   The above concerns call for making notification optional. The OPES
   architecture allows for an efficient and meaningful notification
   protocol to be implemented in certain OPES environments.  For
   example, a Cable Company Internet Service Provider (Cable ISP) may
   provide a user-configurable porn filtering service to its subscribers
   while having an agreement with the parent Cable Company to send
   notifications to the content provider when clients (content
   consumers) use the same filter to block Company's advertisement
   images. If the Cable Company deems such subscriber actions
   inappropriate, the company may contact individual subscribers and
   enforce their ISP usage policy according to the terms of the service
   agreement. In this example, ISP cooperation is expected, the volume
   of notifications would be relatively low, and notifications can be
   handled in an automated manner.

5.2 An example of an OPES trace for HTTP

   The example below illustrates adaptations done to HTTP request at an
   OPES processor operated by the client ISP. Both original (as sent by
   an end user) and adapted (as received by the origin web server)
   requests are shown. The primary adaptation is the modification of
   HTTP "Accept" header. The secondary adaptation is the addition of an
   OPES-System HTTP extension header [I-D.ietf-opes-http].

   GET /pub/WWW/ HTTP/1.1
   Host: www.w3.org
   Accept: text/plain




Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


                                Figure 3

   ... may be adapted by an ISP OPES system to become:

   GET /pub/WWW/ HTTP/1.1
   Host: www.w3.org
   Accept: text/plain; q=0.5, text/html, text/x-dvi; q=0.8
   OPES-System: http://www.isp-example.com/opes/?client-hash=1234567

                                Figure 4

   The example below illustrates adaptations done to HTTP response at an
   OPES intermediary operated by a Content Distribution Network (CDN).
   Both original (as sent by the origin web server) and adapted (as
   received by the end user) responses are shown. The primary adaptation
   is the conversion from HTML markup to plain text. The secondary
   adaptation is the addition of an OPES-System HTTP extension header.

   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Content-Length: 12345
   Content-Encoding: text/html

   <html><head><h1>Available Documenta...

                                Figure 5

   ... may be adapted by a CDN OPES system to become:

   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Content-Length: 2345
   Content-Encoding: text/plain
   OPES-System: http://www.cdn-example.com/opes/?site=7654&svc=h2t

   AVAILABLE DOCUMENTA...

                                Figure 6

   In the above examples, OPES-System header values contain URIs that
   may point to OPES-specific documents such as description of the OPES
   operator and its privacy policy.  Those documents may be
   parameterized to allow for customizations specific to the transaction
   being traced (e.g., client or even transaction identifier may be used
   to provide more information about performed adaptations). An OPES-Via
   header may be used to provide a more detailed trace of specific OPES
   entities within an OPES System that adapted the message. Traced OPES
   URIs may be later used to request OPES bypass
   [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm].




Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


5.3 Consideration (3.1) 'Notification'

   "The overall OPES framework needs to assist content providers in
   detecting and responding to client-centric actions by OPES
   intermediaries that are deemed inappropriate by the content
   provider."[RFC3238]

   OPES tracing mechanisms assist content providers in detecting
   client-centric actions by OPES intermediaries. Specifically, a
   compliant OPES intermediary or system notifies a content provider of
   its presence by including its tracing information in the application
   protocol requests. An OPES system MUST leave its trace
   [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm].  Detection assistance has its limitations.
   Some OPES intermediaries may work exclusively on responses and may
   not have a chance to trace the request. Moreover, some application
   protocols may not have explicit requests (e.g., a content push
   service).

   OPES tracing mechanisms assist content providers in responding to
   client-centric actions by OPES intermediaries. Specifically, OPES
   traces MUST include identification of OPES systems and SHOULD include
   a list of adaptation actions performed on provider's content. This
   tracing information may be included in the application request.
   Usually, however, this information will be included in the
   application response, an adapted version of which does not reach the
   content provider. If OPES end points cooperate, then notification can
   be assisted with traces. Content providers that suspect or experience
   difficulties can do any of the following:

   o  Check whether requests they receive pass through OPES
      intermediaries. Presence of OPES tracing info will determine that.
      This check is only possible for request/response protocols. For
      other protocols (e.g., broadcast or push), the provider would have
      to assume that OPES intermediaries are involved until proven
      otherwise.

   o  If OPES intermediaries are suspected, request OPES traces from
      potentially affected user(s). The trace will be a part of the
      application message received by the user software. If involved
      parties cooperate, the provider(s) may have access to all the
      needed information.  Certainly, lack of cooperation may hinder
      access to tracing information. To encourage cooperation, data
      providers might be able to deny service to uncooperative users.

   o  Some traces may indicate that more information is available by
      accessing certain resources on the specified OPES intermediary or
      elsewhere. Content providers may query for more information in
      this case.



Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


   o  If everything else fails, providers can enforce no-adaptation
      policy using appropriate OPES bypass mechanisms and/or end-to-end
      encryption mechanisms.

   OPES detection and response assistance is limited to application
   protocols with support for tracing extensions. For example, HTTP
   [RFC2616] has such support while DNS over UDP does not.

5.4 Consideration (3.2) 'Notification'

   "The overall OPES framework should assist end users in detecting the
   behavior of OPES intermediaries, potentially allowing them to
   identify imperfect or compromised intermediaries."[RFC3238]

   OPES tracing mechanisms assist end users in detecting OPES
   intermediaries. Specifically, a compliant OPES intermediary or system
   notifies an end user of its presence by including its tracing
   information in the application protocol messages sent to the client.
   An OPES system MUST leave its trace [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm].
   However, detection assistance has its limitations. Some OPES systems
   may work exclusively on requests and may not have a chance to trace
   the response.  Moreover, some application protocols may not have
   explicit responses (e.g., event logging service).

   OPES detection assistance is limited to application protocols with
   support for tracing extensions. For example, HTTP [RFC2616] has such
   support while DNS over UDP does not.
























Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


6. Consideration (3.3) 'Non-blocking'

   "If there exists a "non-OPES" version of content available from the
   content provider, the OPES architecture must not prevent users from
   retrieving this "non-OPES" version from the content
   provider."[RFC3238]

   "OPES entities MUST support a bypass feature"
   [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm]. If an application message includes bypass
   instructions and an OPES intermediary is not configured to ignore
   them, the matching OPES intermediary will not process the message. An
   OPES intermediary may be configured to ignore bypass instructions
   only if no non-OPES version of content is available.  Bypass may
   generate content errors since some OPES services may be essential but
   may not be configured as such.

   Bypass support has limitations similar to the two
   notification-related considerations above.

































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


7. Consideration (4.1) 'URI resolution'

   "OPES documentation must be clear in describing these services as
   being applied to the result of URI resolution, not as URI resolution
   itself."[RFC3238]

   "OPES Scenarios and Use Cases" specification
   [I-D.ietf-opes-scenarios] documents content adaptations that are in
   scope of the OPES framework. Scenarios include adaptations of
   requests and responses. These adaptations do not include URI
   resolution adaptations. In some environments, it is technically
   possible to adapt URIs (and other kinds of identifiers or addresses)
   using documented OPES mechanisms. The OPES framework cannot
   effectively prohibit any specific adaptations.





































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


8. Consideration (4.2) 'Reference validity'

   "All proposed services must define their impact on inter- and
   intra-document reference validity."[RFC3238]

   The OPES framework does not propose adaptation services. However,
   OPES tracing requirements include identification of OPES
   intermediaries and services (for details, see "Notification"
   consideration sections in this document). It is required that
   provided identification can be used to locate information about the
   OPES intermediaries, including the description of impact on reference
   validity [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm].







































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


9. Consideration (4.3) 'Addressing extensions'

   "Any services that cannot be achieved while respecting the above two
   considerations may be reviewed as potential requirements for Internet
   application addressing architecture extensions, but must not be
   undertaken as ad hoc fixes."[RFC3238]

   OPES framework does not contain ad hoc fixes. This document in
   combination with and other OPES documents should be sufficient to
   inform service creators of IAB considerations. If a service does URI
   resolution or silently affects document reference validity, the
   authors are requested to review service impact on Internet
   application addressing architecture and work within IETF on potential
   extension requirements. Such actions would be outside of the current
   OPES framework.




































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


10. Consideration (5.1) 'Privacy'

   "The overall OPES framework must provide for mechanisms for end users
   to determine the privacy policies of OPES intermediaries."[RFC3238]

   OPES tracing mechanisms allow end users to identify OPES
   intermediaries (for details, see "Notification" consideration
   sections in this document). It is required that provided
   identification can be used to locate information about the OPES
   intermediaries, including their privacy policies.

   The term "privacy policy" is not defined in this context (by IAB or
   OPES working group). OPES tracing mechanisms allow end users and
   content providers to identify an OPES system and/or intermediaries.
   It is believed that once an OPES system is identified, it would be
   possible to locate relevant information about that system, including
   information relevant to requesters perception of privacy policy or
   reference validity.

































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


11. Consideration 'Encryption'

   "If OPES is chartered, the OPES working group will also have to
   explicitly decide and document whether the OPES architecture must be
   compatible with the use of end-to-end encryption by one or more ends
   of an OPES-involved session. If OPES was compatible with end-to-end
   encryption, this would effectively ensure that OPES boxes would be
   restricted to ones that are known, trusted, explicitly addressed at
   the IP layer, and authorized (by the provision of decryption keys) by
   at least one of the ends."[RFC3238]

   The above quoted requirement was not explicitly listed as on of the
   IAB considerations, but still needs to be addressed. The context of
   the quote implies that the phrase "end-to-end encryption" refers to
   encryption along all links of the end-to-end path, with the OPES
   intermediaries as encrypting/decrypting participants or hops (e.g.,
   encryption between the provider and the OPES intermediaries, and
   between the OPES intermediaries and the client).

   Since OPES processors are regular hops on the application protocol
   path, OPES architecture allows for such encryption, provided the
   application protocol being adapted supports it. Hop-by-hop encryption
   would do little good for the overall application message path
   protection if callout services have to receive unencrypted content.
   To allow for complete link encryption coverage, OPES callout protocol
   (OCP) supports encryption of OCP connections between an OPES
   processor and a callout server via optional (negotiated) transport
   encryption mechanisms [I-D.ietf-opes-ocp-core].

   For example, TLS encryption [RFC2817] can be used among HTTP hops
   (some of which could be OPES processors) and between each OPES
   processor and a callout server.



















Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


12. Security Considerations

   This document does not define any mechanisms that may be subject to
   security considerations. Security considerations for OPES mechanisms
   are discussed in corresponding OPES framework documents.














































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


13. Compliance

   This document may be perceived as a proof of OPES compliance with IAB
   implied recommendations. However, this document does not introduce
   any compliance subjects. Compliance of OPES implementations is
   defined in other OPES documents discussed above.













































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


Appendix A. Change Log

   RFC Editor Note: This section is to be removed during the final
   publication of the document.

   Internal WG revision control ID: $Id: iab-cons.xml,v 1.32 2003/12/03
   06:46:04 rousskov Exp $

   2003/11/18

      *  Added an example where an efficient and meaningful notification
         protocol can be implemented in OPES.

      *  Assume Communications draft will contain wording about
         documenting impact on reference validity.

      *  Use OPES-System HTTP header for examples and mention OPES-Via.
         We still need to get HTTP Adaptations draft in sync with this
         change, but the text now assumes that has been done.

   2003/10/24

      *  Addressed hop-by-hop encryption concerns mentioned in the IAB
         draft.

      *  Polished IP addressing figure.

      *  Removed resolved XXXs.

   2003/10/01

      *  Polishing (Abbie Barbir).

   2003/09/23

      *  Added a reference to Optional Notification section of the
         ietf-opes-end-comm draft.

      *  Fixed "Consideration (3.3) Non-blocking" section position.

   head-sid15

      *  Added a figure showing a chain of internal OPES intermediaries
         behind a public IP address. Needs more work. More cases?







Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


   head-sid14

      *  Rewrote the Introduction to the IP addressing consideration.
         Do NOT explain how IAB considerations, if interpreted literary,
         do not satisfy important real-world constraints. Instead, use
         the "chain of OPES intermediaries" exception introduced by IAB
         itself to show that OPES architecture addresses IAB concerns as
         long as the "chain" is defined/formed for a given application
         message rather than being a statically configured application
         routing table of sorts. IAB had to add the "chain" exception to
         cover one of the most obvious real-world usage scenario. We use
         the very same exception to cover all usage scenarios we care
         about.

      *  Polished text explaining the differences between tracing and
         notification mechanisms.

      *  Added examples of OPES/HTTP traces.

      *  Be careful not to imply that all OPES intermediaries must obey
         bypass instructions. Bypass should be ignored when no non-OPES
         version of the content exists. Ideally, this may need to be
         polished further -- if there is no non-OPES version of the
         content, most IAB considerations probably do not apply because
         there is really no adaptation, only creation of content (and we
         should not restrict content creation).

      *  Added references to OPES "Communications" draft
         [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm].

   head-sid9

      *  Polished to meet new xml2rfc strict requirements.

   head-sid8

      *  Added unpolished meat for all nine considerations.

      *  Added Abbie Barbir as an author.

   head-sid7

      *  Initial revision








Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-opes-end-comm]
              Barbir, A., "OPES processor and end points
              communications", draft-ietf-opes-end-comm-05 (work in
              progress), October 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-opes-architecture]
              Barbir, A., "An Architecture for Open Pluggable Edge
              Services (OPES)", draft-ietf-opes-architecture-04 (work in
              progress), December 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-opes-scenarios]
              Barbir, A., "OPES Use Cases and Deployment Scenarios",
              draft-ietf-opes-scenarios-01 (work in progress), August
              2002.

   [RFC3238]  Floyd, S. and L. Daigle, "IAB Architectural and Policy
              Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge Services", RFC
              3238, January 2002.































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


Informative References

   [RFC2227]  Mogul, J. and P. Leach, "Simple Hit-Metering and
              Usage-Limiting for HTTP", RFC 2227, October 1997.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Nielsen, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [RFC2817]  Khare, R. and S. Lawrence, "Upgrading to TLS Within HTTP/
              1.1", RFC 2817, May 2000.

   [I-D.ietf-opes-http]
              Rousskov, A. and M. Stecher, "HTTP adaptation with OPES",
              draft-ietf-opes-http-01 (work in progress), October 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-opes-ocp-core]
              Rousskov, A., "OPES Callout Protocol Core",
              draft-ietf-opes-ocp-core-03 (work in progress), November
              2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Abbie Barbir
   Nortel Networks
   3500 Carling Avenue
   Nepean, Ontario
   CA

   Phone: +1 613 763 5229
   EMail: abbieb@nortelnetworks.com


   Alex Rousskov
   The Measurement Factory

   EMail: rousskov@measurement-factory.com
   URI:   http://www.measurement-factory.com/












Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft    OPES Treatment of IAB Considerations     December 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Barbir & Rousskov         Expires June 1, 2004                 [Page 26]


