


TBD                                                             T. Davis
Internet-Draft                                                    Boeing
Intended status: Informational                        September 18, 2006
Expires: March 22, 2007


            Aviation Global Internet Operations Requirements
                     draft-davis-aviationreq-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 22, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The commercial aviation industry is among the first to develop and
   deploy mobile networks capable of utilizing Internet communications
   services around the world.  In development of this capability the
   industry developed their own standards for the use of IP based
   communications within the aircraft and on the direct connected off-
   board links.  This document defines aviationOs desired Internet
   usages and capabilities and the gaps the industry sees in basic
   Internet technology required for the full utilization of the Internet



Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


   by mobile platforms.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Aviation Internet Concept of Operations  . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.  Aircraft Control Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   4.  Airline Information Services Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   5.  Passenger Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   6.  Aircraft to Ground Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   7.  Transitional Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   8.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   10. Protocol Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   11. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   13. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   Appendix A.  Draft ICAO Technical Considerations . . . . . . . . .  8

   Appendix B.  Draft ICAO Implementation Considerations  . . . . . .  8

   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10














Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


1.  Introduction

   The commercial aviation industry is among the first to develop and
   deploy mobile networks capable of utilizing Internet communications
   services around the world.  In development of this capability the
   industry developed their own standards for the use of IP based
   communications within the aircraft and on the direct connected off-
   board links.  These internal and link network specifications are
   covered by Arinc standards 664, 763, 811, 821, and 822.

   As this technology has begun to deploy, the industry has found
   several gaps in its ability to fully utilize Internet technology and
   services.  This document defines aviationOs desired Internet usages
   and capabilities and the gaps the industry sees in basic Internet
   technology required for the full utilization of the Internet by
   mobile platforms.  The aviation industryOs usage of Internet services
   is also confined and regulated by service and support requirements
   defined by various national and international agencies that govern
   aircraft operation and air transport services.


2.  Aviation Internet Concept of Operations

   Aircraft systems, including communications systems, are divided into
   three distinct domains for which statutory, regulatory, and
   airworthiness certification requirements are distinctly different.
   The domains are:

   Aircraft Control (AC) Domain

      The AC domain covers aircraft operational control and air traffic
      communications relating to safety and regularity of flight.

      The communications equipment in the AC domain operates under the
      regulations of the International Civil Aviation Organization
      (ICAO), the Air Navigation Service Providers (ANSPs), and the
      airworthiness requirements of the certifying aeronautical agency/
      government.  This domain is generally under operational control of
      the ANSPs.

   Airline Information Services (AIS) Domain

      The AIS domain covers airline administrative and non-safety
      airline operational communications.

      The equipment in the AIS domain operates under rules and
      regulations of the airworthiness certifying aeronautical and
      communications agency/government, but because the use is not



Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


      safety related, the rules are similar to those governing
      international banking and generally under the governance and
      jurisdiction of the carrierOs flag country.

   Passenger Information and Entertainment Services (PIES) Domain

      The PIES domain covers entertainment and communications provided
      directly to the passengers, including interfaces for passenger
      communication equipment.

      The equipment in the PIES domain generally operates under the
      rules and regulations of the local government and/or the flag
      country, covering personal communications.  This includes voice/
      telephone/cell service rules, regulations, and law enforcement
      access.

   The maintenance of these discreet logical networks is critical to the
   ability to operate the aircraft in all jurisdictions around the
   world.


3.  Aircraft Control Domain

   At the present time, current scenarioOs envision that the
   communication of the Aircraft Control Domain would be operated as a
   closed domain with access permitted to only the aircraft and the
   national entities providing air navigation services.  This isolation
   is necessary to ensure the safety and reliability of air navigation
   services.  This design also serves to minimize the routing tables
   associated with this network ensuring that aircraft mobility services
   can be assured of a rapid routing convergence as the aircraft add and
   drop links

   In addition the communication of the Aircraft Control Domain will be
   operated as a high security network with all traffic both encrypted
   and authenticated.  It is anticipated that this domain will require
   many individual sets of digital keys to allow the aircraft to operate
   in the various national and regional air traffic control spaces
   around the globe with separate authentication and encryption within
   each control space.  Network layer authentication will also be
   required in order for aircraft to join this network.

   For network services, this network is expected to have a unified
   domain naming service structure in order to facilitate the handoff of
   aircraft in flight between the air traffic control spaces.  It is
   anticipated to require its own top level domain.  Secure DNS services
   and dynamic DNS are required.  Aircraft operating in this domain will
   have statically assigned IP prefixes for routing.  On board systems



Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


   may utilize DHCP and/or IPv6 auto-configuration services like
   neighbor discovery.  Network time services via NTP will be provided
   as a stratum 1 service from the aircraft GPS and therefore this
   network will not be required to have an additional NTP source.

   The Control domain also has regulatory requirements covering the
   approval of different links and providers to handle traffic/data
   related to the safety of flight and pilot to controller
   communications.  These requirements also specify maximum levels of
   latency and minimum levels of QoS performance.  In general this
   network takes link priority over traffic from the Airline Information
   Services and Passenger domains.

   All services for the Control domain including routing, mobility,
   security, and naming services will ultimately be handled in
   accordance with guidance provided by ICAO and air navigation service
   providers.


4.  Airline Information Services Domain

   The AIS domain will likely be operated as a closed subnet within the
   airlines' infrastructure, however some routing can be expected to
   both exit and enter this subnet.  Again the minimal size of the
   network should assure rapid network convergence.  Dual-homed servers
   are likely to be deployed on the edge of this network to provide data
   transfer between the airlines' operational aircraft network and their
   corporate IT systems.

   This network is also assumed to be operated as a high security
   network with network access authentication and encryption required.
   The authentication, encryption and digital keying will likely be
   defined by the airline with guidance from industry groups and their
   flag government.

   The network services required for this network domain will be similar
   to those required for the Control domain although the data volumes
   are likely to be much higher.  This domain also has some similar
   regulatory requirements on latency and QOS performance but are in
   general much less strict than the AC domain.  In general this link
   will be a secondary queue with priority over traffic from the
   passenger domain; however AC domain traffic will have priority over
   AIS domain traffic.

   This domain is subject to both international and national
   regulations.





Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


5.  Passenger Domain

   The operation of the Passenger services and In-flight Entertainment
   (IFE) domain is expected to be defined by the service providers and
   the in-flight entertainment system vendors.  It is assumed to be
   subject to all local, national, and international regulations
   regarding voice and data communications.  It may also be subject to
   local and national law enforcement requirements for intercept.


6.  Aircraft to Ground Links

   Some data communication and digital voice links between the aircraft
   and ground stations or service providers are expected to be shared
   between the three domains under the guidance provided above.

   In addition it is expected that the normal state of operation for the
   aircraft shall be to have multiple data or voice links simultaneously
   active.  These links are expected to be aircraft initiated and will
   come and go primarily based on location (over land or water, which
   country) and what service providers are available as the aircraft
   traverses the globe.  No single uniform service provider
   infrastructure exists for any type of link globally.  Thus on a
   typical flight around the globe the aircraft may utilize three to
   seven link types provided by five to ten independent service
   providers.

   In order to implement this type of link service infrastructure link
   access authentication and accounting must occur.  In addition, all
   Air-to-Ground communications are expected to be link encrypted.

   This mix of link types provided by multiple service providers appears
   to make the implementation of home agents as envisioned by NEMO
   (NEtwork MObility) extremely operationally difficult.  Further the
   regulatory and links latency requirements will also make the use of
   home agents difficult.


7.  Transitional Services

   The aircraft services must also include transition architectures such
   that existing IP-v4 based aircraft may operate seamlessly on either
   existing IP-v4 or new IP-v6 air to ground links.  Likewise, new IP-v6
   aircraft must operate seamlessly on either IP-v4 or IP-v6 air to
   ground links.  The aviation industry expects that IP-v4 based
   aircraft will continue to operate in the system for 20 or more years.
   Likewise individual aviation networks (air and ground) will
   transition from IP-v4 to IP-v6 slowly over the next 10 to 15 years;



Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


   therefore, aircraft must be able to operate seamlessly with either
   IP-v4 or IP-v6 link services including handling mixed links
   simultaneously.


8.  Summary

   This document is intended to provide the basis by which the IETF can
   provide an informational RFC to the aviation industry detailing the
   recommended suite of network services and technologies.  This
   informational RFC is expected to contain primarily existing defined
   services and technologies but may include some RFCOs specifically
   developed to support the aviation industries global mobility and
   complex regulatory requirements.  There is an expectation that a
   specific new informational RFC for OInternet DockingO services will
   also be developed to cover the specifics of a mobile network
   connecting and disconnecting from non-similar networks around the
   world to be referenced in primary document.

   This RFC will be periodically updated to incorporate new regulatory
   information and guidelines from appropriate governmental or industry
   organizations around the globe.


9.  Security Considerations


10.  Protocol Considerations

   This document does not impose any protocol considerations.


11.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no action from IANA.


12.  Acknowledgements

   The following people have contributed to this document: TBD


13.  References

   [1]  Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
        "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
        January 2005.




Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


Appendix A.  Draft ICAO Technical Considerations

   o  TC-1.  The approach should provide a means to define data
      communications that can be carried only over authorized paths for
      the traffic type and category specified by the user.
   o  TC-2.  The approach should enable an aircraft to both roam between
      and to be simultaneously connected to multiple independent air-
      ground networks.
   o  TC-3.  The approach should minimize latency during establishment
      of initial paths to an aircraft, during handoff, and during
      transfer of individual data packets.
   o  TC-4.  The approach should have high availability which includes
      not having a single point of failure.
   o  TC-5.  The approach should not negatively impact end-to-end data
      integrity, for example, by introducing packet loss during path
      establishment, handoff or data transfer.
   o  TC-6.  The approach should be scaleable to accommodate anticipated
      levels of aircraft equipage.
   o  TC-7.  The approach should result in throughput which accommodates
      anticipated levels of aircraft equipage.
   o  TC-8.  The approach should be secure.
   o  TC-9.  The approach should be scalable to accommodate anticipated
      transition to new IP-based communication protocols.


Appendix B.  Draft ICAO Implementation Considerations

   o  IC.1 The approach should permit the addition of air/ground service
      providers.
   o  IC.2 The approach should not rely on a particular air/ground
      service provider or administration for operation.
   o  IC.3 The approach should not be unique to aviation but rather
      should be based on open industry standards.
   o  IC.4 The approach should have mature and commercially available
      implementations.
   o  IC.5 The approach should allow the industry to implement a closed
      network.
   o  IC.6 The approach should allow an authentication to be required
      for systems to join the closed network.












Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


Author's Address

   Terry Davis
   Boeing
   TBD
   TBD
   U.S.A.

   Email: terry.l.davis@boeing.com










































Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Aviation Requirements           September 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Davis                    Expires March 22, 2007                [Page 10]


