Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Apr 6, 2015                               		Oct 06, 2014
                                                      		
                                                          


                 There should be a concept of mask applied to HTTP URLs.
                         draft-httpurlmask-02


Abstract

    This document describes the need for an HTTP client browser to be able to
    use masks and create masks by logic and drag and drop in the browser and see
    them as pulldown menu in the browser while viewing URLs or URIs?.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Apr 6, 2015.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Apr 6, 2015              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    There should be a concept of mask applied to HTTP URLs   Oct 06, 2014

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    There should be a concept of mask that can be applied to HTTP URLs
    and implementable in a browser and easily creatable using a browser.
    This concept can be extended to Views of an website information site
    that are invokable by the client browser by browser load action.
    

2. Background
	I am a publisher of an impressive information site but a victim
	of cybercrime. So i have to publish information thats not pleasant to
	view even for me. So i see a need to give an Option of mask as a drop down
	menu or that can be creatable by a user viewing a page. 
     

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Apr 06, 2015                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    There should be a concept of mask applied to HTTP URLs          Oct 06, 2014


	
3. General Information of the service
	THis should involve modifying HTTP protocol and more research is needed
        for finalising requirements.
	Think of the static or dynamic page you are viewing your information
	as a rectangle of dots. You can create an information mask that shows
	only certain dots and not others. You as a publisher of a static or dynamic
	page can offer your own masks or the viewer of a certain information
	site can create his or her own mask, and this could include more than inclusion
	and exclusion and some executable logic also.Since 2008 my information
      page has been cluttered with my concerns of being attacked and irritated
      while travelling and details of cybercrime. I have information that 2 or 3
      interest groups would like and i should be able to offer masks so those
      i nterest groups see only what they need.

	This concept can be extended to include views of website/information site
	or URL's. A script or file executable on the client site should be loadable
	into the browser. I am publishing an information site on self exploration,
	and i should be able to send a View file to clients that can invoke a view
	of my publishing that shows only yoga pose related posts or food related posts.
	The View can include other information collated by some computing mechanisms
	searching and shown. The website/URL could be used as a key to Views that
	can be generated by complicated processing if i have username/passwords also.


4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
	 http://www.dhyanayoga.info
	 http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com



5.Acknowledgement

    I have been a publisher of http://www.dhyanayoga.info since 2004/2005 
    and http://www.explodingmoon.org since 2008. 

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Apr 06,2015                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    There should be a concept of mask applied to HTTP URLs        Oct 06, 2014




