


BLISS                                                   Denis Alexeitsev
Internet-Draft                                       Deutsche Telekom AG
Intended status: Standards Track                       September 2, 2008
Expires: March 6, 2009


      Alert-Info header URNs for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
               draft-alexeitsev-bliss-alert-info-urns-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 6, 2009.

Abstract

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) supports the capability to
   provide a reference to the alternative ringback tone (RBT) for
   caller, or ring tone (RT) for callee using the Alert-Info header.
   However, the reference addresses only the network resources with
   specific rendering properties.  There is currently no support for
   predefined standard identifiers for ringback tones or semantic
   indications without tied rendering.  To overcome this limitations and
   support new applications a family of the URNs is defined in this
   specification.






Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Server Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  User Agent Client Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Call is a waiting call . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Registration template  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     6.1.  New Indication identifying lables  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     6.2.  Top-level indications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.3.  Sub-Indications for the 'service' Indication . . . . . . .  8
     6.4.  Sub-Indications for the 'tone' Indication  . . . . . . . .  9
     6.5.  Initial IANA Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Internationalization Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  An Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12





















Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


1.  Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] allows for user agent
   servers (UAS) and proxies to provide the specific ringback or ring
   tone to the user agent (UA).  In RFC 3261 this is done by including a
   URI reference in the Alert-Info header field, that points to the
   tone.  The URI reference is most commonly the HTTP URI to the audio
   file.  On the receipt of the Alert-Info header the user agent may
   fetch the referenced ringback or ring tone and play it to the user.
   Current solution is sufficient for human users that share the same
   understanding of the tones.  However if caller and callee are from
   the different countries the understanding of the tones may vary
   significantly.  Hearing impaired users may not sense the specific
   tone if it is provided as an audio file.  The tone per se is also not
   useful for automata.  Another limitation of the current solution is
   that the referenced tones are tied to particular rendering.  It is
   not possible to provide a semantic indication that signals the intent
   and allows the recipient to decide how to render the received
   information in an appropriate way.

   To solve the described issues and support new applications this
   specification defines the new URN namespace 'alert' for the Alert-
   Info header that can be understood by an automaton, would allow for
   programmatic handling, including user interface adaptation, or
   conversion to equivalent protocol parameters in the Public Switched
   Telephone Network (PSTN) when the client is a gateway.

   Using 'alert' namespace provides syntax for several different
   application spaces:

   o  Names for services like "call is a waiting call", not tied to any
      particular rendering.

   o  Names for standard tones, such as those used by the PSTN.  For
      instance there could be names for all the various country-specific
      ring and ringback tones

   o  Names for things with specific renderings that aren't purely
      audio.  They might be static icons, video sequences, text, etc.

   Some advantages of a URN rather than a net reference to a
   downloadable resource:

      no need to download it

      you don't have to worry if you support the format downloaded





Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


      there is no "danger" that you might end up rendering something
      unexpected and undesirable

      you can render as high (or low) quality as your device can use

   The downside is that if the recipient does not understand the URN
   then it won't be able to render anything.  To provide the general
   awareness about the Alert-Info URNs this document provides IANA
   template for registering the URNs and defines several typical
   identifiers.


2.  Server Behavior

   A server MAY add a URN or multiple URNs to the Alert-Info header in
   an appropriate SIP message when it needs to provide additional
   information about the status of the user.  A server SHOULD NOT add a
   mixture of the 'alert' URNs and URIs to the Alert-Info header that
   may cause disturbing rendering interference at the recepient's UA.

   Following example shows both the network audio resource referenced by
   the HTTP URI and the URN indication for the call-waiting service
   transported by the Alert-Info header in a 183 Session Progress
   provisional response.

      Alert-Info: <http://www.example.com/sound/moo.wav>,
      <urn:alert:service:call-waiting>


3.  User Agent Client Behavior

   Upon receiving a SIP message with an Alert-Info header that contains
   a single or multiple 'alert' URNs, the User Agent (UA) attempts to
   match the received URNs with the known indications.

   If no match is found, the UA ignores the received 'alert' URNs and
   proceed with normal operation.

   If the one or multiple URNs matches a known indication the UAC
   renders the indication(s) to the user according to the type of
   indication.  The UA is responsible for the non disturbing rendering
   if multiple indications and network resources are to be rendered
   simultaneously.


4.  Use cases

   This section describes the use cases that are supported by the



Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


   'alert' URNs.

4.1.  Call is a waiting call

   The call waiting Service [TS24.615] permits a callee to be notified
   of an incoming call whilst the media resources are not available for
   the incoming call and the callee is engaged in an active or held
   call.  Subsequently, the callee can either accept, reject, or ignore
   the incoming call.  There is an interest on the caller side to be
   informed about the call waiting situation on the callee side.  Having
   this information the caller can decide whether to continue waiting
   for callee to pickup, or better to call some time later when it is
   estimated, that the callee could finished the ongoing conversation.
   To provide this information callee's UAS or proxy aware of the call
   waiting condition can add the call-waiting indication URN to the
   Alert-Info header.

   As call-waiting information may be subject to the callee's privacy
   concerns, the exposure of this information SHALL be done only if
   explicitly required by the user


5.  Registration template

   Below is the registration template for the 'alert' URN scheme
   according to the RFC 3406 [RFC3406]

   Namespace ID: alert

   Registration Information:

   Registration version: 1

   Registration date: 2008-08-14

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

   Registering organization: IETF

   Designated contact: Denis Alexeitsev

   Designated contact email: d.alexeitsev@telekom.de

   Declaration of syntactic structure:

   The URN consists of a hierarchical alert indication identifier, with
   a sequence of labels separated by periods.  The left-most label is
   the most significant one and is called 'top-level alert indication',



Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


   while names to the right are called 'alert indication'.  The set of
   allowable characters is the same as that for domain names [RFC1123].
   Labels are case-insensitive, but MUST be specified in all lower-case.

   Some 'alert' URNs, indication- identifiers can be removed right-to-
   left; the resulting URN is still valid, referring to a more generic
   indication.  In other words, if an indication 'x.y.z' exists, the
   URNs 'x' and 'x.y' are also valid 'alert' URNs.  Each alert
   indication identifier SHALL explicitly define it's validity
   respective the sub-indications.

   The ABNF [RFC4234] is shown below.

        alert-URN       = "URN:alert:" indication
        indication      = top-level *("." sub-indication)
        top-level       = let-dig [ *25let-dig-hyp let-dig ]
        sub-indication  = let-dig [ *let-dig-hyp let-dig ]
        let-dig-hyp     = let-dig / "-"
        let-dig         = ALPHA / DIGIT
        ALPHA           = %x41-5A / %x61-7A   ; A-Z / a-z
        DIGIT           = %x30-39 ; 0-9


   Relevant ancillary documentation: None

   Community considerations: The alert URN is believed to be relevant to
   a large cross-section of Internet users, including both technical and
   non-technical users, on a variety of devices and with a variety of
   perception capabilities.  The 'alert' URN will allow Internet users
   to better understand the status of the callee in the foreign country,
   or better understand if the callee is able to answer the call.  For
   example, specific ringback tone from the foreign country can be
   rendered by the user interface in the familiar way to the user.  Call
   is a waiting call indication meaning that the callee is occupied with
   the different session can be provided to the caller that would help
   to better assert the answer probability.  User interfaces for the
   perception impaired users can better render the ringback indication
   based on the 'alert' URN.  The assignment of identifiers is described
   in the IANA Considerations (Section 6).  The 'alert' URN does not
   prescribe a particular resolution mechanism, but it is assumed that a
   number of different entities could operate and offer such mechanisms.

   Namespace considerations: There do not appear to be other URN
   namespaces that serve the same need of uniquely identifying 'alert'
   communication and information services.

   Identifier uniqueness considerations: An 'alert' URN identifies a
   logical service or tone, specified in the 'alert' indication



Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


   registration (see IANA Considerations (Section 6)).  Resolution of
   the registered URN, will return a particular instance of the alert
   indication.  Alert indication URNs MUST be unique for each unique
   indication; this is guaranteed through the registration of each alert
   indication within this namespace, described in (Section 6).

   Identifier persistence considerations: The 'alert' URN for the same
   indication is expected to be persistent, as long as it is registered
   with IANA.

   Process of identifier assignment: The process of identifier
   assignment is described in the IANA Considerations (Section 6).

   Process for identifier resolution: 'alert' URNs are statically
   resolved according to the IANA registry.

   Rules for lexical equivalence: 'alert' URNs are compared according to
   case-insensitive string equality.

   Conformance with URN syntax: The BNF in the 'Declaration of syntactic
   structure' above constrains the syntax for this URN scheme.

   Validation mechanism: Validation determines whether a given string is
   currently a validly-assigned URN [RFC3406].  Static validation is
   performed based on the currently registered 'alert' URNs at IANA.

   Scope: The scope for this URN is public and global.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This section registers a new URN scheme with the registration
   template provided in section Registration Template.

   Below, the section 7.1 details how to register new alert indication
   identifying labels.  Descriptions of sub-indications for the first
   two indications to be registered, service and tone, are given in
   Section 7.2 and Section 7.3, respectively.  Finally, Section 7.4
   contains the initial registration table.

6.1.  New Indication identifying lables

   Indications and sub-indications are identified by labels managed by
   IANA, according to the processes outlined in [RFC2434] in a new
   registry called "Alert URN Labels".  Thus, creating a new indication
   requires IANA action.  The policy for adding top-level indication
   labels is 'Standards Action'.  (This document defines the top-level
   indication labels 'service' and 'tone'.)  The policy for assigning



Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


   labels to sub-indications may differ for each top-level indication
   designation and MUST be defined by the document describing the top-
   level indication.

   Entries in the registration table have the following format:

    Indication  Reference  Description
    --------------------------------------------------------------------
    foo         RFCxyz     Description of the 'foo' top-level indication
    foo.bar     RFCabc     Description of the 'foo.bar' sub-indication

   Each top-level or sub-indication label MUST NOT exceed 27 characters.

6.2.  Top-level indications

   This section defines the indication registration within the IANA
   registry defined in Section 7.1, using the top-level indication
   labels 'service' and 'tone'.

   The 'service' indication label provides information about additional
   services performed on the callee side.  Sub-indications of the
   'service' indication are not tied to any particular rendering and
   signal the service invocation, that allows the recipient to decide on
   the best way to render this indication.

   Validity of the 'service' top-level indication: this indication is
   not valid without respective sub-indications.

   The 'tone' indication label describes tones that should be rendered
   to the caller.  The normal rendering is audio, however there can be
   other renderings applicable if needed by the user interface
   specifics.

   Validity of the 'tone' top-level indication: this indication is not
   valid without respective sub-indications.

6.3.  Sub-Indications for the 'service' Indication

   This section defines the indication registration within the IANA
   registry defined in Section 7.1, using the sub-indication label
   'service:call-waiting'.

   urn:alert:service:call-waiting indication provides information to the
   caller about the call-waiting situation on the callee side.  Call-
   waiting situation for the callee means that very limited resources
   are available for an incoming communication.  The callee normally has
   the choice of accepting, rejecting or ignoring the waiting call.




Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


   Validity of the 'service:call-waiting' sub-indication: this
   indication is valid without respective sub-indications

6.4.  Sub-Indications for the 'tone' Indication

   This section defines the indication registration within the IANA
   registry defined in Section 7.1, using the sub-indication label
   'tone.xyz'.

   [[anchor11: Input on the 'tone' sub-indication is requested.]]

   urn:alert:tone:xyz

6.5.  Initial IANA Registration

   The following table contains the initial IANA registration for
   service and tone indications.

      Indication             Reference  Description
      --------------------------------------------------------
      service                RFC XYZ    Invoked services
      service.call-waiting   RFC XYZ    Call-waiting service

      tone                   RFC XYZ    Ringback tones
      tone.xyz               RFC XYZ    XYZ tone


7.  Internationalization Considerations

   The indication labels are protocol elements [RFC3536] and are not
   normally seen by users.  Thus, the character set for these elements
   is restricted, as described in Section 6.


8.  Security Considerations

   As an identifier, the alert indication URN does not appear to raise
   any particular security issues.  The indications described by the
   'alert' URN are meant to be well-known, so privacy considerations do
   not apply to the URN.

   Provision of the specific indications from callee to caller may raise
   privacy issues.  Such provision SHALL always be explicitly authorised
   by the callee.







Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


9.  Acknowledgements

   The draft is based on the ideas expressed by Paul Kyzivat on the
   BLISS WG mailing list.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1123]  , R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Application and
              Support", October 1898.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2141]  , R., "URN Syntax", May 1997.

   [RFC3261]  , J. and , H., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol",
              June 2002.

   [RFC3406]  , L., , D., , R., and P. , "Uniform Resource Names (URN)
              Namespace Definition Mechanisms", October 2002.

   [RFC4234]  Ed, D. and P. , "Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications:
              ABNF", October 2005.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2434]  , T. and H. , "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
              Considerations Section in RFCs", October 1998.

   [RFC3536]  , P., "Terminology Used in Internationalization in the
              IETF", May 2003.

   [TS24.615]
              "3GPP TS 24.615 Communication Waiting (CW) using IP
              Multimedia (IM) Core Network (CN) subsystem".


Appendix A.  An Appendix










Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


Author's Address

   Denis Alexeitsev
   Deutsche Telekom AG
   Heinrich-Hertz Str 3-7
   Darmstadt, Hessen  64293
   Germany

   Phone: +49-6151-6282773
   Email: d.alexeitsev@telekom.de









































Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Alert-Info URNs              September 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Denis Alexeitsev          Expires March 6, 2009                [Page 12]


