Mobile IP Working Group                                 David B. Johnson
INTERNET-DRAFT                                Carnegie Mellon University
                                                         Charles Perkins
                                                         IBM Corporation
                                                            13 June 1996


                        Mobility Support in IPv6

                   <draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-01.txt>


Abstract

   This document specifies the operation of mobile computers using IPv6.
   Each mobile node is always identified by its home address, regardless
   of its current point of attachment to the Internet.  While situated
   away from its home, a mobile node is also associated with a care-of
   address, which provides information about the mobile node's current
   location.  IPv6 packets addressed to a mobile node's home address are
   transparently routed to its care-of address.  The protocol enables
   IPv6 nodes to cache the binding of a mobile node's home address with
   its care-of address, and to then send packets destined for the mobile
   node directly to it at this care-of address.


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Mobile IP Working Group of the
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be submitted
   to the Working Group mailing list at "mobile-ip@SmallWorks.COM".
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
   the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).






Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page i]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996




                                Contents



Abstract                                                               i

Status of This Memo                                                    i

 1. Introduction                                                       1
     1.1. Design Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
     1.2. Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
     1.3. Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
     1.4. Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
     1.5. Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
     1.6. Specification Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5

 2. Overview of Mobile IPv6 Operation                                  7

 3. Message and Option Formats                                         9
     3.1. Binding Update Option . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
     3.2. ICMP Binding Acknowledgement Message  . . . . . . . . . .   13

 4. Requirements for IPv6 Nodes                                       15

 5. Binding Cache Management                                          17
     5.1. Receiving Binding Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
     5.2. Requests to Cache a Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
     5.3. Requests to Delete a Binding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
     5.4. Sending Binding Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
     5.5. Cache Replacement Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
     5.6. Receiving ICMP Error Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

 6. Mobile Node Considerations                                        21
     6.1. Movement Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
     6.2. Forming New Care-of Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
     6.3. Sending Binding Updates to the Home Agent . . . . . . . .   24
     6.4. Sending Binding Updates to Correspondent Nodes  . . . . .   25
     6.5. Sending Binding Updates to the Previous Default Router  .   25
     6.6. Rate Limiting for Sending Binding Updates . . . . . . . .   26
     6.7. Receiving Binding Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . .   26
     6.8. Using Multiple Care-of Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
     6.9. Returning Home  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28

 7. Home Agent Considerations                                         29
     7.1. Home Agent Care-of Address Registration . . . . . . . . .   29
     7.2. Home Agent Care-of Address De-registration  . . . . . . .   31



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page ii]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


     7.3. Delivering Packets to a Mobile Node . . . . . . . . . . .   32
     7.4. Renumbering the Home Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32

 8. Correspondent Node Considerations                                 34
     8.1. Delivering Packets to a Mobile Node . . . . . . . . . . .   34

 9. Authentication and Replay Protection                              36

10. Routing Multicast Packets                                         37

11. Constants                                                         38

Acknowledgements                                                      38

References                                                            39

 A. Open Issues                                                       40
     A.1. Session Keys with Local Routers . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
     A.2. Source Address Filtering by Firewalls . . . . . . . . . .   40

Chair's Address                                                       42

Authors' Addresses                                                    42




























Johnson and Perkins         Expires 13 December 1996          [Page iii]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


1. Introduction

   This document specifies the operation of mobile computers using
   Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) [6].  Mobile computers are likely
   to account for a majority or at least a substantial fraction of
   the population of the Internet during the lifetime of IPv6.  The
   protocol, known as Mobile IPv6, allows transparent routing of IPv6
   packets to mobile nodes using the mobile node's home IPv6 address,
   regardless of the mobile node's current point of attachment to the
   Internet.

   The most important function needed to support such routing to mobile
   nodes is the reliable and timely notification of a mobile node's
   current location to those other nodes that need it.  Correspondent
   nodes communicating with a mobile node need this location information
   in order to correctly deliver their own packets to a mobile node;
   Mobile IPv6 allows correspondent nodes to learn and cache a mobile
   node's location, and to use this cached information to route their
   own packets directly to a mobile node at its current location.  The
   mobile node's "home agent", a router on the mobile node's home
   network, also needs this location information in order to forward
   intercepted packets from the home network to the mobile node, for
   correspondent nodes that have not yet learned the mobile node's
   location, and indeed, for correspondent nodes that do not even yet
   know that the mobile node is currently away from home.

   A mobile node's current location is represented as a "care-of
   address", an IPv6 address assigned to the mobile node (in addition
   to its home IPv6 address) within the foreign network currently being
   visited by the mobile node.  The association between a mobile node's
   home address and its care-of address, along with the remaining
   lifetime of that association, is known as a "binding", and the mobile
   node notifies other nodes about its current binding using a new
   destination option called a Binding Update.  IPv6 correspondent nodes
   then use a Routing header to deliver subsequent packets to the mobile
   node's care-of address.  All IPv6 nodes and routers MUST be able to
   cache mobile node bindings received in Binding Updates; this leads to
   dramatic simplifications in the required protocols, compared to the
   methods required for IPv4.

   In this document, "movement" is considered to be a change in a mobile
   node's point of attachment to the Internet such that it is no longer
   link-level connected to the same IPv6 subnet (network prefix) as
   it was previously.  If a mobile node is not currently link-level
   connected to its home IPv6 network, the mobile node is said to be
   "away from home".





Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


1.1. Design Requirements

   A mobile node must continue to be able to be addressed by its home
   IPv6 address, and to be able to communicate with other IPv6 nodes
   using its home address, after changing its link-level point of
   attachment from one IPv6 subnet to another.

   All messages used to update another node as to the location of a
   mobile node must be authenticated in order to protect against remote
   redirection attacks.


1.2. Goals

   The number of administrative messages sent over the link by which
   a mobile node is directly attached to the Internet should be
   minimized, and the size of these messages should be kept as small
   as is reasonably possible.  This link may often be a wireless link,
   having a substantially lower bandwidth and higher error rate than
   traditional wired networks, and many mobile nodes are likely to
   operate on limited battery power.  By reducing the number and size
   of administrative messages required for mobility support, network
   resources and mobile node battery resources are conserved.


1.3. Assumptions

   This protocol places no additional constraints on the assignment of
   IPv6 addresses.  That is, a mobile node may acquire its addresses
   using stateless address autoconfiguration [12], or alternatively
   using a stateful address configuration protocol such as DHCPv6 [3] or
   PPPv6 [7].

   This protocol assumes that any mobile node will generally not change
   its link-level point of attachment from one IPv6 subnet to another
   more frequently than once per second.

   This protocol assumes that IPv6 unicast packets are routed based on
   the Destination Address in the packet's IPv6 header (and not, for
   example, by source address).


1.4. Applicability

   Mobile IPv6 is intended to enable nodes to move from one IPv6 subnet
   to another.  It is just as suitable for mobility across homogeneous
   media as it is for mobility across heterogeneous media.  That is,
   Mobile IPv6 facilitates node movement from one Ethernet segment to



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   another as well as it accommodates node movement from an Ethernet
   segment to a wireless LAN, as long as the mobile node's IPv6 address
   remains the same after such a movement.

   One can think of Mobile IPv6 as solving the "macro" mobility
   management problem.  It is less well suited for more "micro" mobility
   management applications -- for example, handoff amongst wireless
   transceivers, each of which covers only a very small geographic
   area.  As long as node movement does not occur between link-level
   points of attachment on different IPv6 subnets, link-layer mechanisms
   for mobility management (i.e., link-layer handoff) may offer faster
   convergence and far less overhead than Mobile IPv6.


1.5. Terminology

   This document uses the following special terms:

      Binding

         The association of the home address of a mobile node with a
         care-of address for that mobile node, along with the remaining
         lifetime of that association.

      Binding Cache

         A cache, maintained by each IPv6 node, of bindings for other
         nodes.  An entry in a node's binding cache for which the node
         is serving as a home agent is marked as a "home registration"
         entry and SHOULD NOT be deleted by the node until the
         expiration of its binding lifetime, whereas other Binding Cache
         entries MAY be replaced at any time by any reasonable local
         cache replacement policy.  The Binding Cache is a conceptual
         data structure used in this document, which may be implemented
         in any manner consistent with the external behavior described
         here, for example by being combined with the node's Destination
         Cache as maintained through Neighbor Discovery [9].

      Binding Update List

         A list, maintained by each IPv6 mobile node, of the IPv6
         address of each other node to which this node has sent a
         Binding Update giving its binding, such that the lifetime of
         the binding sent to that node has not yet expired.  This is a
         conceptual data structure used in this document, which may be
         implemented in any manner consistent with the external behavior
         described here.




Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


      Care-of Address

         An IPv6 address associated with a mobile node while visiting a
         foreign network, which uses the network prefix of that foreign
         network.  Among the multiple care-of addresses that a mobile
         node may have at a time (with different network prefixes), the
         one registered with its home agent is called its "primary"
         care-of address.

      Correspondent Node

         A peer with which a mobile node is communicating.  The
         correspondent node may be either mobile or stationary.

      Foreign Network

         Any network other than the mobile node's home network.

      Home Address

         An IPv6 address that is assigned for an extended period of
         time to a mobile node.  It remains unchanged regardless of the
         node's current link-level point of attachment to the Internet.

      Home Agent

         A router on a mobile node's home network that, while the mobile
         node is away from home, intercepts packets on the home network
         destined to the mobile node's home address, encapsulates them,
         and tunnels them to the mobile node's current care-of address.
         The home agent maintains a registry of the current binding for
         mobile nodes whose home address is on the home network routed
         by the home agent.

      Home Network

         A network, which may possibly be a virtual network, having a
         network prefix matching that of a mobile node's home address.
         Standard IPv6 routing mechanisms will deliver packets destined
         for a mobile node's home address to the mobile node's home
         network.

      Link

         A facility or medium over which nodes can communicate at the
         link layer.  A link underlies the network layer.





Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


      Mobile Node

         A node that can change its link-level point of attachment from
         one IPv6 subnet to another, while still being addressable via
         its IPv6 home address.

      Node

         A host or a router.

      Tunnel

         The path followed by a packet while it is encapsulated.  The
         model is that, while it is encapsulated, a packet is routed
         to a knowledgeable decapsulating agent, which decapsulates
         the packet and then correctly delivers it to its ultimate
         destination.

      Virtual Network

         A network with no physical instantiation beyond a home agent
         (with a physical network interface on another network).  The
         home agent generally advertises reachability to the network
         prefix of the virtual network using conventional routing
         protocols.


1.6. Specification Language

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.

      MUST

         This word, or the adjective "required", means that the
         definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.

      MUST NOT

         This phrase means that the definition is an absolute
         prohibition of the specification.

      SHOULD

         This word, or the adjective "recommended", means that, in some
         circumstances, valid reasons may exist to ignore this item, but
         the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed




Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


         before choosing a different course.  Unexpected results may
         result otherwise.

      MAY

         This word, or the adjective "optional", means that this item is
         one of an allowed set of alternatives.  An implementation which
         does not include this option MUST be prepared to interoperate
         with another implementation which does include the option.

      silently discard

         The implementation discards the packet without further
         processing, and without indicating an error to the sender.  The
         implementation SHOULD provide the capability of logging the
         error, including the contents of the discarded packet, and
         SHOULD record the event in a statistics counter.


































Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


2. Overview of Mobile IPv6 Operation

   In addition to its (permanent) IPv6 home address, a mobile node
   while away from home will have assigned to its network interface(s)
   a "primary care-of address" and possibly other "care-of addresses".
   A care-of address is an IPv6 address assigned to a mobile node only
   while visiting a particular foreign network, typically acquired
   through stateless [12] or stateful (e.g., DHCPv6 [3]) address
   autoconfiguration.  The decision about which manner of address
   autoconfiguration to use is made according to the methods of IPv6
   Neighbor Discovery [9].

   Each time a mobile node moves its link-level point of attachment from
   one IPv6 subnet to another, it will configure its primary care-of
   address at its new point of attachment, and will send a Binding
   Update containing that care-of address to its home agent.  The
   care-of address for a mobile node registered with its home agent is
   known as the mobile node's "primary" care-of address, and the mobile
   node may also have additional care-of addresses, one for each of the
   network prefixes that it currently considers to be on-link.  Each
   time it changes its primary care-of address, a mobile node also sends
   a Binding Update to each other (correspondent) node that may have an
   out-of-date care-of address for the mobile node in its Binding Cache.

   A mobile node attached to the Internet can always be reached by
   sending packets to its home IPv6 address.  If the mobile node is not
   present on its home network, any packet arriving there for it will be
   intercepted there by its home agent, which will tunnel the packet to
   the mobile node's current primary care-of address.  The home agent
   uses IPv6 encapsulation [5] to tunnel the packet.

   A correspondent node sending a packet checks its Binding Cache for
   an entry for the Destination Address of the packet, and uses a
   Routing header (instead of encapsulation) to route the packet to the
   destination mobile node's care-of address if a cached binding is
   found.  Otherwise, the correspondent node sends the packet normally
   (with no Routing header), and the packet is then intercepted and
   tunneled by the mobile node's home agent as described above.  When
   the tunneled packet reaches the mobile node, the mobile node returns
   a Binding Update to the correspondent node, allowing it to cache the
   mobile node's binding for future packets.

   Since correspondent nodes cache bindings, it is expected that
   correspondent nodes usually will route packets directly to the mobile
   node's care-of address, so that the home agent is rarely involved
   with packet transmission to the mobile node.  This is essential for
   scalability and reliability, and for minimizing overall network load.
   By caching the care-of address of a mobile node, optimal routing of



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   packets can be achieved between the correspondent node and the mobile
   node.  Routing packets directly to the mobile node's care-of address
   also eliminates congestion at the mobile node's home agent and home
   network.  In addition, the impact of of any possible failure of the
   home agent, the home network, or intervening networks leading to the
   home network is drastically reduced, since these components are not
   involved in the delivery of most packets to the mobile node.












































Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


3. Message and Option Formats

3.1. Binding Update Option

   A Binding Update is a new IPv6 destination option, used by a mobile
   node to notify a correspondent node or its home agent of its current
   care-of address.  As a destination option, it can appear in a
   Destination Options header in any IPv6 packet [6], and thus can be
   included in any normal data packet or can be sent in a separate
   packet containing no data.  The Binding Update contains the mobile
   node's care-of address, an identification for the Update (to sequence
   Updates and to protect against attempts to replay it), and a lifetime
   for the binding.  The mobile node's IPv6 home address MUST be the
   source address of the packet containing the Binding Update, since
   the option does not contain space to separately represent the mobile
   node's home address.

   Binding Updates should be considered a form of routing updates;
   handled incorrectly, they could be a source of security problems and
   routing loops.  Therefore, packets which include Binding Updates MUST
   also include an IPv6 Authentication header [1]; sequencing and replay
   protection is then achieved by use of the Identification field in the
   Binding Update.




























Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996           [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   The Binding Update option is encoded in type-length-value (TLV)
   format as follows:

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
                                   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
                                   |  Option Type  | Option Length |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |A|H|L|       Reserved          |            Lifetime           |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                                                               |
   +                         Identification                        +
   |                                                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                                                               |
   +                                                               +
   |                                                               |
   +                        Care-of Address                        +
   |                                                               |
   +                                                               +
   |                                                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                                                               |
   +                                                               +
   |                                                               |
   +                    Home Link-Local Address                    +
   |                  (only present if L bit set)                  |
   +                                                               +
   |                                                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

      Option Type

         16

      Option Length

         8-bit unsigned integer.  Length of the option, in octets,
         excluding the Option Type and Option Length fields.  For the
         current definition of the Binding Update option, this field
         must be set to 28.

      Acknowledge (A)

         The Acknowledge (A) bit is set by the sending node to request a
         Binding Acknowledgement message be returned upon receipt of the
         Binding Update option.




Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


      Home Registration (H)

         The Home Registration (H) bit is set by the sending node to
         request the receiving node to act as this node's home agent.
         The Destination Address in the IPv6 header of the packet
         carrying this option MUST be that of a router sharing the same
         network prefix as the mobile node's home IPv6 address.

      Home Link-Local Address Present (L)

         The Home Link-Local Address Present (L) bit indicates the
         presence of the Home Link-Local Address field in the Binding
         Update.  This bit is set by the sending mobile node to request
         the receiving node to act as a proxy (for participating in
         the Neighbor Discovery Protocol) for the node while it is
         away from home.  This bit MUST NOT be set unless the Home
         Registration (H) bit is also set in the Binding Update.

      Reserved

         Sent as 0; ignored on reception.

      Lifetime

         16-bit unsigned integer.  The number of seconds remaining
         before the binding must be considered expired.  A value of all
         ones (0xffff) indicates infinity.  A value of zero indicates
         that the Binding Cache entry for the mobile node should be
         deleted.

      Identification

         a 64-bit number used to sequence Binding Updates and to match
         a returned Binding Acknowledgement message with this Binding
         Update.  The Identification field also serves to protect
         against replay attacks for Binding Updates.

      Care-of Address

         The current care-of address of the mobile node.  When set equal
         to the home address of the mobile node, the Binding Update
         option instead indicates that any existing binding for the
         mobile node should be deleted; no binding for the mobile node
         should be created.







Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


      Home Link-Local Address

         The link-local address of the mobile node used by the mobile
         node when it was last attached to its home network.  This field
         in the Binding Update is optional and is only present when the
         Home Link-Local Address (L) bit is set.

   As with all IPv6 options, the highest-order three bits of the Option
   Type Field (16) of the Binding Update option specify the following
   properties of the option:

    -  The highest-order two bits are 00:  Any node receiving this
       option that does not recognize the Option Type MUST skip over
       this option and continue processing the header.

    -  The third-highest-order bit is 0:  The Option Data does not
       change en-route, and thus, when an Authentication header is
       present in the packet, the entire Binding Update option MUST be
       included when computing or verifying the packet's authenticating
       value.

   Extensions to the Binding Update option format may be included after
   the fixed portion of the Binding Update option specified above.
   The presence of such extensions will be indicated by the Option
   Length field.  When the Option Length is greater than 28 octets,
   the remaining octets are interpreted as extensions.  Currently no
   extensions have been defined.
























Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


3.2. ICMP Binding Acknowledgement Message

   A Binding Acknowledgement message is an informational ICMP message
   used to acknowledge acceptance of a Binding Update (Section 3.1)
   option, if that Binding Update has the Acknowledge (A) bit set.

   Upon receipt of a Binding Update requesting an acknowledgement, the
   receiving node returns a Binding Acknowledgement message addressed to
   the care-of address in the Binding Update.

   If a mobile node fails to receive an acceptable Binding
   Acknowledgement message within INITIAL_BINDACK_TIMEOUT seconds
   after transmitting the Binding Update, it SHOULD retransmit the
   Binding Update until a Binding Acknowledgement is received.  Such a
   retransmitted Binding Update MUST use he same Identification value as
   the original transmission.  The retransmissions by the mobile node
   MUST use an exponential back-off process, in which timeout period
   is doubled upon each retransmission until either the node receives
   a Binding Acknowledgement message or the timeout period reaches the
   value MAX_BINDACK_TIMEOUT.

   The ICMP Binding Acknowledgement message has the following format:

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |     Type      |     Code      |           Checksum            |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                                                               |
   +                         Identification                        +
   |                                                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

      Type

         133

      Code

         8-bit unsigned integer indicating the disposition of the
         Binding Update.  Values of the Code field less than 128
         indicate that the Binding Update was accepted by the receiving
         node.  The following such values are currently defined:

              0   Binding Update accepted






Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


         Values of the Code field greater than or equal to 128 indicate
         that the Binding Update was rejected by the receiving node.
         The following such values are currently defined:

            128   Reason unspecified
            129   Poorly formed Binding Update
            130   Administratively prohibited
            131   Insufficient resources
            132   Home registration not supported
            133   Not home network
            134   Identification field mismatch
            135   Unknown home agent address

      Checksum

         The checksum of the message calculated as specified for ICMP
         for IPv6 [4].

      Identification

         The acknowledgement Identification is derived from the Binding
         Update option, for use by the mobile node in matching the
         acknowledgement with an outstanding Binding Update.

   Up-to-date values of the Code field are to be specified in the most
   recent "Assigned Numbers" [10].

   Extensions to the Binding Acknowledgement message format may be
   included after the fixed portion of the Binding Acknowledgement
   message specified above.  The presence of such extensions will be
   indicated by the ICMP message length, derived from the IPv6 Payload
   Length field.  When the Option Length is greater than 16 octets,
   the remaining octets are interpreted as extensions.  Currently no
   extensions have been defined.

















Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


4. Requirements for IPv6 Nodes

   Mobile IPv6 places some special requirements on the functions
   provided by different IPv6 nodes.  This section itemizes those
   requirements, identifying the functionality each requirement is
   intended to support.  Further details on this functionality is
   provided in the following sections.

   Since any IPv6 node may at any time be a correspondent of a mobile
   node, all IPv6 nodes MUST support the following requirements:

    -  Every IPv6 node MUST be able to process a received Binding Update
       option, and to return a Binding Acknowledgement message if
       requested.

    -  Every IPv6 node MUST be able to maintain a Binding Cache of the
       bindings received in accepted Binding Updates.

    -  Every IPv6 node MUST be able to maintain Security Associations
       for use in IPv6 Authentication Headers [2, 1, 6].  An IPv6
       node receiving a packet containing a Binding Update option
       MUST verify, using the Authentication Header in the packet,
       the authenticity of the sender (the mobile node for which this
       binding applies) before modifying its Binding Cache in response
       to that Binding Update option.

   Since any IPv6 router may at any time have a Binding Cache entry
   for a mobile node, all IPv6 router MUST support the following
   requirement:

    -  Every IPv6 router MUST be able to use its Binding Cache in
       forwarding packets; if the router has a Binding Cache entry for
       the Destination Address of a packet it is forwarding, then the
       router SHOULD encapsulate the packet and tunnel it to the care-of
       address in the Binding Cache entry.

   In order for a mobile node to correctly operate while away from
   home, at least one IPv6 router in its home network must support
   functioning as a home agent for the mobile node.  All IPv6 routers
   capable of serving as a home agent MUST support the following special
   requirements:

    -  Every home agent MUST be able to maintain a registry of mobile
       node bindings for those mobile nodes for which it is serving as
       the home agent.

    -  Every home agent MUST be able to intercept packets (e.g., using
       Neighbor Advertisements) on the local network addressed to



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


       a mobile node for which it holds a binding in its registry
       indicating that the mobile node is currently away from home.

    -  Every home agent MUST be able to encapsulate such intercepted
       packets in order to tunnel them to the care-of address for the
       mobile node indicated in its binding.

    -  Every home agent MUST be able to issue Binding Acknowledgement
       messages in response to Binding Updates received from a mobile
       node.

    -  Every home agent MUST be able to maintain Security Associations
       for the mobile nodes from which it will accept Binding Updates.

   Finally, all IPv6 nodes capable of functioning as mobile nodes MUST
   support the following requirements:

    -  Every IPv6 mobile node MUST be able to perform IPv6
       decapsulation [5].

    -  Every IPv6 mobile node MUST support sending Binding Updates,
       as specified in Sections 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5; and MUST be able
       to receive and process Binding Acknowledgement messages, as
       specified in Section 6.7.

    -  Every IPv6 mobile node MUST maintain a Binding Update List in
       which it keeps track of which other IPv6 nodes it has sent a
       Binding Update to, for which the Lifetime sent in that binding
       has not yet expired.






















Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


5. Binding Cache Management

   The Binding Cache is the central data structure in Mobile IPv6.
   All IPv6 nodes MUST support maintenance of a Binding Cache, and
   MUST support processing of received Binding Updates.  This section
   describes the management aspects of a Binding Cache common to all
   nodes.


5.1. Receiving Binding Updates

   Upon receiving a Binding Update option in some packet, the receiving
   node MUST validate the packet according to the following tests:

    -  The packet contains an IP Authentication header and the
       authentication is valid [1].  The Authentication header is
       assumed to provide both authentication and integrity protection.

    -  The length of the option specified in the Option Length field is
       greater than or equal to 28 octets.

    -  The Identification field is valid.

   Any Binding Update not satisfying all of these tests MUST be silently
   ignored, although the remainder of the packet (i.e., other options,
   extension headers, or payload) SHOULD be processed normally according
   to any procedure defined for that part of the packet.

   If the Binding Update is valid according to the tests above, then the
   Binding Update is processed further as follows:

    -  If the Lifetime specified in the Binding Update is nonzero and
       the specified Care-of Address differs from the Home Address,
       this is a request to cache a binding for the mobile node.
       Processing for this type of received Binding Update is described
       in Section 5.2.

    -  If the Lifetime specified in the Binding Update is zero or the
       specified Care-of Address matches the Home Address, then this is
       a request to delete the mobile node's binding.  Processing for
       this type of received Binding Update is described in Section 5.3.


5.2. Requests to Cache a Binding

   If a node receives a valid Binding Update requesting it to cache a
   binding for a mobile node, as specified in Section 5.1, then the node
   MUST examine the Home Registration (H) bit in the Binding Update



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   to determine how to further process the Binding Update.  If the
   Home Registration (H) bit is set, the Binding Update is processed
   according to the procedure specified in Section 7.1.

   If the Home Registration (H) bit is not set, then the receiving
   node SHOULD create a new entry in its Binding Cache for this mobile
   node's Home Address (or update its existing Binding Cache Entry for
   this Home Address) to record the Care-of Address as specified in the
   Binding Update, and begin a timer to delete this Binding Cache entry
   after the expiration of the Lifetime period specified in the Binding
   Update.


5.3. Requests to Delete a Binding

   If a node receives a valid Binding Update requesting it to delete
   a binding for a mobile node, as specified in Section 5.1, then the
   node MUST examine the Home Registration (H) bit in the Binding Update
   to determine how to further process the Binding Update.  If the
   Home Registration (H) bit is set, the Binding Update is processed
   according to the procedure specified in Section 7.2.

   If the Home Registration (H) bit is not set, and if a node receives a
   valid Binding Update requesting it to delete a binding for a mobile
   node, as specified in Section 5.1, then it MUST delete any existing
   entry in its Binding Cache for this mobile node's Home Address.


5.4. Sending Binding Acknowledgements

   When any node receives a packet containing a Binding Update option,
   it SHOULD return a Binding Acknowledgement message acknowledging
   receipt of the Binding Update.  If the node accepts the Binding
   Update and adds the binding contained in it to its Binding Cache, the
   Code field in the Binding Acknowledgement MUST be set to a value less
   than 128; if the node rejects the Binding Update and does not add
   the binding contained in it to its Binding Cache, the Code field in
   the Binding Acknowledgement MUST be set to a value greater than or
   equal to 128.  Specific values for the Code field are described in
   Section 3.2 and in the most recent "Assigned Numbers" [10].

   The Destination Address in the IPv6 header for the Binding
   Acknowledgement MUST be set to the Care-of Address copied from the
   Binding Update option.  This ensures that the Binding Acknowledgement
   will be routed to the current location of the node sending the
   Binding Update, whether the Binding Update was accepted or rejected.





Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


5.5. Cache Replacement Policy

   Any entry in a node's Binding Cache MUST be deleted after the
   expiration the Lifetime specified in the Binding Update from which
   the entry was created.  Conceptually, a node MUST maintain a separate
   timer for each entry in its Binding Cache.  When creating or updating
   a Binding Cache entry in response to a received Binding Update, the
   node sets the timer for this entry to the specified Lifetime period.
   When a Binding Cache entry's timer expires, the node MUST delete the
   entry.

   Each node's Binding Cache will, by necessity, have a finite size.
   A node MAY use any reasonable local policy for managing the space
   within its Binding Cache, except that any entry marked as a "home
   registration" (Section 7.1) SHOULD NOT be deleted from the cache
   until the expiration of its lifetime period.  When attempting to
   add a new "home registration" entry in response to Binding Update
   with the Home Registration (H) bit set, if insufficient space exists
   (or can be reclaimed) in the node's Binding Cache, the node MUST
   reject the Binding Update and SHOULD return a Binding Acknowledgement
   message to the sending mobile node, in which the Code field is set to
   131 (Insufficient resources).  When otherwise attempting to add a new
   entry to its Binding Cache, a node MAY if needed choose to drop any
   entry already in the Binding Cache other than a "home registration"
   entry, in order to make space for the new entry.  For example, a
   "least-recently used" (LRU) strategy for cache entry replacement is
   likely to work well.

   If a packet is sent by a node to a destination for which it has
   dropped the cache entry from its Binding Cache, the packet will be
   routed normally, leading to the mobile node's home network, where it
   will be intercepted by the mobile node's home agent and tunneled to
   the mobile node's current primary care-of address.  As when a Binding
   Cache entry is initially created, this indirect routing to the mobile
   node will result in the mobile node sending a Binding Update to this
   sending node, allowing it to add this entry again to its Binding
   Cache.


5.6. Receiving ICMP Error Messages

   When a correspondent node sends a packet to a mobile node, if the
   correspondent node has a Binding Cache entry for the destination
   mobile node's address (its home address), then the correspondent node
   uses a Routing header to deliver the packet to the mobile node's
   care-of address, and then to the mobile node's home address.  Any
   ICMP error message caused by the packet on its way to the mobile node
   will be returned normally to the correspondent node.



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   On the other hand, if the correspondent node has no Binding Cache
   entry for the mobile node, the packet will be routed to the mobile
   node's home network, where it will be intercepted by the mobile
   node's home agent, encapsulated, and tunneled to the mobile node's
   care-of address.  Similarly, if a packet for a mobile node arrives
   at the mobile node's previous default router (e.g., the mobile node
   moved after the packet was sent), the router will encapsulate and
   tunnel the packet to the mobile node's new care-of address (if it has
   a Binding Cache entry for the mobile node).  Any ICMP error message
   caused by the packet on its way to the mobile node while in the
   tunnel, will be returned to the node that encapsulated the packet
   (the home agent or the previous default router, respectively).  By
   the definition of IPv6 encapsulation [5], however, this encapsulating
   node MUST relay certain ICMP error messages back to the original
   sender of the packet (the correspondent node).

   Thus, whether the correspondent node has a Binding Cache entry
   for the destination mobile node or not, the correspondent node
   will receive any meaningful ICMP error message that is caused by
   its packet on its way to the mobile node.  If the correspondent
   node receives an ICMP Host Unreachable or Network Unreachable
   error message after sending a packet to a mobile node using its
   cached care-of address, the correspondent node SHOULD delete its
   Binding Cache entry for this mobile node.  If the correspondent node
   subsequently transmits another packet to the mobile node, the packet
   will be routed to the mobile node's home network, intercepted by the
   mobile node's home agent, and tunneled to the mobile node's care-of
   address using IPv6 encapsulation.  The mobile node will then return a
   Binding Update to the correspondent node, allowing it to recreate a
   (correct) Binding Cache entry for the mobile node.





















Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


6. Mobile Node Considerations

6.1. Movement Detection

   A mobile node MAY use any combination of mechanisms available to
   it to detect when its link-level point of attachment has moved
   from one IPv6 subnet to another.  The primary movement detection
   mechanism for Mobile IPv6 defined here uses the facilities of
   IPv6 Neighbor Discovery, including Router Discovery and Neighbor
   Unreachability Detection.  The description here is based on the
   conceptual model of the organization and data structures defined by
   Neighbor Discovery [9].

   Mobile nodes SHOULD use Router Discovery to discover new routers and
   on-link network prefixes; a mobile node MAY send Router Solicitation
   messages, or MAY wait for unsolicited (periodic) Router Advertisement
   messages, as specified for Router Discovery [9].  Based on received
   Router Advertisement messages, a mobile node (in the same way as any
   other node) maintains an entry in its Default Router List for each
   router, and an entry in its Prefix List for each network prefix,
   that it currently considers to be on-link.  Each entry in these
   lists has an associated invalidation timer value (extracted from the
   Advertisement) used to expire the entry when it becomes invalid.

   While away from home, a mobile node SHOULD select one router from its
   Default Router List to use as its default router, and one network
   prefix advertised by that router from its Prefix List to use as
   the network prefix in its primary care-of address.  A mobile node
   MAY also have associated additional care-of addresses, using other
   network prefixes from its Prefix List.  The method by which a mobile
   node selects and forms a care-of address from the available network
   prefixes is described in Section 6.2.  The mobile node registers
   its primary care-of address with its home agent, as described in
   Section 6.3.

   While away from home and using some router as its default router,
   it is important for a mobile node to be able to quickly detect when
   that router becomes unreachable, so that it can switch to a new
   default router and to a new primary care-of address.  Since some
   links (notably wireless) do not necessarily work equally well in
   both directions, it is likewise important for the mobile node to
   detect when it becomes unreachable to its default router, so that any
   correspondent nodes attempting to communicate with the mobile node
   can still reach it.

   To detect when its default router becomes unreachable, a mobile
   node SHOULD use Neighbor Unreachability Detection.  As specified
   in Neighbor Discovery [9], while the mobile node is actively



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   sending packets to (or through) its default router, the mobile node
   can detect that the router has become unreachable either through
   indications from upper layer protocols on the mobile node that a
   connection is not making "forward progress" (e.g., TCP timing out
   waiting for an acknowledgement after a number of retransmissions),
   or through the failure to receive a Neighbor Advertisement messages
   form its default router in response to retransmitted explicit
   Neighbor Solicitation messages to it.  No exceptions to Neighbor
   Unreachability Detection are necessary for this aspect of movement
   detection in Mobile IPv6.

   For a mobile node to detect when it has become unreachable to its
   default router, however, the mobile node cannot efficiently rely on
   Neighbor Unreachability Detection alone, since the network overhead
   would be prohibitively high in many cases for a mobile node to
   continually probe its default router with Neighbor Solicitation
   messages even when it is not otherwise actively sending packets to
   it.  Instead, a mobile node SHOULD consider receipt of any IPv6
   packets from its current default router as an indication that it is
   still reachable from the router.  Both packets from the router's IPv6
   address and (IPv6) packets from its link-layer address (e.g., those
   forwarded but not originated by the router) SHOULD be considered.

   Since the router SHOULD be sending periodic multicast Router
   Advertisement messages, the mobile node will have frequent
   opportunity to check if it is still reachable to its default router,
   even in the absence of other packets to it from the router.  On some
   types of network interfaces, the mobile node MAY also supplement
   this by setting its network interface into "promiscuous" receive
   mode, so that is able to receive all packets on the link, including
   those not link-level addressed to it.  The mobile node will then
   be able to detect any packets sent by the router, in order to to
   detect reachability from the router.  This may be useful on very low
   bandwidth (e.g., wireless) links, but its use MUST be configurable on
   the mobile node.

   If the above means do not provide indication that the mobile node
   is still reachable from its current default router (i.e., the
   mobile node receives no packets form the router for a period of
   time), then the mobile node SHOULD actively probe the router with
   Neighbor Solicitation messages, even if it is not otherwise actively
   sending packets to the router.  If it receives a solicited Neighbor
   Advertisement message in response from the router, then the mobile
   node can deduce that it is still reachable.  It is expected that the
   mobile node will in most cases be able to determine its reachability
   from the router by listening for packets from the router as described
   above, and thus, such extra Neighbor Unreachability Detection probes
   should rarely be necessary.



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   With some types of networks, it is possible that additional
   indications about link-layer mobility can be obtained from
   lower-layer protocol or device driver software within the mobile
   node.  However, a mobile node MUST NOT assume that all link-layer
   mobility indications from lower layers indicate a movement of the
   mobile node's link-layer connection to a new IPv6 subnet, such that
   the mobile node would need to switch to a new default router and
   primary care-of address.  Upon lower-layer indication of link-layer
   mobility, the mobile node SHOULD send Router Solicitation messages
   to determine if new routers (and new on-link network prefixes) are
   present on its new link.

   Such lower-layer information might also be useful to a mobile node in
   deciding to switch its primary care-of address to one of the other
   care-of addresses it has formed from the on-link network prefixes
   currently available through different default routers from which the
   mobile node is reachable.  For example, a mobile node MAY use signal
   strength or signal quality information (with suitable hysteresis)
   for its link with the available default routers to decide when to
   switch to a new primary care-of address using that default router
   rather than its current default router (and current primary care-of
   address).  Even though the mobile node's current default router may
   still be reachable in terms of Neighbor Unreachability Detection, the
   mobile node MAY use such lower-layer information to determine that
   switching to a new default router would provide a better connection.


6.2. Forming New Care-of Addresses

   After detecting that its link-layer point of attachment has moved
   from one IPv6 subnet to another (i.e., its current default router
   has become unreachable and it has discovered a new default router),
   a mobile node SHOULD form a new primary care-of address using one of
   the on-link network prefixes advertised by the new router.  A mobile
   node MAY form a new primary care-of address at any time, except
   that it MUST NOT do so too frequently (more often than once per
   MAX_UPDATE_RATE seconds).

   In addition, after discovering a new on-link network prefix, a
   mobile node MAY form a new (non-primary) care-of address using that
   network prefix, even when it has not switched to a new default
   router.  A mobile node can have only one primary care-of address
   at a time (registered with its home agent), but it MAY have an
   additional care-of address for each network prefix on its current
   link.  Furthermore, since a wireless network interface may actually
   allow a mobile node to be reachable on more than one link at a time
   (i.e., within wireless transmitter range of routers on more than one
   separate link), a mobile node MAY have care-of addresses on more than



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   one link at a time.  For more information on using more than one
   care-of address at a time, see Section 6.8.

   As described in Section 2, in order to form a new care-of address,
   a mobile node MAY use either stateless [12] or stateful (e.g.,
   DHCPv6 [3]) address autoconfiguration.  If a mobile node needs to
   send packets as part of the method of address autoconfiguration, it
   MUST use an IPv6 link-local address rather than its own IPv6 home
   address as the Source Address.

   In some cases, a mobile node may already know a (constant) IPv6
   address that has been assigned to it for its use while visiting this
   network.  For example, it may be statically configured with an IPv6
   address assigned by the system administrator of the new network.  If
   so, rather than using address autoconfiguration to form a new care-of
   address using this network prefix, the mobile node SHOULD use its own
   pre-assigned address as its care-of address on this network.


6.3. Sending Binding Updates to the Home Agent

   After changing its primary care-of address as described in
   Sections 6.1 and 6.2, a mobile node SHOULD register its new primary
   care-of address with its home agent.  To do so, the mobile node sends
   a packet to its home agent containing a Binding Update option with
   the Acknowledge (A) bit set, requesting the home agent to return a
   Binding Acknowledgement message in response to this Binding Update.
   As described in Section 3.2, the mobile node SHOULD retransmit this
   Binding Update to its home agent until it receives a matching Binding
   Acknowledgement message.  Once reaching a retransmission timeout
   period of MAX_BINDACK_TIMEOUT, the mobile node SHOULD continue
   to periodically retransmit the Binding Update at this rate until
   acknowledged.

   It is useful for a mobile node to be able to send a Binding Update
   its home agent without explicitly knowing the home agent's address.
   For example, since the mobile node was last at home, it may have
   become necessary to replace the node serving as its home agent due
   to the failure of the original node or due to reconfiguration of the
   home network.  It thus may not always be possible or convenient for a
   mobile node to know the exact address of its own home agent.

   Mobile nodes can dynamically discover the address of a home agent
   by sending a Binding Update to the anycast address on their home
   network.  Each router on the home network which receives this Binding
   Update MUST reject the Binding Update and include its address in the
   Binding Acknowledgement message indicating the rejection.  The mobile
   node is assumed to know a proper anycast address on its home network



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   before making use of this method for determining a particular home
   agent's address.


6.4. Sending Binding Updates to Correspondent Nodes

   A mobile node MAY also include a Binding Update in any normal data
   packet sent to a correspondent node.  For each correspondent node
   to which it has sent a Binding Update, the mobile node MUST keep
   information to determine whether or not the correspondent node has
   been sent a fresh Binding Update since the last time the mobile node
   switched to a new primary care-of address.  When a packet is to be
   sent to a correspondent node that has not been sent a fresh Binding
   Update, the mobile node SHOULD include the Binding Update within the
   packet.  Thus, correspondent nodes are generally kept updated and
   can send almost all data packets directly to the mobile node using
   the mobile node's current binding.  Such Binding Updates are not
   generally required to be acknowledged; however, if the mobile node
   wants to be sure, an acknowledgement can be requested, although in
   this case, the mobile node SHOULD NOT continue to retransmit the
   Binding Update once the retransmission timeout period has reached
   MAX_BINDACK_TIMEOUT.

   A mobile node MAY also send a Binding Update in any otherwise empty
   packet, whenever the mobile node wishes to update a correspondent
   node as to its current binding.  This is normally done only if
   the mobile suspects that its home agent is not operational or is
   too far away, a correspondent node is not sending the traffic to
   the proper care-of address, or there is an immediate need for the
   correspondent node to obtain the binding.  A mobile node can detect
   that a correspondent node is not sending packets to the proper
   care-of address because in that case the packets arrive at the mobile
   node's care-of address by encapsulation instead by inclusion in a
   routing header within the packet.

   A mobile node MAY choose to keep its location private from certain
   correspondent nodes, and thus need not send new Binding Updates to
   those correspondents.  A mobile node MAY also send a Binding Update
   to such a correspondent node to instruct it to delete any existing
   binding for the mobile node from its Binding Cache, as described in
   Section 3.1.  No other IPv6 nodes are authorized to send Binding
   Updates on behalf of a mobile node.


6.5. Sending Binding Updates to the Previous Default Router

   After switching to a new default router (and thus also changing
   its primary care-of address), a mobile node SHOULD send a Binding



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   Update message to its previous default router, giving its new care-of
   address.  If it sends such a Binding Update, the mobile node MUST set
   the Home Address field to its old primary care-of address (that it
   used while using this default router), and set the Care-of Address
   field to its new primary care-of address.  Note that the previous
   router does not necessarily know the mobile node's home address as
   part of this sequence of events.

   The mobile node's previous default router then, in effect,
   temporarily act as a home agent for the mobile node's old primary
   care-of address.  If any subsequent packets arrive at this previous
   router for forwarding to the mobile node's old primary care-of
   address, the router SHOULD encapsulate each and tunnel it to the
   mobile node at its new primary care-of address.  Moreover, the
   previous router should issue Neighbor Advertisement packets for the
   previous care-of address, so that on-link neighbors will send packets
   destined to the mobile node's old primary care-of address to the
   previous router for encapsulation and tunneling to its new care-of
   address.


6.6. Rate Limiting for Sending Binding Updates

   A mobile node MUST NOT send Binding Update messages more often than
   once per MAX_UPDATE_RATE seconds to any correspondent node.  After
   sending 5 consecutive Binding Updates to a particular correspondent
   node with the same care-of address, the mobile node SHOULD reduce its
   rate of sending Binding Updates to that correspondent node, to the
   rate of SLOW_UPDATE_RATE per second.  The mobile node MAY continue
   to send Binding Updates at the slower rate indefinitely, in hopes
   that the correspondent node will finally be able to process a Binding
   Update and begin to route its packets directly to the mobile node at
   its current primary care-of address.


6.7. Receiving Binding Acknowledgements

   Upon receiving a packet carrying a Binding Acknowledgement message,
   a mobile node MUST validate the packet according to the following
   tests:

    -  The packet contains an IP Authentication header and the
       authentication is valid [1].  The Authentication header is
       assumed to provide both authentication and integrity protection.

    -  The ICMP Checksum is valid.





Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


    -  The length of the ICMP message (derived from the IPv6 Payload
       Length field) is greater than or equal to 16 octets.

    -  The Identification field is valid.

   Any Binding Acknowledgement not satisfying all of these tests MUST be
   silently discarded.

   If the Binding Acknowledgement is valid, the mobile node MUST examine
   the Code field as follows:

    -  If the Code field indicates that the Binding Update was accepted
       (the Code field is less than 128), then the mobile node MUST
       update the corresponding entry in its Binding Update List to
       indicate that the Binding Update has been acknowledged.  The
       mobile node SHOULD thus stop retransmitting the Binding Update.

    -  If the Code field indicates that the Binding Update was not
       accepted (the Code field is greater than or equal to 128), then
       the mobile node MUST delete the corresponding Binding Update List
       entry.  Optionally, the mobile node MAY take steps to correct the
       cause of the error and retransmit the Binding Update, subject to
       the rate limiting restriction specified in Section 6.6.


6.8. Using Multiple Care-of Addresses

   As described in Section 6.2, a mobile node MAY have more than
   one care-of address at a time.  Particularly in the case of many
   wireless networks, a mobile node effectively may be reachable through
   multiple link-level points of attachment at the same time (e.g.,
   with overlapping wireless cells), on which different on-link network
   prefixes may exist.  A mobile node SHOULD select a primary care-of
   address from among those care-of addresses it has formed using any
   of these network prefixes, based on the movement detection mechanism
   in use (Section 6.1).  When the mobile node selects a new primary
   care-of address, it MUST register it with its home agent through a
   Binding Update message with the Acknowledge (A) bit set, as described
   in Section 6.3.

   To assist in smooth handoffs, a mobile node SHOULD retain its
   previous primary care-of address as a care-of address, and SHOULD
   still accept packets at this address, even after registering its new
   primary care-of address with its home agent.  This is reasonable,
   since the mobile node could only receive packets at its previous
   primary care-of address if it were indeed still connected to that
   link.  If the previous primary care-of address was allocated using
   stateful address autoconfiguration [3], the mobile node may not wish



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 27]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   to release the address immediately upon switching to a new primary
   care-of address.  The stateful address autoconfiguration server
   will allow mobile nodes to acquire new addresses while still using
   previously allocated addresses.


6.9. Returning Home

   A mobile node detects that it has returned to its home network
   through the movement detection algorithm in use (Section 6.1),
   when the mobile node detects that its home network prefix is again
   on-link.  The mobile node SHOULD then send a Binding Update to its
   home agent, to instruct its home agent to no longer intercept or
   tunnel packets for it.  In this Binding Update, the mobile node MUST
   set the Care-of Address field to its own IPv6 home address.  As with
   other Binding Updates sent to register with its home agent, the
   mobile node MUST set the Acknowledge (A) and Home Registration (H)
   bits and SHOULD retransmit the Binding Update until a matching
   Binding Acknowledgement message is received.

   The mobile node MUST also send out the appropriate Neighbor
   Advertisement packets with the Override flag set, so that its
   neighbors on its home network will update the relevant information
   for the mobile node in their Neighbor Caches.  The mobile node
   MUST do this for both its link-local address and its home address.
   The Neighbor Advertisement packets can be repeated a small number
   of times to guard against occasional loss of packets on the home
   network.























Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 28]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


7. Home Agent Considerations

7.1. Home Agent Care-of Address Registration

   General processing of a received Binding Update that requests a
   binding to be cached, is described in Section 5.2.  However, if the
   Home Registration (H) bit is set in the Binding Update, then the
   receiving node MUST process the Binding Update as specified in this
   section, rather than following the generall procedure specified in
   Section 5.2.

   To begin processing the Binding Update, the home agent MUST perform
   the following sequence of tests:

    -  If the node is not a router that implements home agent
       functionality, then the node MUST reject the Binding Update and
       SHOULD return a Binding Acknowledgement message to the mobile
       node, in which the Code field is set to 132 (Home registration
       not supported).

    -  Else, if the Home Address field in the Binding Update is not an
       on-link IPv6 address with respect to the home agent's current
       Prefix List, then the home agent MUST reject the Binding Update
       and SHOULD return a Binding Acknowledgement message to the mobile
       node, in which the Code field is set to 133 (Not home network).

    -  Else, if the home agent chooses to reject the Binding Update for
       any other reason (e.g., insufficient resources to serve another
       mobile node as a home agent), then the home agent SHOULD return a
       Binding Acknowledgement message to the mobile node, in which the
       Code field is set to an appropriate value to indicate the reason
       for the rejection.

   If the home agent does not reject the Binding Update as described
   above, then it becomes the home agent for the mobile node.  The
   new home agent (the receiving node) MUST then create a new entry
   (or update the existing entry) in its Binding Cache for this
   mobile node's Home Address, as described in Section 5.2.  In
   addition, the home agent MUST mark this Binding Cache entry as a
   "home registration" to indicate that the node is serving as a home
   agent for this binding.  Binding Cache entries marked as a "home
   registration" SHOULD be excluded from the normal cache replacement
   policy used for the Binding Cache (Section 5.5) and SHOULD NOT be
   removed from the Binding Cache until the expiration of the Lifetime
   period.

   If the home agent was not already serving as a home agent for the
   Home Address specified in the Binding Update (the home agent did



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 29]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   not already have a Binding Cache entry for this address marked as
   a "home registration"), then the home agent MUST multicast onto
   the home network (to the all-nodes multicast address), a Neighbor
   Advertisement message on behalf of the mobile node, with the fields
   in the Neighbor Advertisement set as follows:

      Router Flag (R)

         1 -- the sending node (the home agent) is a router.

      Solicited Flag (S)

         0 -- the Neighbor Advertisement message is unsolicited.

      Override Flag (O)

         1 -- the advertisement SHOULD override any existing Neighbor
         Cache entry at the receiver, updating the receiver's cached
         link-layer address for this Target Address.

      Target Address

         The mobile node's home address, copied from the Home Address
         field of the Binding Update.

      Options

         The home agent MUST include at least a Target Link-layer
         Address option in the Neighbor Advertisement message, in which
         the Link-Layer Address gives the link-layer address of the home
         agent itself.

   Any node on the home network receiving this Neighbor Advertisement
   message will thus update its Neighbor Cache to associate the mobile
   node's home address with the home agent's link layer address, causing
   it to transmit future packets for the mobile node instead to the
   mobile node's home agent.  Since multicasts on the local link (such
   as Ethernet) are typically not guaranteed to be reliable, the home
   agent MAY retransmit this Neighbor Advertisement message a small
   number of times to increase its reliability.  It is still possible
   that some nodes on the home network will not receive any of these
   Neighbor Advertisements, but these nodes will eventually be able
   to detect the link-layer address change for the mobile node's home
   address, through use of Neighbor Unreachability Detection [9].

   In addition, while this node is serving as a home agent to any mobile
   node (it has at least one entry marked as a "home registration" in
   its Binding Cache), it SHOULD act as a proxy for each such mobile



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 30]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   node to reply to any received Neighbor Solicitation messages for
   it.  When a home agent receives a Neighbor Solicitation message, it
   MUST check if the Target Address specified in the message matches
   the Home Address of any mobile node for which it has a Binding Cache
   entry marked as a "home registration".  If such an entry exists
   in its Binding Cache, the home agent MUST reply to the Neighbor
   Solicitation message with a Neighbor Advertisement message, giving
   the home agent's own link-layer address as the link-layer address for
   the specified Target Address.


7.2. Home Agent Care-of Address De-registration

   General processing of a received Binding Update that requests a
   binding to be deleted, is described in Section 5.3.  However, if the
   Home Registration (H) bit is set in the Binding Update, then the
   receiving node MUST process the Binding Update as specified in this
   section, rather than following the generall procedure specified in
   Section 5.3.

   To begin processing the Binding Update, the home agent MUST perform
   the following sequence of tests:

    -  If the node is not a router that implements home agent
       functionality, then the node MUST reject the Binding Update and
       SHOULD return a Binding Acknowledgement message to the mobile
       node, in which the Code field is set to 132 (Home registration
       not supported).

    -  Else, if the Home Address field in the Binding Update is not an
       on-link IPv6 address with respect to the home agent's current
       Prefix List, then it MUST reject the Binding Update and SHOULD
       return a Binding Acknowledgement message to the mobile node, in
       which the Code field is set to 133 (Not home network).

   If the home agent does not reject the Binding Update as described
   above, then it MUST delete any existing entry in its Binding Cache
   for this mobile node's Home Address, as specified in the Binding
   Update.

   In addition, the home agent SHOULD multicast a Neighbor Advertisement
   message (to the all-nodes multicast address), giving the mobile
   node's home address as the Target Address, and specifying the mobile
   node's link-layer address in a Target Link-layer Address option in
   the Neighbor Advertisement message.  The home agent MAY retransmit
   this Neighbor Advertisement message a small number of times to
   increase its reliability, and any nodes on the home network that miss
   all of these Neighbor Advertisements can also eventually detect the



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 31]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   link-layer address change for the mobile node's home address, through
   use of Neighbor Unreachability Detection [9].


7.3. Delivering Packets to a Mobile Node

   Home agents cannot use Routing headers to deliver packets to the
   mobile node, because they can't modify the packet and add to it
   in flight.  They must always use IPv6 encapsulation [5] for this
   purpose.

   When a home agent encapsulates a packet for delivery to the mobile
   node, the home agent uses the care-of address as the destination
   address in the outer IPv6 header.  Since the mobile node is presumed
   to be receiving packets at the care-of address, the delivery path
   from the care-of address to the mobile node's home address is then
   trivial.

   Note that the home agent cannot insert a routing header, or
   modify the destination address of the mobile node, because of IPv6
   authentication mechanisms [1].  The home agent is expected to be
   involved only rarely with the transmission of data to the mobile
   node, because the mobile node will send Binding Updates as soon as
   possible to its correspondent nodes.


7.4. Renumbering the Home Network

   Neighbor Discovery [9] specifies a mechanism by which all nodes on a
   network can gracefully autoconfigure new addresses, say by combining
   a new routing prefix with their existing MAC address.  As currently
   specified, this mechanism works when the nodes are on the same link
   as the router issuing the necessary multicast packets to advertise
   the new routing prefix(es) appropriate for the link.

   However, for mobile nodes away from home, special care must be taken
   to allow the mobile nodes to renumber gracefully.  The most direct
   method of insuring this is for the home agent to encapsulated and
   tunnel the multicast packets to the care-of address of the mobile
   node as necessary.  The rules for this are as follows:

    -  A mobile node assumes that its routing prefix has not changes
       unless it receives authenticated router advertisement messages
       from its home agent that the prefix has changed.

    -  When the mobile node is at home, the home agent does not tunnel
       router advertisements to it.




Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 32]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


    -  When a home network prefix changes, the home agent tunnels router
       advertisement packets to each mobile node which is currently
       away from home and using a home address with the affected
       routing prefix.  Such tunneled router advertisements MUST be
       authenticated [1].

    -  When a mobile node receives a tunneled router advertisement
       containing a new routing prefix, it must perform the standard
       autoconfiguration operation to create its new address

    -  When a mobile node returns to its home network, it must again
       perform Duplicate Address Detection at the earliest possible
       moment after it has registered with its home agent.

    -  A mobile node may send a router solicitation to its home agent at
       any time, within the constraints imposed by rate control in the
       Neighbor Discovery specification [9]

   Note that a mobile node is guaranteed that its home address is unique
   and used by no other mobile node.  However, in some circumstances it
   may nevertheless be true that other nodes on its home network form
   the same link-local address as the mobile node during the time when
   the mobile node is away from its home network.  Thus, there is the
   requirement above that the mobile node perform Duplicate Address
   Detection when it returns again to its home network.


























Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 33]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


8. Correspondent Node Considerations

8.1. Delivering Packets to a Mobile Node

   The routing infrastructure of the Internet will normally route a
   packet destined to a mobile node to the mobile node's home network,
   if the Destination Address in the packet's IPv6 header is the mobile
   node's home address.  Once the packet reaches the home network, it
   will be intercepted by the mobile node's home agent if the mobile
   node is away from home, and will then be encapsulated using IPv6
   encapsulation and tunneled to the mobile node's current primary
   care-of address.  Using this delivery mechanism, the sender need not
   know that the node is mobile.

   Correspondent nodes that have received and cached a Binding Update
   for a mobile node, MAY instead route packets directly to that mobile
   node's care-of address.  To do so, the correspondent node includes
   a Routing header in each packet to the mobile node, to cause the
   packet to be routed to the mobile node's care-of address as the last
   intermediate routing point before reaching the final destination
   of the mobile node's home address.  When the packet arrives at the
   care-of address (which the mobile node has associated with its
   network interface), normal processing of the Routing header by the
   mobile node will result in delivery of the packet to the mobile node
   as the final destination of the packet.

   For example, assuming no other use of the Routing header in the
   packet, the sender initializes the Destination Address in the IPv6
   header to the mobile node's care-of address, and includes a Type 0
   Routing header [6] in the packet initialized as follows:

   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |  Next Header  |  Hdr Ext Len  | Routing Type=0|Segments Left=1|
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Reserved    |             Strict/Loose Bit Map              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                                                               |
   +                                                               +
   |                                                               |
   +                          Home Address                         +
   |                                                               |
   +                                                               +
   |                                                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+







Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 34]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


      Next Header

         8-bit selector.  Identifies the type of header immediately
         following the Routing header.

      Hdr Ext Len

         8-bit unsigned integer.  Length of the Routing header in
         8-octet units, not including the first 8 octets.  For this use
         of the Type 0 Routing header, Hdr Ext Len is equal to 2.

      Routing Type

         0

      Segments Left

         8-bit unsigned integer.  Number of route segments remaining
         before reaching the final destination.  For this use of the
         Type 0 Routing header, Segments Left is initialized to 1 by the
         sender.

      Reserved

         8-bit reserved field.  Initialized to zero for transmission;
         ignored on reception.

      Strict/Loose Bit Map

         24-bit bit-map, numbered 0 to 23, left-to-right.  For this use
         of the Type 0 Routing header, bit 0 of the Strict/Loose Bit Map
         is set to 1, indicating strict routing from the care-of
         address to the mobile node's home address (both addresses are
         associated with the mobile node itself).

      Home Address

         The home address of the destination mobile node.

   If a correspondent node receives an ICMP Host Unreachable or Network
   Unreachable message after sending a packet to a mobile node using
   its cached care-of address, it SHOULD delete the cache entry from
   its Binding Cache until information about the mobile node's current
   care-of address becomes available (via a Binding Update).







Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 35]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


9. Authentication and Replay Protection

   When sending Binding Updates, a mobile node uses the Identification
   field in the option, in conjunction with the IPv6 Authentication
   Header, to protect against replays of the Binding Update.  The style
   of replay protection specified for the IPv6 Binding Update involves
   the use of a timestamp as the Identification data.  Accordingly the
   mobile node and the target of its Binding Update have to roughly
   agree on the current time.  Stale Binding Updates MUST be rejected.










































Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 36]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


10. Routing Multicast Packets

   A mobile node that is connected to its home network functions just
   like any other (stationary) node.  Thus, when it is at home, a mobile
   node functions identically to other multicast senders and receivers.
   This section therefore describes the behavior of a mobile node that
   is not on its home network.

   In order receive multicasts, a mobile node must join the multicast
   group.  Mobile nodes MAY join multicast groups in order to receive
   transmissions in one of two ways.  First, they MAY join the group
   via a (local) multicast router on the visited subnet.  This option
   assumes that there is a multicast router present on the visited
   subnet.  The mobile node SHOULD use its dynamically acquired care-of
   address (if it has acquired one) as the source IPv6 address of its
   multicast group membership control message packets.  Otherwise, it
   MAY use its home address.

   Alternatively, a mobile node which wishes to receive multicasts can
   join groups via a bi-directional tunnel to its home agent, assuming
   that its home agent is a multicast router.  The mobile node tunnels
   the appropriate multicast group membership control packets to its
   home agent and the home agent forwards multicast packets down the
   tunnel to the mobile node.  The home agent must tunnel the packet
   directly to the mobile node's dynamically acquired care-of address,
   or, the packet must be tunneled first to the mobile node's home
   address and then recursively tunneled to the mobile node's care-of
   address.

   A mobile node which wishes to send packets to a multicast group also
   has two options:  (1) send directly on the visited network; or (2)
   send via a tunnel to its home agent.  Because multicast routing in
   general depends upon the IPv6 source address, a mobile node which
   sends multicast packets directly on the visited network MUST use a
   dynamically acquired care-of address as the IPv6 source address.
   Similarly, a mobile node which tunnels a multicast packet to its home
   agent MUST use its home address as the IPv6 source address of both
   the (inner) multicast packet and the (outer) encapsulating packet.
   This second option assumes that the home agent is a multicast router.












Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 37]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


11. Constants

      INITIAL_BINDACK_TIMEOUT   1 second

      MAX_BINDACK_TIMEOUT       256 seconds

      MAX_UPDATE_RATE           1 per second

      SLOW_UPDATE_RATE          once per 10 seconds


Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Thomas Narten for contributing valuable
   discussion and reviewing this draft, and for helping to shape some of
   the recent changes relevant to the operation of Neighbor Discovery.



































Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 38]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


References

    [1] R. Atkinson.  IP Authentication Header.  RFC 1826, August 1995.

    [2] R. Atkinson.  Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.
        RFC 1825, August 1995.

    [3] J. Bound and C. Perkins.  Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
        for IPv6.  draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv6-05.txt -- work in progress,
        June 1996.

    [4] A. Conta and S. Deering.  Internet Control Message Protocol
        (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6).  RFC 1885,
        December 1995.

    [5] A. Conta and S. Deering.  Generic Packet Tunneling in IPv6.
        draft-ietf-ipngwg-ipv6-tunnel-01.txt - work in progress,
        February 1996.

    [6] S. Deering and R. Hinden.  Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
        Specification.  RFC 1883, December 1995.

    [7] D. Haskin and E. Allen.  IP Version 6 over PPP.
        draft-ietf-ipngwg-pppext-ipv6cp-03.txt - work in progress, June
        1996.

    [8] David B. Johnson and Charles E. Perkins.  Route Optimization
        in Mobile-IP.  draft-ietf-mobileip-optim-04.txt -- work in
        progress, February 1996.

    [9] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, and W. Simpson.  IPv6 Neighbor
        Discovery.  draft-ietf-ipngwg-discovery-03.txt -- work in
        progress, November 1995.

   [10] Joyce K. Reynolds and Jon Postel.  Assigned Numbers.  RFC 1700,
        October 1994.

   [11] Fumio Teraoka.  draft-teraoka-ipv6-mobility-sup-02.txt.
        Internet Draft -- work in progress, January 1996.

   [12] S. Thomson and T. Narten.  IPv6 Stateless Address
        Autoconfiguration.  draft-ietf-addrconf-ipv6-auto-06.txt
        - work in progress, November 1995.








Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 39]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


A. Open Issues

A.1. Session Keys with Local Routers

   In the IPv4 route optimization proposal [8], a mechanism is outlined
   whereby a session key can be established between foreign agents
   and mobile nodes, without requiring any pre-established security
   relationship between them.  A similar mechanism could be defined for
   IPv6, to avoid the need for a possibly time-consuming negotiation
   between routers and mobile nodes for the purpose of obtaining the
   session key, which under many circumstances would only be used once.
   This mechanism, if needed, can be specified completely outside
   the Mobile IPv6 protocol and would amount to a way of creating a
   dynamic security association between two nodes which do not share an
   existing trust relationship, but which need to agree on a key for
   some particular purpose (here, allowing the future authentication of
   a Binding Update).  Hopefully, the work of the IP Security Working
   Group will allow this function to be performed appropriately for
   mobile nodes, say by a Diffie-Hellman key exchange.


A.2. Source Address Filtering by Firewalls

   The current specification does nothing to permit mobile nodes to
   send their packets through firewalls which filter out packets with
   the "wrong" source IPv6 addresses in the IPv6 packet header.  The
   mobile node's home address may be unlikely to fall within the ranges
   required to satisfy the firewall's criteria for further delivery.

   As indicated by recent discussion, firewalls are unlikely to
   disappear.  Any standardized solution [11] to the firewall problem
   based on hiding the non-local source address outside the source
   address field of the IPv6 header is likely to fail.  Any vendor or
   facilities administrator wanting to filter based on the address in
   the IPv6 source address field would also quickly begin filtering on
   hidden source addresses.

   Assume, for the moment, that a mobile node is able to establish a
   secure tunnel through a firewall protecting the domain in which
   a correspondent node is located.  The mobile node could then
   encapsulate its packet so that the outer IPv6 header was addressed
   to the firewall and used the mobile node's care-of address as the
   source address.  When the firewall decapsulates, it would be able to
   authenticate the inner packet based (correctly) on the mobile node's
   home address.  After the authentication is performed, the firewall
   could forward the packet to the correspondent node as desired.  This
   simple procedure has the feature that it requires the minimal amount
   of encapsulation, no assistance by routers or other agents, and that



Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 40]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


   the firewall can establish a security relationship with the mobile
   node based on its home (i.e., permanent) address.

















































Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 41]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Mobility Support in IPv6           13 June 1996


Chair's Address

   The Working Group can be contacted via its current chair:

        Jim Solomon
        Motorola, Inc.
        1301 E. Algonquin Rd.
        Schaumburg, IL  60196

        Work:   +1-847-576-2753
        E-mail: solomon@comm.mot.com


Authors' Addresses

   Questions about this document can also be directed to the authors:

        David B. Johnson
        Computer Science Department
        Carnegie Mellon University
        5000 Forbes Avenue
        Pittsburgh, PA  15213-3891

        Work:   +1 412 268-7399
        Fax:    +1 412 268-5576
        E-mail: dbj@cs.cmu.edu


        Charles Perkins
        Room H3-D34
        T. J. Watson Research Center
        IBM Corporation
        30 Saw Mill River Rd.
        Hawthorne, NY  10532

        Work:   +1 914 789-7350
        Fax:    +1 914 784-6205
        E-mail: perk@watson.ibm.com













Johnson and Perkins          Expires 13 December 1996          [Page 42]
