

Network Working Group                                              X. Fu
Internet-Draft                                          Univ. Goettingen
Expires: April 16, 2004                                        P. Mendes
                                                        DoCoMo Euro-Labs
                                                          H. Schulzrinne
                                                          Columbia Univ.
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                                 Siemens
                                                        October 17, 2003


           Mobility Issues in Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS)
                     draft-fu-nsis-mobility-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document attempts to identify the various problems with
   signaling in the data path for the mobile node's on-going flows after
   it moves to a new point of attachment, and analyzes emerging issues
   with mobility support in the two-layer Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS)
   architecture.





Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.    Problems with Mobility Support in Signaling  . . . . . . . .  5
   3.1   Problems Caused by Rerouting of Data Packets . . . . . . . .  5
   3.1.1 State Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.1.2 Local Path Repair  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.1.3 Crossover Router Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.1.4 Update the Unchanged Path  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.1.5 Service-aware Signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.2   Problems Caused by IP-in-IP Encapsulation  . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.2.1 (Re-)Routing of Signaling Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.2.2 IP-in-IP Tunnels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.2.3 Service-aware Signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.2.4 Routing Interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.2.5 Crossover Router Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.    Analysis on Mobility in the Two-Layer NSIS Architecture  . . 11
   4.1   Identifiers in Data and Control Planes . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.2   Crossover Router Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   4.3   Local Path Repair  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.4   Routing of Signaling Messages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   4.5   IP-in-IP Encapsulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   4.6   Interaction between Mobility Routing and NSIS Signaling  . . 17
   4.7   Interaction between NTLP and NSLP Signaling  . . . . . . . . 18
   5.    Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   5.1   Both End-Hosts are Mobile  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   5.2   Interact with Seamoby Protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   5.3   Fast State Installation/Advanced Reservations  . . . . . . . 19
   5.4   Resource Discovery in an End-to-End Path . . . . . . . . . . 20
   5.5   Security and AAA Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   5.6   Other Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   6.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   6.1   Missing Cost Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   6.2   Implications for Price Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   6.3   Intra-domain Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   7.    Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 30











Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


1. Introduction

   The Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS) working group is chartered with
   the goal of standardizing a generic IP signaling protocol, having
   Quality of Service (QoS) signaling as the first use case.  A
   two-layer signaling architecture of NSIS, which consists of a generic
   transport layer protocol (NTLP) and various application signaling
   procotols (NSLPs, e.g. QoS signaling [I-D.ietf-nsis-qos-nslp] and
   NAT/firewall traversal), enables a separation of the transport of the
   signaling from the application signaling.  The NSIS framework
   [I-D.ietf-nsis-fw] describes the functionality of the individual
   layers in detail.

   The interactions between mobility and signaling protocols have been
   analyzed in recent years, in the context of RSVP and Mobile IP
   interaction [I-D.thomas-nsis-rsvp-analysis],
   [I-D.shen-nsis-rsvp-mobileipv6], [I-D.manner-lrsvp], [paskalis03],
   [I-D.ietf-nsis-signalling-analysis], in the context of the DiffServ
   model [heijenk01] and in the context of optimizing QoS signaling for
   Mobile IP handovers [I-D.westphal-nsis-qos-mobileip].

   A previous study about QoS provisioning in mobile IP [manner02] shows
   that the difficulty with the interaction between mobility and QoS
   signaling protocols is mainly due to the design of the latter ones.
   The I-D on requirements for signaling protocols [I-D.ietf-nsis-req]
   and a recently published RFC on mobile IP QoS requirements [RFC3583]
   discuss some issues concerning NSIS signaling and QoS signaling in
   various mobility environment. However, the interaction between
   mobility protocols and the NSIS protocols has not yet reached a
   conclusion. The goal of this document is two-fold. First, it aims to
   identify the problems that mobility causes to NSIS signaling, in
   particular in the case of QoS signaling. Secondly, it presents an
   analysis about mobility support in the two-layer NSIS architecture.

   In a long term, it may be necessary to study how to use NSIS
   signaling in particular network environments, such as 3G and WLAN
   networks. However, we do not assume a specific mobile access network,
   since it is important to avoid tightening NSIS signaling with any
   specific access technology. Moreover, NSIS signaling should be also
   independent from the used mobility management scheme.  Hence, we
   assume a general scenario where mobile nodes (MNs) can have local
   mobility (inside the same access network) or global mobility (between
   different access networks), without making NSIS signaling aware of
   details specific to different mobility management schemes.

   This document attempts to identify problems with signaling in
   mobility environments, and the implications caused by different
   design choices for mobility support in NSIS signaling.



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


2. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   In addition, this document frequently uses the following terms or
   abbreviations most of which are defined in Mobile IP, SEAMOBY and
   NSIS related documents (e.g.,
   [I-D.ietf-seamoby-mobility-terminology]):

      Home Address

      Home Agent (HA)

      Mobile Node (MN)

      Correspondent Node (CN)

      Access Router (AR), Previous AR (PAR) and New AR (NAR)

      Mobile IP (MIP): Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) or Mobile IPv4 (MIPv4)

      Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6)

      Localized Mobilitiy Management (LMM): Fast/Low Latency Handovers,
      HMIPv6 or Mobile IPv4 Regional Registration

      Seamoby mechanisms: Context Transfer, Candidate Access Router
      Discovery

      Care of Address (CoA)

      Regional Care-of-Address (RCoA), On-Link Care-of-Address (LCoA)

      Mobility Anchor Point (MAP)

      Mobility Agent: e.g., MAP and HA

      NSIS Entity (NE)

      NSIS Transport-Layer Protocol (NTLP)

      NSIS Signaling-Layer Protocol (NSLP)

      (Next-)Peer discovery

      Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (AAA)



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


3. Problems with Mobility Support in Signaling

   In this section we identify the problems that mobility poses to
   signaling. The described problems are due to two main characteristics
   of mobile systems. First, changes caused by re-routing of data
   packets, essentially posed by topology changes, including the change
   of host IP addresses and the change of routes for data packets sent
   to or from the mobile node. Second, the use of IP-in-IP encapsulation
   in some sections of the end-to-end path.

3.1 Problems Caused by Rerouting of Data Packets

   Rerouting of data packets can be due to non-mobility related events
   inside the network, or due to the movement of end hosts (mobility).
   The reparation of a data path due to non-mobility issues, such as
   load balancing and router failure, are not a concern of this I-D.

   The movement of end-hosts leads to changes in the data path due to
   the change of their point of attachment in the network. This results
   in the original data path between a sender and a receiver to be
   divided into three paths, all of which intersect at a crossover
   router: the unchanged path, the newly-added path and the old
   ("obsoleted") path.

   The attachment of a mobile node (MN) to a new network point normally
   means a change in the IP address used to build a data path. However,
   in some situations, the movement of end-hosts can lead to changes in
   the data path even if the addresses associated with the data flow do
   not change in the path. This happens with Hierarchical Mobile IPv6
   (HMIPv6) [I-D.ietf-mobileip-hmipv6], when a Mobility Anchor Point
   (MAP) allows an MN to use the Regional Care-of Address (RCoA) as
   source address without tunneling through the MAP. This means that
   although the uptream flow have the same source address (RCoA) and
   destination IP address it can be routed through a different path
   towards the correspondent node (CN). This section describes a set of
   problems posed by rerouting due to the movement of end-hosts.

3.1.1 State Management

   Due to rerouting of data packets after handovers,
   signaling-associated states need to be updated or removed. This
   concerns with which information is needed for indexing states and
   where a creation, update or removal of these states is required.

   In general, a mobile node has a home address as its permanent IP
   address; after a movement it obtains a new CoA which is the basis for
   routing its data. If signaling-associated states, which are stored at
   routers along the path, are indexed based on some temporary data



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   plane information, such as CoA, the states created by previous CoAs
   can be inaccessible for the signaling after most handover procedures.
   Furthermore, updating state information along the entire path might
   be necessary to reflect the topology change of the MN (as one
   signaling end).

3.1.2 Local Path Repair

   In any mobility approach, a handover causes route changes in some
   network nodes along the path: for the upstream direction signaling,
   in the MN and possibly mobility agent(s) (if reverse tunneling is
   used); for the downstream direction signaling, in the CN, the HA and/
   or other mobility agents (when non-route-optimization or LMM is
   used). Therefore, state needs to be installed on the new path and
   removed from the old one. We call this "path repair".

   The installation of state in the new path must be done as quick as
   possible so that the mobile node does not experience service
   interruption or service degradation.  To allow a quick set up of
   state in a new path, the path repair should be done locally, i.e.,
   only between the MN and the crossover router, which is the first
   signaling-aware router where the old and new path meet. This also
   avoid state duplication on the unchanged path, i.e., the path from
   the crossover router to the correspondent node.

   Besides the installation of state in the new path, the local path
   repair mechanism should release state in the old path, as soon as
   possible, to avoid wasting resources. Typically, the changed path is
   located inside an access network, where resources are relatively
   expensive, thus it might be inefficient to wait for typical
   soft-state timeouts. However, immediately releasing resources along
   the old path might cause problems. In case of a ping-pong type of
   movement resources along the old path might need to be reused again
   after a very short time period. This means that the MN may return to
   the previous access network shortly after leaving it, which brings
   some problems about deciding to when to release state in the old
   path.

   The local path repair may be triggered by the mobile node, the
   mobility agent(s), or by the access router at which the mobile node
   is attached to. However, the triggering may be constrained by which
   entities are authorized to carry out what state manipulations, which
   is then a signaling application and security question.

   To install states in the new path and to release states in the old
   path, at least the following problems have to be solved:

   o  Know when to trigger the reparation of the local path. This



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


      triggering requires some interaction with mobility management
      schemes;

   o  Know where to end the local repair (i.e., discovery of the
      crossover router, which requires differentiating between the MN as
      sender or receiver.


3.1.3 Crossover Router Discovery

   The problem of finding the crossover router in a new data path is a
   generalization of the problem of finding next signaling-aware node.
   It requires to probe the new data path until the old path is reached.
   Since we have to assume that the MN can be a sender as well as a
   receiver, the first difficulty to find a crossover router is posed by
   the asymmetric characteristic of routing.

   Due to routing asymmetry there is no reason for the crossover router
   to be the same in the upstream direction and in the downstream
   direction, even for the same correspondent node.

   When an MN changes its point of attachment to the network, the
   discovery of the crossover router is easier for the upstream
   direction, in which the MN is the sender, than for the downstream
   direction. In the latter case, although it is the MN that detects
   data path changes, the discovery of the downstream crossover router
   has to be done by signaling via the correspondent node.

   Hence, the problem of discovering the new crossover router can be
   divided into the following issues:

   o  When to trigger the discovery mechanism. This problem is related
      with the interaction between a signaling protocol and the mobility
      scheme, to allow the former to be notified from the latter about
      the movement of mobile devices.

   o  How to trigger the crossover router discovery mechanism, which
      depends on the role of the MN as a sender or receiver.

   o  How to identify a crossover router.

   o  Since both end-hosts involved in a bi-directional communication
      can be mobile, the discovery mechanism trigger by each one of
      them, as sender and receiver, has to be coordinated.







Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


3.1.4 Update the Unchanged Path

   As discussed earlier, double reservations in the unchanged path
   should be avoided. This can only be done by being able to establish a
   relationship between the old and the new flow. This is essentially
   the same problem faced to release resource in the old path.

   After the identification of the old flow in the unchanged path, the
   network control state on the unchanged path must be updated to
   reflect new flow identification.  This leads to the problem of
   requiring end-to-end signaling, which should be avoided to decrease
   the control load overhead. However, it should be possible to avoid
   AAA and admission control processing.

3.1.5 Service-aware Signaling

   Signaling in mobile environments can be quite dependent on the type
   of applications. For instance, for QoS signaling, having reservations
   on old and new paths has a cost and should be avoided. On the other
   hand, in the presence of ping-pong movement, the immediately release
   of state in the old path can have a performance impact higher than
   the cost of keeping that state.

   The main problem posed by these issues is the difficult definition of
   a signaling protocol general to all types of application in mobile
   environments. Therefore, interaction of signaling and mobility
   imposes an analysis of signaling responsibilities of each one of the
   two NSIS layers in mobile environments.

3.2 Problems Caused by IP-in-IP Encapsulation

   IP-in-IP encapsulation is one type of IP-in-IP tunnels, which have
   been mentioned in [RFC2746]. Mobile IP's IP-in-IP encapsulation for
   data packets introduces a number of problems, described below.

3.2.1 (Re-)Routing of Signaling Messages

   One concern is which information can be used for routing of signaling
   messages. In NSIS, signaling is expected to follow the standard IP
   routing and mobile IP routing. In a standard IP routing case,
   messages can be routed according to the destination host's IP address
   and possibly additional IP header fields. In presence of mobile IP
   routing protocols, especially when multiple mobility protocols are
   applied for the same MN-CN communications, possibly nested (e.g.,
   MIPv6+HMIPv6+FMIPv6), it can be difficult to use the MN's address
   (CoA) as the destination address. Also, as asymmetric routing is
   common, routing of signaling messages must differentiate between the
   case of the MN as data sender and the case of the MN as data



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   receiver.

3.2.2 IP-in-IP Tunnels

   If the two end points of a tunnel is not signaling-aware, it might be
   difficult to provide signaling services for signaling-aware nodes
   inside the tunnel. In order to, for example, make a QoS reservation
   for tunnels, it might be necessary to have the tunnel end points to
   support NSIS. To make things more complicated, mobile IP tunnels
   co-exist with the change of host addresses (e.g., CoAs) and multiple
   of them can be possible nested. Therefore, signaling operations over
   these tunnels, including routing of signaling messages and state
   management, need to be systematically constructed.

3.2.3 Service-aware Signaling

   Essentially, the purpose of signaling is to provide certain services
   for the MN's flows. Therefore, signaling must be able to install
   correct packet classifiers in the signaling-aware nodes. Since the
   tunnels can be physically long, without loss of generality, the
   ability to signal and install service-aware state inside the (mobile
   IP) tunnels is required. Such information may need to be delivered to
   both the tunnel endpoints and internal signaling-aware nodes. This is
   difficult because signaling messages - same as other data packets -
   can be encapsulated so as to be invisible of host addresses. In case
   that nested tunnels are used (e.g., due to the concurrent usage of
   several tunneling protocols), where an MN can have several level of
   CoAs at one time together with a home address, special care would be
   needed.

   Another issue with service-aware signaling concerns with selective
   signaling over tunnels. For example, when an application triggers a
   per-flow QoS reservation, in some cases it is desired to trigger a
   QoS reservation also for the tunnel. In some cases it is, however,
   not desirable to support a QoS reservation for a tunnel. It must
   therefore be possible for NSIS to decide whether a reservation for a
   tunnel is desired and at which granularity. An end-to-end QoS
   reservation need not to be automatically extended to the tunneled
   region since the tunnel might also serve as a means for aggregation.

3.2.4 Routing Interface

   Mobility reflects different route change due to creating, updating or
   deleting tunnels, as well as changes in the routing entries, for
   example in HA, CN, FA/MN, GFA/MAP). It is necessary for the signaling
   process to obtain such information. RFC 2205 [RFC2205] provides an
   RSVP/routing interface which can be applicable for mobility/
   NSIS-signaling interface. However, it is necessary to coordinate



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   signaling behaviors based on several mobility route change events in
   different parts in the network, even when a single mobility routing
   protocol is used.

3.2.5 Crossover Router Discovery

   As previously stated, signaling messages can be hidden for
   signaling-aware routers inside a tunnel. Therefore, it may be
   necessary to introduce a separate discovery and signaling message for
   the tunneled region.









































Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


4. Analysis on Mobility in the Two-Layer NSIS Architecture

   The problems described in Section 3.1 have several implications to
   the funtionality of the two-layer NSIS architecture in providing
   mobility support. Hence, we analyze how mobility can be supported in
   the two-layer NSIS architecture. Specifically, we focus on the
   following issues to understand how different design choices can
   possible address the enumerated problems.

4.1 Identifiers in Data and Control Planes

   The main purpose of NSIS signaling is to manage flow-based state in
   the network nodes. As mentioned in Section 3.1.2, to be able to
   perform a local path repair, the flows in the new path and the
   correspondent ones in the old path must be identified. The problem is
   that although a flow is the same, one or both of the source and
   destination addresses are different due to the new Care-of Address
   (CoA) which the MN obtained from the new access network. Hence, A
   stable identifier within NSIS is required which does not change due
   to mobility.  This identifier helps in the discovery of the crossover
   router, allows the identification of the same flow in the old and new
   path, and avoids setting up double state in the unchanged path.

   The definition of a stable identifier must consider whether that
   identifier should be placed in the data plane or in the control
   plane. The former requires the definition of a flow identification
   that does not change. This simplifies the problem of session update,
   but introduces some problems on packet classification and security.
   No such mobility independent identifier is available although the
   IPv6 Flow Label [I-D.ietf-ipv6-flow-label] based on the Home Address
   was discussed on the mailing list. If the flow identifier is based on
   the Home Address, for example, once an MN has more than one signaling
   flow to the same CN, say, one for the purpose of QoS and another for
   firewall pinhole, it becomes difficult to distinguish between them.

   In general, a distinguish between data plane and control plane
   identifiers is necessary: the former of which reflects real, routable
   IP addresses (home address, CoA or other possible tunnel endpoints'
   addresses) in order to reflect packet classification, while the
   latter reflects a stable identifier for managing state information.
   In other words, the following two identifiers are useful to support
   mobility in NSIS:

   o  A session identifier (session-ID) in the control plane that must
      not change during mobility, in order to manage the control state.
      This session-ID can be a random identifier or cryptographically
      generated. It should be "globally unique".
      [I-D.tschofenig-nsis-sid] discusses some possible mechanisms for



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


      creating such an identifier.

   o  A flow identifier (flow-ID) in the data plane that describing
      packets belonging to the flow. The flow-ID should contain fields
      that are used by NSIS-aware routers to install filter specs
      (packet classification). Some possible way of composing flow-IDs
      have been suggested in the NSIS framework document
      [I-D.ietf-nsis-fw]: 5-tuple, IPv6 flow label or a 3-tuple. Since
      in mobile IP one or more IP-in-IP tunnels is(are) inserted in the
      data path (see discussions in Section 3.2), an end-to-end universe
      flow-ID might be insufficient to route signaling messages, or even
      to make filter specs for applications' flows. It might be not
      necessary to have the flow-ID in the NSIS message (and the
      associated packet classifier/state stored at NSIS nodes) along the
      entire end-to-end path to be the same; some network nodes (e.g.,
      HA) might need to be able to change it.

   Note it can also possible that the NSLP has its own session-ID to
   identify individual sessions. They may or may not be correlated. In
   the following text, without special statement, session-ID represents
   NTLP session-ID.

   The use of a flow-ID based on MN's addresses, e.g., the CoA, and
   possibly other fields in the IP header is meaningful for many
   signaling applications. However, whether flow-ID would be needed for
   all NSLPs is still an open issue. Therefore, the flow-ID could be
   constructed either by NTLP or by the NSLP layer.  While constructing
   flow-ID, if CoAs are used for identifing flows, even on the unchanged
   path, signaling would be still needed to update a changed flow
   identification in the unchanged path. In this case, signaling in the
   unchanged path should be possible to avoid AAA and admission control
   processing. Note if flow-ID is managed by the NTLP layer, it can be
   avoided to be constraint to host addresses, thus make it possible to
   limit the update of flow-ID information locally, while still allowing
   flow-ID useful/visible for NSLPs. If the flow-ID contains a CoA, it
   is necessary to update flow-IDs stored at NSIS nodes along the the
   unchanged path. Furthermore, from a performance point of view it
   would be highly advisable to avoid AAA and admission control
   processing.

   The management of the session-ID and flow-ID in the two-layer NSIS
   architecture requires more study, especially after an analysis of the
   NTLP proposal. In particular, routing of signaling messages at NTLP
   level can be based on either flow-ID or session-ID. In a
   flow-ID-based approach, NTLP has to rely on a mapping between certain
   fields of the flow-ID (e.g., destination IP address and additional IP
   header information) and local IP (and mobility) routing table. In a
   session-ID-based approach, NTLP can route the signaling messages



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   based on a mapping between the session-ID and the local NTLP-level
   state (for example, next/previous NE's address). If there is no
   existing state, a next-peer discovery has to be performed to create
   such a state.

   As the association of different flow-IDs to a single session-ID is a
   problem common to many signaling applications, the association
   between both identifiers might be done at the NTLP. However, it could
   be also possible this association is done at the NSLP layer, if the
   method used to perform such association is specific to each
   application. In both possibilities, it is assumed that the session-ID
   should be visible within the NTLP, allowing it to perform an enhanced
   forwarding control for packets belonging to that session.

   Another three related identifiers, namely the message identifier
   (message-ID) that is introduced in RFC 2961 [RFC2961], the branch
   identifier (branch-ID) suggested in CASP
   [I-D.schulzrinne-nsis-casp][fu03] and the Reservation Sequence Number
   (RSN) proposed in QoS NSLP [I-D.ietf-nsis-qos-nslp], have been also
   discussed as potential mechanisms useful for mobility support in
   NSIS. All of three indicate the order in which corresponding
   signaling messages are processed by the corresponding signaling
   entities (RSVP, CASP-NTLP and QoS-NSLP daemons, respectively) and try
   to address the out-of-order problems of signaling messages.

   Message-ID, together with Epoch object in RFC 2961, concerns with
   signaling messages between peering neighbors, where the out-of-order
   problem can come from retransmission/refresh. It was not designed for
   mobility support specifically. As an extension to message-ID concept,
   the branch ID (together Session ID) can be used for detecting
   out-of-order signaling messages along different branches each can
   consist of multiple hops) for route change and mobility scenarios; it
   can be generally useful for determining end of (explicit) teardown
   message to forward on along the unchanged path. Different from the
   branch ID, the RSN is meaningful in a QoS-NSLP node for protecting
   out-of-order problems in the associated branches, each of which can
   consist of multiple QoS NEs.

4.2 Crossover Router Discovery

   The discovery of the crossover router, due to the mobility of
   end-hosts, must be based on the session-ID of the MN. Additional
   information might be used for computing an authorization decision or
   to verify ownership.

   Since the session-ID is processed at the NTLP layer, we can say that
   the crossover router of a mobile session is an NTLP-aware node that
   for a session request coming from one of its interfaces, already has



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   forwarding information about that session stored on one or more
   interfaces, excluding the incoming one. However, a session may have a
   different crossover router for the upstream and downstream
   directions. Hence, we can specify the definition of a crossover
   router as follows:

   o  Upstream direction: an NTLP-aware NE that for a session request
      coming from one of its interfaces, already has information about
      that session stored on more than one interface, excluding the
      incoming one.

   o  Downstream direction: an NTLP-aware NE that for a session request
      coming from one of its interfaces, already has information about
      that session stored on more than one interface, excluding the
      outgoing one.

   The discover of the downstream crossover router must be started by
   the correspondent node, which means that the MN should signal the
   correspondent node when it detects some movement. However, this
   procedure does not necessarily increase the handover latency, since
   end to end message exchanges will be required at the application
   layer anyway to update the sender with the new address of the
   receiver.

   In either situation, the discovery of the crossover router is
   typically done at the NTLP layer. For instance, to discover the
   crossover router in the upstream direction, all NEs in the new path
   have to be found out. A natural way is to use NTLP next peer
   discovery for this purpose and then one can do state repair
   immediately after finding out the next NE peer, or perform the state
   repair after finding the new NE-chain in the new path (as discussed
   in Section 4.3).

   Alternatively, it is possible to discover the crossover router at the
   NSLP layer, since the NSLP is the entity who does the real work for
   signaling sessions and leaves useful information in NEs. However,
   this is problematic since the number of NSLPs for a given MN-CN pair
   may be more than one, which requires discovery of possibly different
   crossover routers for each NSLP.  Furthermore, as NSIS is assumed to
   follow normal IP routing mechanism, all NSLP sessions between a same
   MN-CN pair will have the same crossover router. Therefore, definition
   and discovery of the crossover router at NSLP layer would only
   increase the complexity.

   The discovery of the crossover router due to route changes inside the
   network caused by non-mobility reasons, such as load balancing and
   node failure should also be taken care by NTLP. In this case, if
   end-to-end NTLP addressing is used the discovery of the crossover



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   router can be done based on the flow-ID, which does not change;
   otherwise, session-ID will assist the discovery. The analysis of this
   situation is beyond the scope of this document, since it is not an
   issue caused by IP mobility.

4.3 Local Path Repair

   There is a tight relationship between the crossover router discovery
   mechanism and the local path repair mechanism, because the local path
   is defined as the path between the MN and the crossover router. Local
   repair can be done either during (coupled approach) or after
   (separated approach) the crossover router discovery process. This
   affects whether only NSLP or both NSLP and NTLP is involved in the
   local repair. In both cases, all NEs in that path have to be
   discovered by the NTLP peer discovery mechanism.  In the coupled
   approach, NSLP state in a new local path has to be recovered upon a
   notification of local NTLP (more details are discussed in Section
   4.7); the advantage is that it requires less recovery time and the
   same procedure as normal NSIS signaling. In contrast, the separated
   approach utilizes an additional NSLP-based procedure which might add
   the complexity to the whole NSIS signaling; NTLP essentially is used
   as a transparent underlying mechanism to transport NSLP messages.

   The interaction between the crossover router discover mechanism and
   the local path repair mechanism is different for the upstream and
   downstream directions:

   o  Upstream direction: Since the definition of local path depends
      upon the location of the crossover router, in the separated
      approach, it may be considered that is the crossover router
      discovery mechanism that triggers the local path repair, which
      itself is triggered by the mobile node. In the coupled approach,
      the crossover router discovery mechanism takes place before the
      local path repair is performed, until the crossover router is
      discovered.

   o  Downstream direction: Since the crossover router of downstream
      direction can be located in any section in the data path (e.g.,
      between CN and HA, or between HA and CN) a general assumption
      would be that the crossover router discovery mechanism has to
      started by the correspondent node (for example, after receiving a
      binding update message or detecting of a change in its binding
      entry, see discussions in Section 4.6). However, if LMM mechanisms
      are used for mobility, it can be also possible that mobility
      agents such as HA or MAP to start this process. Also, it can be
      considered that it is the crossover router that starts the local
      path repair mechanism. A local repair mechanism as the one used by
      RSVP [RFC2205], where local repair may be triggered by a local



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


      route change, is impossible or at least difficult in this case.
      The reason is that, the node experiencing a route change can only
      be the CN, HA, or other mobility agents, which is not necessarily
      the crossover router and it is the destination address that
      changed and not the route to the old CoA.

   During the local path repair procedure, setting state in a new path
   may be conditioned by the session ownership and the availability of
   resources. In the latter case, when the network is overloaded, it is
   preferable to keep state belonging to previously established flows
   while blocking new requests.  Therefore, the local path repair
   mechanism for mobiling sessions should have priority over local
   requests for resources.

4.4 Routing of Signaling Messages

   As stated in the NSIS framework document [I-D.ietf-nsis-fw], there
   are two ways to address a signaling message being transmitted between
   NEs:

   o  Peer-to-peer, where the message is addressed to a neighboring NE
      that is known to be closer to the destination NE.

   o  End-to-end, where the message is addressed to the flow destination
      directly, and intercepted by an intervening NE.

   Each type of message is necessary for some aspects of NTLP operation:
   in particular, initial discovery of the next peer will usually
   require end-to-end addressing, whereas reverse routing will always
   require peer-peer addressing. For other message types, the choice is
   a matter of protocol design. The mode used is not visible to the
   NSLP, and the information needed in each case is available from the
   flow-ID or locally stored as NTLP state.

   With peer-to-peer addressing, an NE uses the payload of the message
   to determine the address of the next NE.  This requires the address
   of the destination NE to be derivable from the information present in
   the payload.  Peer-peer addressing inherently supports tunneling of
   messages between NEs.

   In the case of end-to-end addressing, the message is addressed to the
   data flow receiver, and some of the NEs along the data path intercept
   the messages. The routing of the messages should follow exactly the
   same path as the associated data flow. To allow signaling packets
   follow the same route as data packets, network nodes that route
   packets based on different information from flow-ID must be
   NSIS-aware. An example is the forwarding of signaling massages into
   an IP tunnel. In this case the NTLP may need to force a signaling



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   packet to use an output interface that it knows data packets are
   going to use, even if the IP stack would naturally use a different
   one. The session-ID, which may be visible within the NTLP, as stated
   in the framework draft, can be used to identify sessions that should
   be tunneled instead of routed based on the flow-ID. In this
   situation, the NE at the end of the tunnel should restart routing
   messages for this session by using the flow-ID.

4.5 IP-in-IP Encapsulation

   RFC 2746 [RFC2746] provides an approach for RSVP operation over
   IP-in-IP tunnels. Basically, the same considerations can be also
   applicable to NSIS operation over mobile IP IP-in-IP encapsulations.

   Two methods of dealing with this issue are conceivable. One is to
   adapt signaling payloads which refer to header fields to allow
   signaling inside the tunnel.  Another is to use an adaptable flow-ID
   to indicate the changed situation of the signaling message. Both can
   be used together, with certain extensions to RFC 2746 [RFC2746].
   However, since NTLP itself is not yet fully determined, the issue of
   operations over mobile IP's IP-in-IP encapsulated paths needs further
   study.

4.6 Interaction between Mobility Routing and NSIS Signaling

   One issue related to routing NSIS messages is the interface between
   the routing protocol and NTLP/NSLP.  In normal situations, end-to-end
   and peer-to-peer addressing can be handle by the NTLP. In the
   presence of tunnels, the use of the session-ID by the NTLP allows the
   forwarding of packet through a tunnel. In this situation, only the
   NTLP need to have an interface to the routing protocol.

   Another issue related with the interaction between mobility routing
   and NSIS signaling is whether to use the receipt of binding messages
   (e.g., in CN, MN or HA) (active way) or to use routing/NSIS interface
   (passive way), to trigger NSIS signaling. The active way allows
   faster state recovery and removal, but its disadvantage is that fast
   or ping-pong movements may result in considerable signaling overhead
   and possible errors, and moreover, by mobility protocol binding
   updates can take place periodically even for the MN with the same
   point of attachment. The passive way, typically after seconds of
   routing change detection (the MN and the CN in typical cases) of a
   routing/NSIS interface mechanism to obtain route change and tunnel
   change information, can be less processing-intensive and thus more
   promising.

   If the session-ID is not visible by the NTLP, two alternatives are
   conceivable: either other methods need to be used at the NTLP level



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   to identify sessions that need to be tunneled, or the forwarding of
   messages may be done by the NSLP. The latter case required an
   interface between the NSLP and the routing protocol, which may break/
   complicate the NSIS layering.

4.7 Interaction between NTLP and NSLP Signaling

   In the two-layer architecture, there is a separation between NTLP and
   NSLPs.  In general, NTLP is needed to be involved with mobility
   anyway, for example to transport signaling messages along the new
   path in order to create new state, or to transport explicit release
   signaling messages along old path to release old state. In such
   cases, NTLP should be able to notify NSLP to update state (by
   initializing NSLP refresh/teardown messages appropriately). An open
   issue is, however, how and what information the NSLP can expect from
   NTLP, or directly from the routing interface.



































Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


5. Open Issues

   This section discusses some open issues for mobility support in NSIS.

5.1 Both End-Hosts are Mobile

   Considerations about signaling between two MNs. Until now, we are
   assuming a non-mobile corresponding node. Problems can show up if
   both devices start to signal at the same time, namely in the local
   path repair, and signaling of NSIS messages.

5.2 Interact with Seamoby Protocols

   A term "seamless mobility" is often referred to mean that the MN is
   able to keep an ongoing session seamlessly (without experiencing
   perceivable service interruption or performance penalty) during and
   after moving from one access network to another. Measures to achieve
   seamless mobility include, but not limited to, various LMM
   mechanisms, seamoby context transfer [I-D.ietf-seamoby-ctp] and
   candidate access router discovery [I-D.ietf-seamoby-card-protocol]
   protocols, as well as predictive/anticipated handling mechanism.
   Issues related to signaling in LMM scenarios have been discussed in
   previous sections, while interaction of NSIS with seamoby protocols
   are different because of their effects on parts that are out of the
   signaling path.  [I-D.westphal-nsis-qos-mobileip] studied the issue
   of QoS signaling for mobile IP with context transfer, but the
   interaction between NSIS and context transfer still needs further
   investigation.

   In the context of mobility between different access routers, it is
   common to consider performance optimizations in two areas: selection
   of the optimal access router to handover to, and transfer of state
   information between the access routers to avoid having to regenerate
   it in the new access router after handover. Since these solutions are
   still under development as well as the NTLP, it is premature to
   specify details on the interaction.

5.3 Fast State Installation/Advanced Reservations

   There are some other issues concerned with performance optimization,
   for example, the capability to (pre-)discover the required level of
   end-to-end resources, and to fast (predictive/anticipated/in-advance)
   state installation. This section discusses fast state installation.

   Since the time required to establish the session in the new path can
   induce packet losses and delays, which do not contribute to achieve a
   seamless handover. Therefore, it is important that the NSIS signaling
   in a new path can be carried out very quickly.



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   To accomplish a fast state installation, it might be desirable for
   NSIS to be performed in advance to the movement of MNs.  This
   approach may involve some kind of NSIS proxy, on the new access
   network, which can signal in the new path on behalf of the MN. If we
   assume that the end-to-edge communication is done between the MN and
   its access router, some study is required to determine how to signal
   between the mobile device currently access router and the NSIS proxy
   in the new access network - e.g., how to discover the most suitable
   NSIS proxy, and to establish a communication between access networks.
   The latter issue is beyond the charter of NSIS, since it involves
   out-of-path signaling.

   Moreover, in some anticipated signaling scenarios, NSIS signaling
   cannot be triggered by the mobility signaling, which required some
   study about other possible triggers, such as:

   o  Cross-layer triggering. For instance, the layer-2 mechanism can
      give some information about a possible movement.

   o  Context-awareness triggering. For instance, information about a
      lower traffic load in some neighbor access networks can trigger
      the establishment of state in a new path.


5.4 Resource Discovery in an End-to-End Path

   The anticipated signaling for a new path and the selection of a
   suitable access network may not be enough to ensure seamless
   mobility. Resource availability in a new end-to-end path may be
   considered as well. This means that a multimedia session can be
   disrupted if NSIS cannot signal the required resources in the
   end-to-end path supplied by the routing protocols.

   To avoid quality degradation due to mobility, it might be desirable
   to interact with QoS routing [RFC2386] to discover the optimal (or
   sub-optimal) end-to-end path. As stated in the framework document
   [I-D.ietf-nsis-fw], NTLP should work with standard layer 3 routing,
   thus QoS NSLP needs to be able to handle this type of enhanced
   routing. Also, in this case, it might be NSLP's responsibility to
   discover crossover router.

   However, NSIS performance should not be deteriorated in the presence
   of such protocols. For instance, state oscillation can occur if flows
   are frequently re-routed due to changes in the traffic load of
   alternative end-to-end paths. Such state oscillation must be avoided.

5.5 Security and AAA Issues




Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   Since a network access authentication protocol can be executed when a
   host arrives at a new network, AAA procedures are likely to create
   the necessary financial settlement. In this sense it is helpful to
   use an identify for the user session which can be mapped to the
   identify used during the network access procedures to make
   authorization and charging easier. This is particularly of relevance
   if the NSLP carries QoS information. For other NSLPs the
   authorization procedure may be different, but the identity used in
   the authentication and key exchange procedure (e.g., IKE, IKEv2 or
   KINK) has to be accessible especially for an entity in the network at
   the NSLP layer. (Note that this is simpler in case of TLS where the
   authenticated identity of the user is available to the NSLP via an
   API).

   The authorization procedure in a mobile environment still needs more
   investigation, particularly since there is a strong relationship to
   network access procedures.

5.6 Other Issues

   Aggregation (as well as multicast) is not a mobility-specific problem
   in general. In mobility scenarios, one possibly related issue is that
   whether the messages for creating, updating and removing existing
   states in different sections in the network need to be grouped
   according to the new CoAs, or the home address, when the MN is the
   data receiver.

   Another issue is signaling in Network Mobility (NEMO) or ad-hoc
   network scenarios, which has different implications from IP mobility
   scenarios. In NEMO or ad-hoc networks an end-host's address can
   remain the same while the path is changed, so state management,
   crossover router discovery and local repair would rely on the change
   of path not on the change of host addresses. However, as NSIS
   signaling is assumed to follow normal IP routing (including IP
   mobility routing), further study of these issues is beyond the scope
   of this document.















Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


6. Security Considerations

   It is obvious that mobility support within NSIS raises security
   issues. A number of mobility scenarios with impacts on security are
   discussed in Section 7 of [I-D.tschofenig-nsis-aaa-issues]. Even if
   the signaling message exchange is restarted from scratch (i.e. using
   a new flow-ID), security handling within NSIS is affected. This type
   of processing is, however, mostly not a topic for this draft.

   The introduction of a flow-ID independent identifier referred as
   session identifier creates security hazards which are discussed in
   [I-D.tschofenig-nsis-sid]. Once the expected signaling messaging
   behavior is precisely defined then it is possible to address the
   raised security concerns. Then it should be possible to define which
   entities are authorized to perform certain types of actions. In the
   following subsections we discuss some additional security
   implications.

6.1 Missing Cost Control

   A large number of service providers (e.g. wireless LAN hotspots) with
   complex roaming agreements create a non-transparent cost structure.
   In a traditional subscription-based scenario, users are subscribed to
   their home network and use this trust relationship to dynamically
   establish a financial settlement between the visited network and the
   home network.  Additionally, security associations are dynamically
   established as part of this procedure.  This is the typical AAA
   deployment scenario. In these scenarios users do not learn the
   identity of the access network as part of a regular authentication
   and key exchange protocol message exchange. The identity of the
   access network is possibly never revealed (in a secure fashion). The
   user is therefore only authenticated to the home network (and
   hopefully vice versa). While issuing a QoS reservation request to the
   next NSIS peer (for example in the access network), the end host is
   typically unaware of the cost of such an end-to-end QoS reservation.
   Without knowing the costs it is not possible to reject a too
   expensive QoS reservation.

   Currently there is no standarized protocol available which allows
   users to communicate cost limits, to request cost information for
   network resources or to learn already accumulated costs for a
   particular reservation.

   Especially in mobility environments - where an end host is likely to
   have access to different networks within a short time period - cost
   control is even more complicated.

   Some mobility/QoS protocol proposals try to merge existing mobility



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   protocols with QoS signaling (i.e. to apply in-band signaling).
   Thereby the access network is queried (towards the crossover router
   or the MAP) for the possibility of making a QoS reservation (without
   actually making the reservation itself).  Without a query mechanism,
   a user cannot take reservation costs into account when choosing
   between different access networks (or different access routers).
   Hence, the user might be able to refuse a more expensive service
   provider. The ability to allow a user to choose between different
   providers might be required - not only because of the availability of
   different access technologies (e.g. IEEE 802.1x, Bluetooth, UTRAN)
   and different service quality offered, but also for cost reasons.

   Although real-time notifications of QoS reservation costs (cost
   control) to the user are out of the scope of NSIS, some interaction
   might be required.

6.2 Implications for Price Determination

   The problem of determining the price of a QoS reservation has been
   mentioned in [I-D.tschofenig-nsis-aaa-issues] and closely relates to
   integrating the end host into the process of authorization. Even if
   the end host is aware of the price of a QoS reservation during
   reservation setup the price might change for a number of reasons:

   o  First, mobility in general causes a different path to be chosen
      and might therefore require a new price determination. End host
      mobility is visible to the end host itself, therefore the
      appropriate actions can be triggered by the end host to always
      determine the correct price.

   o  Route changes somewhere along the path, e.g., mobility in NEMO
      networks or even mobility in ad-hoc networks, create more
      problems, since the route change might not be visible for the end
      host. If price determination is based on the number of networks
      traversed and intermediate nodes or network contribute to the
      total price of a QoS reservation, then a periodic price query is
      necessary. Discussions at the NEMO mailing list already point to
      this problem [Nemo-ML]. If the price of QoS reservation is
      associated with the authorization itself, then a periodic
      re-authorization based on the change of prices or on the
      accumulated costs is necessary.


6.3 Intra-domain Mobility

   Intra-domain mobility with the help of the context transfer protocol
   can help to move established state information between different
   access nodes within the same administrative domain including security



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   associations, QoS parameters (QoS NSLP state), NTLP state and even
   authorization information.  An authorization for a QoS reservation
   granted along one path through the access network might also valid at
   a different access router or even at a different path within the same
   administrative domain. Discussions in the EAP working group, however,
   reveal that this might not always be the case. However, if we extend
   the scheme from intra-domain context transfer to inter-domain context
   transfer then we might encounter some interesting authorization
   problems. Note that these issues do not only address authorization of
   QoS resources, but are more applicable to network access
   authentication and authorization in general. Network access
   authentication and authorization would not necessarily be executed
   again after attaching to the new domain. Instead, a trust
   relationship is established between the new and the old
   administrative domain.

   In addition to the above issues, performance is important in mobility
   environments. Proper security handling accounts for a high percentage
   of the total performance.
































Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


7. Acknowledgment

   The authors would like to acknowledge discussions with Bob Braden,
   Marcus Brunner, Ruediger Geib, Seong Jeong, Zhigang Kan, Cornelia
   Kappler, Holger Karl, Gary Kenward, Sung-Hyuck Lee, Jukka Manner,
   Andrew McDonald, Sarantis Paskali, Cedric Westphal, and Hairong Zheng
   in the NSIS working group. In particular, the document benefits from
   Hemant Chaskar, Robert Hancock, Charles Shen and Michael Thomas's
   insightful comments on various aspects of this topic.










































Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


References

   [I-D.ietf-ipv6-flow-label]
              Rajahalme, J., Conta, A., Carpenter, B. and S. Deering,
              "IPv6 Flow Label Specification",
              draft-ietf-ipv6-flow-label-07 (work in progress), April
              2003.

   [I-D.ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6]
              Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6",
              draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-08 (work in progress),
              October 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-mobileip-hmipv6]
              Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., Malki, K. and L. Bellier,
              "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management (HMIPv6)",
              draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-08 (work in progress), July
              2003.

   [I-D.ietf-nsis-fw]
              Hancock, R. and et al., "Next Steps in Signaling:
              Framework", draft-ietf-nsis-fw-04 (work in progress),
              September 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-nsis-qos-nslp]
              Van den Bosch, S. and et al., "NSLP for Quality-of-Service
              signaling", draft-ietf-nsis-qos-nslp-00 (work in
              progress), September 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-nsis-req]
              Brunner, M., "Requirements for Signaling Protocols",
              draft-ietf-nsis-req-09 (work in progress), August 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-nsis-signalling-analysis]
              Manner, J., Fu, X. and P. Pan, "Analysis of Existing
              Quality of Service Signaling Protocols",
              draft-ietf-nsis-signalling-analysis-02 (work in progress),
              July 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-seamoby-card-protocol]
              Liebsch, M. and et al., "Candidate Access Router
              Discovery", draft-ietf-seamoby-card-protocol-04 (work in
              progress), September 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-seamoby-ctp]
              Loughney, J. and et al., "Context Transfer Protocol",
              draft-ietf-seamoby-ctp-04 (work in progress), October
              2003.



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   [I-D.ietf-seamoby-mobility-terminology]
              Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
              draft-ietf-seamoby-mobility-terminology-04 (work in
              progress), April 2003.

   [I-D.manner-lrsvp]
              Manner, J. and et al., "Localized RSVP",
              draft-manner-lrsvp-02 (work in progress), July 2003.

   [I-D.schulzrinne-nsis-casp]
              Schulzrinne, H. and et al., "CASP - Cross-Application
              Signaling Protocol", draft-schulzrinne-nsis-casp-01 (work
              in progress), March 2003.

   [I-D.shen-nsis-mobility-fw]
              Shen, C., "Several Framework Issues Regarding NSIS and
              Mobility", draft-shen-nsis-mobility-fw-00 (work in
              progress), July 2002.

   [I-D.shen-nsis-rsvp-mobileipv6]
              Shen, C. and et al., "Mobility Extensions to RSVP in an
              RSVP-Mobile IPv6 Framework",
              draft-shen-nsis-rsvp-mobileipv6-00 (work in progress),
              July 2002.

   [I-D.thomas-nsis-rsvp-analysis]
              Thomas, M., "Analysis of Mobile IP and RSVP Interactions",
              draft-thomas-nsis-rsvp-analysis-00 (work in progress),
              November 2002.

   [I-D.tschofenig-nsis-aaa-issues]
              Tschofenig, H., "NSIS Authentication, Authorization and
              Accounting Issues", draft-tschofenig-nsis-aaa-issues-01
              (work in progress), March 2003.

   [I-D.tschofenig-nsis-sid]
              Tschofenig, H. and et al., "Security Implications of the
              Session Identifier", draft-tschofenig-nsis-sid-00 (work in
              progress), June 2003.

   [I-D.westphal-nsis-qos-mobileip]
              Westphal, C. and H. Chaskar, "QoS Signaling Framework for
              Mobile IP", draft-westphal-nsis-qos-mobileip-00 (work in
              progress), June 2002.

   [Nemo-ML]  Alper, Y., "[nemo] AAA and NEMO", discussion in the IETF
              Nemo Mailing List (available at: http://
              www.nal.motlabs.com/pipermail/nemo/2003-February/



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


              000271.html), February 2003.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, Sep 1997.

   [RFC2386]  Crawley, E., Nair, R., Rajagopalan, B. and H. Sandick, "A
              Framework for QoS-based Routing in the Internet", RFC
              2386, August 1998.

   [RFC2746]  Terzis, A., Wroclawski, J. and L. Zhang, "RSVP Operation
              Over IP Tunnels", RFC 2746, January 2000.

   [RFC2961]  Berger, L., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Pan, P., Tommasi, F. and
              S. Molendini, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction
              Extensions", RFC 2961, April 2001.

   [RFC3583]  Chaskar, H., "Requirements of a Quality of Service (QoS)
              Solution for Mobile IP", RFC 3583, September 2003.

   [fu03]     Fu, X., Schulzrinne, H. and H. Tschofenig, "Mobility
              Support for Next-Generation Internet Signaling Protocols",
              Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference
              2003-Fall, October 2003.

   [heijenk01]
              Heijenk, G., Karagiannis, G., Rexhepi, V. and L. Westberg,
              "DiffServ Resource Management in IP-based Radio Access
              Networks", Proceedings of 4th International Symposium on
              Wireless  Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC'01),
              Aalborg, Denmark, September 2001.

   [manner02]
              Manner, J., Lopez, A., Mihailovic, A., Velayos, H.,
              Hepworth, E. and Y. Khouaja, "Evaluation of mobility and
              QoS interaction", Computer Networks vol.38, no.2,
              pp.137-163, February 2002.

   [paskalis03]
              Paskalis, S., Kaloxylos, A., Zervas, E. and L. Merakos,
              "An efficient RSVP-mobile IP interworking scheme", Mobile
              Networks and Applications vol.8, no.3, pp.197-207, June
              2003.





Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


Authors' Addresses

   Xiaoming Fu
   University of Goettingen
   Telematics Group
   Lotzestr. 16-18
   Goettingen  37083
   Germany

   EMail: fu@cs.uni-goettingen.de


   Paulo Mendes
   DoCoMo Communications Laboratories Europe GmbH
   Landsberger Str. 312
   Munich  80687
   Germany

   EMail: mendes@docomolab-euro.com


   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Dept. of Computer Science
   1214 Amsterdam Avenue
   New York, NY  10027
   USA

   EMail: hgs@cs.columbia.edu


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens AG
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich  81739
   Germany

   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com













Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft          Mobility Issues in NSIS             October 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Fu, et al.               Expires April 16, 2004                [Page 31]

