

   IPR WG                                                               
   Internet-Draft                                       V. See (editor) 
   Document: draft-ietf-ipr-template-07.txt                   Microsoft 
   Expires: February 19, 2004                               August 2003 
    
    
     A Template for IETF Patent Disclosures and Licensing Declarations 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes a template for IETF patent disclosures and 
   licensing declarations. The optional use of this template is meant to
   simplify the process of such disclosures and licensing declarations 
   and to assist disclosers in providing the necessary information to 
   meet the obligations documented in RFC XXXX. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 1] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. The Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template.......2 
   3. Commentary on Terms used in the Template.......................5 
   Security Considerations...........................................7 
   Normative References..............................................7 
   Acknowledgments...................................................7 
   Authors' Addresses................................................7 
   Intellectual Property Statement...................................8 
   Full Copyright statement..........................................8 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   RFC XXXX [i] documents the current IETF policies and obligations with
   respect to disclosure of patents and patent applications. It also 
   documents the information requested in licensing declarations for 
   IETF specifications. In the interest of making these patent 
   disclosure and licensing declaration processes simpler, this document
   proposes a patent disclosure and licensing declaration template that 
   may be optionally used as one method for IETF participants and patent
   holders to comply with patent disclosure requirements and licensing 
   declaration provisions under RFC XXXX. For the latest information on
   how to submit a patent disclosure or licensing declaration, please 
   see http://www.ietf.org/ipr-instructions. 
    
    
2. The Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template 
    
   START OF TEMPLATE 
    
   This document is an IETF Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration 
   Template and is submitted to inform the IETF of a) patent information
   regarding the IETF document or contribution listed in Section IV, and
   b) a Patent Holder's intention with respect to the licensing of its 
   necessary patent claims. No actual license is implied by submission 
   of this template. Please complete and submit a separate template for 
   each IETF document or contribution to which the disclosed patent 
   information relates. 
    
   I. Patent Holder/Applicant ("Patent Holder") 
    
   Legal Name:  
    
   II. Patent Holder's Contact for License Application 
    
   Name:  
    
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 2] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
   Title: 
    
   Department:  
    
   Address:  
    
    
   Telephone:  
    
   Fax:  
    
   Email:  
    
   III. Contact Information for the IETF Participant Whose Personal 
   Belief Triggered the Disclosure in this Template (Optional): 
    
   Name:  
    
   Title: 
    
   Department:  
    
   Address:  
    
    
   Telephone:  
    
   Fax:  
    
   Email:  
    
   IV. IETF Document or Contribution to Which Patent Disclosure Relates 
    
    
   Title:  
    
    
   RFC Number or I-D Tag:  
    
    
   Other Designations:  
    
    
   V. Disclosure of Patent Information (i.e., patents or patent 
   applications required to be disclosed by Section 6 of RFC XXXX) 
    
   A. For granted patents or published pending patent applications, 
   please provide the following information: 
    
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 3] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
   Patent, Serial, Publication, Registration, or Application/File 
   number(s): 
    
    
   Date(s) granted or applied for (dd/mm/yy):  
    
    
   B. Does your disclosure relate to an unpublished pending patent 
   application? 
    
   Select one:  Yes  ______  No ______ 
    
   C. If an Internet-Draft or RFC includes multiple parts and it is not
   reasonably apparent which part of such Internet-Draft or RFC is 
   alleged to be covered by the patent information disclosed in Section
   V(A) or V(B), it is helpful if the discloser identifies here the 
   sections of the Internet-Draft or RFC that are alleged to be so 
   covered.  
    
    
    
   VI. Licensing Declaration  
    
   The Patent Holder states that its position with respect to licensing 
   any patent claims contained in the patent(s) or patent application(s) 
   disclosed above that would necessarily be infringed by implementation
   of the technology required by the relevant IETF specification 
   ("Necessary Patent Claims"), for the purpose of implementing such 
   specification, is as follows (select one licensing declaration option
   only): 
    
   a) ___   No License Required for Implementers 
              Check here if commitment to forgo a license is limited 
              solely to standards-track RFCs ___ 
    
   b) ___   Royalty-Free, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to 
            All Implementers  
              Check here if this commitment to license is limited solely
              to standards-track RFCs ___ 
    
   c) ___   Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All  
            Implementers with Possible Royalty/Fee 
              Check here if this commitment to license is limited solely
              to standards-track RFCs ___ 
    
   d) ___   Licensing Declaration to be Provided Later (implies a  
            willingness to commit to the provisions of a), b), or c) 
            above; otherwise, the next option - "Unwilling to Commit to 
            the Provisions of a), b), or c) Above" - must be selected) 
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 4] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
    
   e) ___   Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), b), or c) 
            Above 
    
   NOTE: The individual submitting this template represents and warrants 
   that he or she is authorized by the Patent Holder to agree to the 
   above-selected licensing declaration. 
    
   VII. Contact Information of Submitter of this Form (if different from 
   IETF Participant in Section III above) 
    
   Name: 
    
   Title: 
    
   Department: 
    
   Address: 
    
    
   Telephone: 
    
   Fax: 
    
   Email: 
    
   VIII. Other Notes: 
    
    
    
    
    
    
   END OF TEMPLATE 
    
    
3. Commentary on Terms used in the Template 
    
   Section III requests contact information for the Patent Holder's IETF
   participant whose personal belief that necessary patent claims are 
   implicated by an IETF document or contribution caused this template 
   to be filed. This is an optional section. However, if Section III is 
   not completed, then Section VII must be completed. Even if Section 
   III is completed, Section VII must still be completed if the 
   submitter of this template is different from the IETF participant 
   identified in Section III. 
    


 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 5] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
   The "Other Designations" field in Section IV may be used to identify 
   an IETF contribution (oral or written) other than an Internet-Draft 
   or RFC to which a disclosure is related. 
    
    
   Here is an explanation of the licensing declaration options in 
   Section VI of the template: 
    
   a) No License Required for Implementers: The Patent Holder does not 
   require parties to acquire any license to its Necessary Patent Claims
   in order to make, have made, use, import, offer to sell, sell, or 
   distribute technology that implements such IETF specification. 
     
   b) Royalty-Free, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All 
   Implementers: The Patent Holder is willing, upon request, to grant a 
   license to its Necessary Patent Claims to all persons on a royalty-
   free basis (i.e., no royalty or other fee) and under other reasonable
   and non-discriminatory terms and conditions, to make, have made, use, 
   import, offer to sell, sell, and distribute technology that 
   implements such IETF specification.  
     
   c) Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All Implementers with
   Possible Royalty/Fee: The Patent Holder is willing, upon request, to 
   grant a license to its Necessary Patent Claims to all persons under 
   reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions (which may 
   include a royalty/fee), to make, have made, use, import, offer to 
   sell, sell, and distribute technology that implements such IETF 
   specification. 
    
   d) Licensing Declaration to be Provided Later: The Patent Holder is 
   willing to commit to the provisions of a), b), or c) above, but wants
   to defer its specific selection of one of these licensing declaration
   options until a later point in time (or when asked for this 
   information by the IESG). This option may not be selected if the 
   Patent Holder is unwilling to commit to the provisions of a), b), or 
   c) above. In that case, the Patent Holder must select licensing 
   declaration option e) - "Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), 
   b), or c) Above". 
    
   e) Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), b), or c) Above: The 
   Patent Holder indicates an unwillingness to commit to the provisions 
   of any of options a), b), or c) described above. 
    
   Options a), b), and c) above also allow the Patent Holder to indicate
   (with a check) whether its licensing declaration is limited solely to
   standards-track RFCs. If left unchecked, the Patent Holder's 
   licensing declaration will be deemed to apply to any implementation 
   of the relevant IETF specification, including non-standards-track 
   documents and Internet-Drafts. However, the Patent Holder may list 
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 6] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
   other conditions or restrictions on its commitment to forego a 
   license (option a)) or on its commitment to license (options b) and 
   c)) in Section VIII - "Other Notes". This standards-track qualifier 
   is not relevant to licensing declaration options d) and e), because 
   under d) the Patent Holder has not yet indicated its specific 
   licensing intention and under e) the Patent Holder has indicated a 
   general refusal to commit to the provisions of any of options a), b), 
   or c) above. 
    
   Section VIII in the template, "Other Notes," may be used for any 
   additional information a discloser or Patent Holder wishes to 
   provide. For example, a Patent Holder may use the "Other Notes" 
   Section to indicate any other conditions or restrictions on the 
   licensing declaration option selected in Section VI (e.g., 1) 
   reciprocity, or 2) that a license will only be made available for 
   implementations of any RFC (standards-track or non-standards-track),
   but not for implementations of Internet-Drafts or other documents). 
    
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   This document relates to IETF process, not any particular technology.
   There are security considerations when adopting any particular 
   technology, regardless of whether patent or patent application 
   disclosures or licensing declarations are implicated by such 
   technology. A working group should take those security considerations 
   into account as one part of evaluating the technology, but there are 
   no security considerations per se with these IETF processes. 
    
    
Normative References 
    
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", 
      RFC XXXX, <month> 2003. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors acknowledge the thoughtful contributions of Harald 
   Alvestrand and Scott Bradner to this document. 
    
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Valerie See 
   Microsoft Corporation 
   One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 USA 
   Email: vsee@microsoft.com 

 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 7] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
    
   Robert Barr 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA 95134 USA 
   Email: rbarr@cisco.com 
    
   Scott Brim 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   146 Honess Lane, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA 
   Email: sbrim@cisco.com 
    
   Paul Gleichauf 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA 95134 USA 
   Email: phg@cisco.com 
    
   Allen Lo 
   Juniper Networks 
   1194 North Mathilda Ave., Sunnyvale, CA 94089 USA 
   Email: alo@juniper.net 
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
Full Copyright statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  Except as set forth 
   below, authors retain all their rights. 
    

 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 8] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template   August 19, 2003 
 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for rights 
   in submissions defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   THIS DOCUMENT AND THE INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN IS PROVIDED ON AN 
   "AS IS" BASIS AND THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL 
   NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
























 
 
See (editor)         Expires - February 19, 2004             [Page 9] 
