



Network Working Group                                          R. Sparks
Internet-Draft                                                    Oracle
Intended status: Informational                                T. Kivinen
Expires: February 8, 2016                                  INSIDE Secure
                                                          August 7, 2015


                     Tracking Reviews of Documents
                 draft-sparks-genarea-review-tracker-03

Abstract

   Several review teams ensure specific types of review are performed on
   Internet-Drafts as they progress towards becoming RFCs.  The tools
   used by these teams to assign and track reviews would benefit from
   tighter integration to the Datatracker.  This document discusses
   requirements for improving those tools without disrupting current
   work flows.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 8, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Overview of current workflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Secretariat focused . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Review-team Secretary focused . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Reviewer focused  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  Review Requester and Consumer focused . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.5.  Statistics focused  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7.  Changelog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.1.  03  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.2.  02  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.3.  01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.4.  00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Appendix A.  A starting point for Django models supporting the
                review tool  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Appendix B.  Suggested features deferred for future work  . . . .  17
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   As Internet-Drafts are processed, reviews are requested from several
   review teams.  For example, the General Area Review Team (Gen-ART)
   and the Security Directorate (Secdir) perform reviews of documents
   that are in IETF Last Call.  Gen-ART always performs a follow-up
   review when the document is scheduled for an IESG telechat.  Secdir
   usually performs a follow-up review, but the Secdir secretary may
   choose not to request that follow-up if any issues identified at Last
   Call are addressed and there are otherwise no major changes to the
   document.  These teams also perform earlier reviews of documents on
   demand.  There are several other teams that perform similar services,
   often focusing on specific areas of expertise.

   The secretaries of these teams manage a pool of volunteer reviewers.
   Documents are assigned to reviewers, taking various factors into
   account.  For instance, a reviewer will not be assigned a document
   for which he is an author or shepherd.  Reviewers are given a
   deadline, usually driven by the end of last call or a IESG telechat
   date.  The reviewer sends each completed review to the team's mailing
   list, and any other lists that are relevant for document being



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   reviewed.  Often, a thread ensues on one or more of those lists to
   resolve any issues found in the review.

   The secretaries and reviewers from several teams are using a tool
   developed and maintained by Tero Kivinen.  Much of its design
   predates the modern Datatracker.  The application currently keeps its
   own data store, and learns about documents needing review by
   inspecting Datatracker and tools.ietf.org pages.  Most of those pages
   are easy to parse, but the last-call pages, in particular, require
   some effort.  Tighter integration with the Datatracker would simplify
   the logic used to identify documents ready for review, make it
   simpler for the Datatracker to associate reviews with documents, and
   allow users to reuse their Datatracker credentials.  It would also
   make it easier to detect other potential review-triggering events,
   such as a document entering working group last call, or when a RFC's
   standard level is being changed without revising the RFC.  Tero
   currently believes this integration is best achieved by a new
   implementation of the tool.  This document captures requirements for
   that reimplementation, with a focus on the workflows that the new
   implementation must take care not to disrupt.  It also discusses new
   features, including changes suggested for the existing tool at its
   issue tracker [art-trac].

   For more information about the various review teams, see the
   following references

                  +--------------+---------------------+
                  | Gen-ART      | [Gen-ART] [RFC6385] |
                  | Secdir       | [Secdir]            |
                  | AppsDir      | [AppsDir]           |
                  | OPS-dir      | [OPS-dir]           |
                  | RTG-dir      | [RTG-dir]           |
                  | MIB Doctors  | [MIBdoctors]        |
                  | YANG Doctors | [YANGdoctors]       |
                  +--------------+---------------------+

2.  Overview of current workflows

   This section gives a high-level overview of how the review team
   secretaries and reviewers use the existing tool.  It is not intended
   to be comprehensive documentation of how review teams operate.
   Please see the references for those details.

   For many teams, the team's secretary periodically (typically once a
   week) checks the tool for documents it has identified as ready for
   review.  The tool has compiled this list from Last Call announcements
   and IESG telechat agendas.  The secretary creates a set of
   assignments from this list into the reviewer pool, choosing the



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   reviewers in roughly a round-robin order.  That order can be
   perturbed by several factors.  Reviewers have different levels of
   availability.  Some are willing to review multiple documents a month.
   Others may only be willing to review a document every other month.
   The assignment process takes exceptional conditions such as reviewer
   vacations into account.  Furthermore, secretaries are careful not to
   assign a document to a reviewer that is an author, shepherd,
   responsible WG chair, or has some other already existing association
   with the document.  The preference is to get a reviewer with a fresh
   perspective.  The secretary may discover reasons to change
   assignments while going through the list of documents.  In order to
   not cause a reviewer to make a false start on a review, the
   secretaries complete the full list of assignments before sending
   notifications to anyone.  This assignment process can take several
   minutes, and it is possible for new last calls to be issued while the
   secretary is making assignments.  The secretary typically checks to
   see if new documents are ready for review just before issuing the
   assignments, and updates the assignments if necessary.

   Some teams operate in more of a review-on-demand model.  RTG-dir, for
   example, primarily initiates reviews at the request of a Routing AD.
   They may also start an early review at the request of a working group
   chair.  In either case, the reviewers are chosen manually from the
   pool of available reviewers driven by context rather than using a
   round-robin ordering.

   The issued assignments are either sent to the review team's email
   list or are emailed directly to the assigned reviewer.  The
   assignments are reflected in the tool.  For those teams handling
   different types of reviews (Last Call vs Telechat for example), the
   secretary typically processes the documents for each type of review
   separately, and potentially with different assignment criteria.  In
   Gen-ART, for example, the Last Call reviewer for a document will
   almost always get the follow-up Telechat review assignment.
   Similarly, Secdir assigns any re-reviews of a document to the same
   reviewer.  Other teams may choose to assign a different reviewer.

   Reviewers discover their assignments through email or by looking at
   their queue in the tool.  The secretaries for some teams (such as
   OPS-dir and RTG-dir) insulate their team members from using the tool
   directly.  These reviewers only work through the review team's email
   list or through direct email.  On teams that have the reviewers use
   the tool directly, most reviewers only check the tool when they see
   they have an assignment via the team's email list.  A reviewer has
   the opportunity to reject the assignment for any reason.  While the
   tool provides a way to reject assignments, reviewers typically use
   email to coordinate rejections with the team secretary.  The
   secretary will find another volunteer for any rejected assignments.



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   The reviewer can indicate that the assignment is accepted in the tool
   before starting the review, but this feature is rarely used.

   The reviewer sends a completed review to the team's email list or
   secretary, any other lists relevant to the review, and usually the
   draft's primary email alias.  For instance, many last call reviews
   are also sent to the IETF general list.  The teams typically have a
   template format for the review.  Those templates usually start with a
   summary, describing the conclusion of the review.  Typical summaries
   are "Ready for publication" or "On the right track, but has open
   issues".  The reviewer (or in the case of teams that insulate their
   reviewers, the secretary) uses the tool to indicate that the review
   is complete, provides the summary, and has an opportunity to provide
   a link to the review in the archives.  Note, however, that having to
   wait for the document to appear in the archive to know the link to
   paste into the tool is a significant enough impedance that this link
   is often not provided by the reviewer.  The Secdir secretary manually
   collects these links from the team's email list and adds them to the
   tool.

   Occasionally, a document is revised between when a review assignment
   is made and when the reviewer starts the review.  Different teams can
   have different policies about whether the reviewer should review the
   assigned version or the current version.

3.  Requirements

3.1.  Secretariat focused

   o  The Secretariat must be able to configure secretaries and
      reviewers for review teams (by managing Role records).

   o  The Secretariat must be able to perform any secretary action on
      behalf of a review team secretary (and thus, must be able to
      perform any reviewer action on behalf of the reviewer).

3.2.  Review-team Secretary focused

   o  A secretary must be able to see what documents are ready for
      review of a given type (such as a Last Call review)

   o  A secretary must be able to assign reviews for documents that may
      not have been automatically identified as ready for a review of a
      given type.  (In addition to being the primary assignment method
      for teams that only initiate reviews on demand, this allows the
      secretary to work around errors and handle special cases,
      including early review requests.)




Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   o  A secretary must be able to work on and issue a set of assignments
      as an atomic unit.  No assignment should be issued until the
      secretariat declares the set of assignments complete.

   o  The tool must support teams that have multiple secretaries.  The
      tool should warn secretaries that are simultaneously working on
      assignments, and protect against conflcting assignments being
      made.

   o  It must be easy for the secretary to discover that more documents
      have become ready for review while working on an assignment set.

   o  The tool should make preparing the assignment email to the team's
      email list easy.  For instance, the tool could prepare the
      message, give the secretary an opportunity to edit it, and handle
      sending it to the team's email list.

   o  It must be possible for a secretary to indicate that the review
      team will not provide a review for a document (or a given version
      of a document).  This indication should be taken into account when
      presenting the documents that are ready for review of a given
      type.  This will also make it possible to show on a document's
      page that no review is expected from this team.

   o  A secretary must be able to easily see who the next available
      reviewers are, in order.

   o  A secretary must be able to edit a Reviewer's availability, both
      in terms of frequency, not-available-until-date, and skip-next-
      n-assignments.  (See the description of these settings in the
      Reviewer focused section.)

   o  The tool should make it easy for the secretary to see any team
      members that have requested to review a given document when it
      becomes available for review.

   o  The tool should make it easy for the secretary to identify that a
      reviewer is already involved with a document.  The current tool
      allows the secretary to provide a regular expression to match
      against the document name.  If the expression matches, the
      document is not available for assignment to this reviewer.  For
      example, Tero will not be assigned documents matching '^draft-
      (kivinen|ietf-tcpinc)-.*$'.  The tool should also take any roles,
      such as document shepherd, that the Datatracker knows about into
      consideration.

   o  The tool should make it easy for the secretary to see key features
      of a document ready for assignment, such as its length, its



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


      authors, the group and area it is associated with, its title and
      abstract, its states (such as IESG or WG states) and any other
      personnel (such as the shepherd and reviewers already assigned
      from other teams) involved in the draft.

   o  The tool must make it easy for the secretary to detect and process
      re-review requests on the same version of a document (such as when
      a document has an additional last call only to deal with new IPR
      information).

   o  Common operations to groups of documents should be easy for the
      secretary to process as a group with a minimum amount of
      interaction with the tool.  For instance, it should be possible to
      process all the of documents described by the immediately
      preceding bullet with one action.  Similarly, for teams that
      assign re-reviews to the same reviewer, issuing all re-review
      requests should be a simple action.

   o  A secretary must be able to see which reviewers have outstanding
      assignments.

   o  The tool must make it easy for the secretary to see the result of
      previous reviews from this team for a given document.  In Secdir,
      for example, if the request is for a revision that has only minor
      differences, and the previous review result was "Ready", a new
      assignment will not be made.  If the given document replaces one
      or more other prior documents, the tool must make it easy for the
      secretary to see the results of previous reviews of the replaced
      documents.

   o  The tool must make it easy for the secretary to see the result of
      previous reviews from this team for all documents across
      configurable recent periods of time (such as the last 12 months).
      A RTG-dir secretary, for example, would use this result to aid in
      the manual selection of the next reviewer.

   o  The tools must make it easy for the secretary to see the recent
      performance of a reviewer while making an assignment (see
      Section 3.5).  This allows the secretary to detect overburdened or
      unresponsive volunteers earlier in the process.

   o  A secretary must be able to configure the tool to remind them to
      followup when actions are due.  (For instance, a secretary could
      receive email when a review is about to become overdue).

   o  A secretary must be able to assign multiple reviewers to a given
      draft at any time.  In particular, a secretary must be able to




Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


      assign an additional reviewer when an original reviewer indicates
      their review is likely to be only partially complete.

   o  A secretary must be able to withdraw a review assignment.

   o  A secretary must be able to perform any reviewer action on behalf
      of the reviewer.

   o  A secretary must be able to configure the review-team's set of
      reviewers (by managing Role records for the team).

   o  Information about a reviewer must not be lost when a reviewer is
      removed from a team.  (Frequently, reviewers come back to teams
      later.)

   o  A secretary must be able to delegate secretary capabilities in the
      tool (similar to how a working group chair can assign a Delegate).
      This allows review teams to self-manage secretary vacations.

3.3.  Reviewer focused

   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate availability, both in
      frequency of reviews, and as "not available until this date."  The
      current tool speaks of frequency in these terms:

      -  Assign at maximum one new review per week

      -  Assign at maximum one new review per fortnight

      -  Assign at maximum one new review per month

      -  Assign at maximum one new review per two months

         Assign at maximum one new review per quarter

   o  Reviewers must be able to indicate hiatus periods.  Each period
      may be either "soft" or "hard".

      -  A hiatus must have a start date.  It may have an end date, or
         may be indefinite.

      -  During a hiatus, the reviewer will not be included in the
         normal review rotation.  When a provided end date is reached,
         the reviewer will automatically be included in the rotation in
         their usual order.






Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


      -  During a "soft" hiatus, the reviewer must not be assigned new
         reviews, but is expected to complete existing assignments and
         do followup reviews.

      -  During a "hard" hiatus, the reviewer must not be assigned any
         new reviews, and the secretary must be prompted to reassign any
         outstanding or followup reviews.

   o  Reviewers must be able to indicate that they should be skipped the
      next n times they would normally have received an assignment.

   o  Reviewers must be able to indicate that they are transitioning to
      inactive, providing a date for the end of the transition period.
      During this transition time, the reviewer must not be assigned new
      reviews, but is expected to complete outstanding assignments and
      followup reviews.  At the end of the transition period, the
      secretary must be prompted to reassign any outstanding or followup
      reviews.  (This allows review-team members that are taking on,
      say, AD responsibility to transition gracefully to an inactive
      state for the team).

   o  Both the reviewer and the secretary will be notified by email of
      any modifications to a reviewer's availability.

   o  A reviewer must be able to easily discover new review assignments.
      (The tool might send email directly to an assigned reviewer in
      addition to sending the set of assignments to the team's email
      list.  The tool might also use the Django Message framework to let
      a reviewer that's logged into the Datatracker know a new review
      assignment has been made.)

   o  Reviewers must be able to see their current set of outstanding
      assignments, completed assignments, rejected assignments.  The
      presentation of those sets should either be separate, or, if
      combined, the sets should be visually distinct.

   o  A reviewer should be able to request to review a particular
      document.  The draft may be in any state - available and
      unassigned; already assigned to another reviewer; or not yet
      available.

   o  A reviewer must be able to reject a review assignment, optionally
      providing the secretary with an explanation for the rejection.
      The tool will notify the secretary of the rejection by email.

   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate that they have accepted and
      are working on an assignment




Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate that a review is only
      partially completed, asking the secretary to assign an additional
      reviewer.  The tool will notify the secretary of this condition by
      email.

   o  It should be possible for a reviewer to reject or accept a review
      either by using the tool's web interface, or by replying to the
      review assignment email.

   o  It must easy for a reviewer to see when each assigned review is
      due.

   o  A reviewer must be able to configure the tool to remind them when
      actions are due.  (For instance, a reviewer could receive email
      when a review is about to become overdue).

   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate that a review is complete,
      capturing where the review is in the archives, and the high-level
      review-result summary

   o  It must be possible for a reviewer to clearly indicate which
      version of a document was reviewed.  Documents are sometimes
      revised between when a review was assigned and when it is due.
      The tool should note the current version of the document, and
      highlight when the review is not for the current version.

   o  It must be easy for a reviewer to submit a completed review.

      -  The current workflow, where the reviewer sends email to the
         team's email list (possibly copying other lists) and then
         indicates where to find that review must continue to be
         supported.  The tool should make it easier to capture the link
         to review in the team's email list archives (perhaps by
         suggesting links based on a search into the archives).

      -  The tool should allow the reviewer to enter the review into the
         tool via a web form (either as directly-provided text, or
         through a file-upload mechanism).  The tool will ensure the
         review is posted to the appropriate lists, and will construct
         the links to those posts in the archives.

      -  The tool could also allow the reviewer to submit the review to
         the tool by email (perhaps by replying to the assignment).  The
         tool would then ensure the review is posted to the appropriate
         lists.






Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


3.4.  Review Requester and Consumer focused

   o  It should be easy for an AD or group chair to request any type of
      review, but particularly an early review, from a review team.

   o  It should be possible for that person to withdraw a review
      request.

   o  It must be easy to find all reviews of a document when looking at
      the document's main page in the Datatracker.  The reference to the
      review must make it easy to see any responses to the review on the
      email lists it was sent to.  If a document "replaces" one or more
      other documents, reviews of the replaced documents should be
      included in the results.

   o  It must be easy to find all reviews of a document when looking at
      search result pages, and other lists of documents such as the
      documents on a IESG telechat agenda.

3.5.  Statistics focused

   o  It must be easy to see the following, across all teams, a given
      team, or a given reviewer, and independently across all time, or
      across configurable recent periods of time:

      -  How many reviews have been completed

      -  How many reviews are in progress

      -  How many in progress reviews are late

      -  How many completed reviews were late

      -  How many reviews were not completed at all

      -  Average time to complete reviews (from assignment to
         completion)

   o  It must be easy to see, for all teams, for a given team, or for a
      given reviewer, across all time, or across configurable recent
      periods:

      -  Total counts of reviews in each review state (done, rejected,
         etc.)

      -  Total counts of completed reviews by result (ready, ready with
         nits, etc.)




Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   o  The above statistics should also be calculated reflecting the size
      of the documents being reviewed (such as using the number of pages
      or words in the documents).

   o  Where applicable, statistics should take reviewer hiatus periods
      into account.

   o  Access to the above statistics must be easy to configure.  Access
      will be initially limited as follows

      -  The secretariat and ADs can see any statistic.

      -  A team secretary can see any statistics for that team.

      -  A reviewer can see any team aggregate statistics, or their own
         reviewer-specific statistics.

   o  Where possible, the above statistics should be visible as a time-
      series graph.

   o  The implementation should anticipate future enhancements that
      would allow ADs to indicate their position was informed by a given
      review.  Such enhancements would allow reporting correlations
      between reviews and documents that receive one or more discusses.
      However, implementing these enhancements is not part of the
      current project.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses requirements for tools that assist review
   teams.  These requirements do not affect the security of the Internet
   in any significant fashion.  The tools themselves have authentication
   and authorization considerations (team secretaries will be able to do
   different things than reviewers).

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

6.  Acknowledgments

   Tero Kivinen and Henrik Levkowetz were instrumental in forming this
   set of requirements and in developing the initial Django models in
   the appendix.

   The following people provided reviews of this draft: David Black,
   Deborah Brungard, Brian Carpenter, Elwyn Davies, Stephen Farrell,




Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   Joel Halpern, Jonathan Hardwick, Russ Housley, Barry Leiba, Jean
   Mahoney, Randy Presuhn, Gunter Van De Velde, and Martin Vigoureux.

   (If we have missed a reviewer here, or failed to capture or respond
   to a review comment, please retransmit and accept our apologies.)

7.  Changelog

7.1.  03

   o  Fixed frequent typo haitus -> hiatus

7.2.  02

   o  Clarified typical telechat review workflow for secdir in the
      introduction.

   o  Added MIB and Yang doctor teams.

   o  Captured requirement to be able to request a review assignement
      for a given document.

   o  Capture a requirement to gracefully handle teams that have
      multiple secretaries.

   o  Captured that statistics should reflect document size in addition
      to document count.

   o  Noted that assignement rejection is currently coordinated by
      email.

   o  Noted that teams often copy the draft's primary email alias on
      reviews.

   o  Noted that haitus periods should be carefully considered when
      building statistics.

   o  Highlighted a couple of scenarios where the tools needs to send
      email to the secretary.

7.3.  01

   o  Captured that OPS-dir reviewers do not use the tool directly -
      only the secretaries do.

   o  Secretaries must be able to see who has outstanding reviews.

   o  Reviewers must be able to see when assignments are due.



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   o  Captured that RTG-dir reviews documents primarily only at the
      specific request of Routing ADs.

   o  Captured that RTG-dir QA-reviews can be requested by chairs.

   o  Captured that RTG-dir assignments are made by unicast, rather than
      through a directorate list.

   o  Added a requirement to be able to say "this team isn't going to
      review this (version of this) document"

   o  Captured that the secretariat should be able to act on behalf of
      secretaries

   o  Noted that reviewer information must not be lost as reviewers
      leave teams

   o  Captured the notion of a hiatus

   o  Captured the notion of transition to inactive

   o  Secretaries that want reminders should be able to configure the
      tool to prompt them as due dates arrive

   o  Reviewers that want reminders should be able to configure the tool
      to prompt them as due dates arrive

   o  Access to statistics for individuals should initially be limited
      until we have some experience with them.

   o  Clarified the scope of trying to correlate reviews to discusses,
      recognizing this is mostly future work.

   o  Captured that secretaries and reviewers need to be able to handle
      the edge cases when a review needs to be reassigned or an
      additional reviewer needs to be assigned after the initial
      assignee has started.

7.4.  00

   o  Initial Version

8.  Informative References

   [AppsDir]  "Applications Directorate", Work in Progress , April 2015,
              <http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/app/trac/wiki/
              AppsDirReview>.




Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


   [art-trac]
              "Area Review Team Tool - Active Tickets", Work in Progress
              , April 2015, <https://wiki.tools.ietf.org/tools/art/trac/
              report/1>.

   [Gen-ART]  "General Area Review Team Guidelines", Work in Progress ,
              April 2015,
              <http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/gen/trac/wiki>.

   [MIBdoctors]
              "MIB Doctors", Work in Progress , April 2015,
              <http://www.ietf.org/iesg/directorate/mib-doctors.html>.

   [OPS-dir]  "OPS Directorate", Work in Progress , April 2015,
              <https://svn.tools.ietf.org/area/ops/trac/wiki/
              Directorates>.

   [RFC6385]  Barnes, M., Doria, A., Alvestrand, H., and B. Carpenter,
              "General Area Review Team (Gen-ART) Experiences", RFC
              6385, DOI 10.17487/RFC6385, October 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6385>.

   [RTG-dir]  "Routing Directorate", Work in Progress , April 2015,
              <http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/rtg/trac/wiki/RtgDir>.

   [Secdir]   "Security Directorate", Work in Progress , April 2015,
              <http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/sec/trac/wiki/
              SecurityDirectorate>.

   [YANGdoctors]
              "YANG Doctors", Work in Progress , April 2015,
              <http://www.ietf.org/iesg/directorate/yang-doctors.html>.

Appendix A.  A starting point for Django models supporting the review
             tool

 from django.db import models
 from ietf.doc.models import Document
 from ietf.person.models import Email
 from ietf.group.models import Group, Role

 from ietf.name.models import NameModel

 class ReviewRequestStateName(NameModel):
     """ Requested, Accepted, Rejected, Withdrawn, Overtaken By Events,
         No Response , Completed  """

 class ReviewTypeName(NameModel):



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


     """ Early Review, Last Call, Telechat """

 class ReviewResultName(NameModel):
     """Almost ready, Has issues, Has nits, Not Ready,
        On the right track, Ready, Ready with issues,
        Ready with nits, Serious Issues"""

 class Reviewer(models.Model):
     """
     These records associate reviewers with review team, and keeps track
     of admin data associated with the reviewer in the particular team.
     There will be one record for each combination of reviewer and team.
     """
     role        = models.ForeignKey(Role)
     frequency   = models.IntegerField(help_text=
                                   "Can review every N days")
     available   = models.DateTimeField(blank=True,null=True, help_text=
                         "When will this reviewer be available again")
     filter_re   = models.CharField(blank=True)
     skip_next   = models.IntegerField(help_text=
                          "Skip the next N review assignments")

 class ReviewResultSet(models.Model):
     """
     This table provides a way to point out a set of ReviewResultName
     entries which are valid for a given team, in order to be able to
     limit the result choices that can be set for a given review, as a
     function of which team it is related to.
     """
     team        = models.ForeignKey(Group)
     valid       = models.ManyToManyField(ReviewResultName)

 class ReviewRequest(models.Model):
     """
     There should be one ReviewRequest entered for each combination of
     document, rev, and reviewer.
     """
     # Fields filled in on the initial record creation:
     time          = models.DateTimeField(auto_now_add=True)
     type          = models.ReviewTypeName()
     doc           = models.ForeignKey(Document,
                            related_name='review_request_set')
     team          = models.ForeignKey(Group)
     deadline      = models.DateTimeField()
     requested_rev = models.CharField(verbose_name="requested_revision",
                             max_length=16, blank=True)
     state         = models.ForeignKey(ReviewRequestStateName)
     # Fields filled in as reviewer is assigned, and as the review



Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                 August 2015


     # is uploaded
     reviewer      = models.ForeignKey(Reviewer, null=True, blank=True)
     review        = models.OneToOneField(Document, null=True,
                                                    blank=True)
     reviewed_rev  = models.CharField(verbose_name="reviewed_revision",
                                      max_length=16, blank=True)
     result        = models.ForeignKey(ReviewResultName)


Appendix B.  Suggested features deferred for future work

   Brian Carpenter suggested a set of author/editor-focused requirements
   that were deferred for another iteration of improvement.  These
   include providing a way for the editors to acknowledge receipt of the
   review, potentially tracking the email conversation between the
   reviewer and document editor, and indicating which review topics the
   editor believes a new revision addresses.

Authors' Addresses

   Robert Sparks
   Oracle
   7460 Warren Parkway
   Suite 300
   Frisco, Texas  75034
   USA

   Email: rjsparks@nostrum.com


   Tero Kivinen
   INSIDE Secure
   Eerikinkatu 28
   HELSINKI  FI-00180
   FI

   Email: kivinen@iki.fi














Sparks & Kivinen        Expires February 8, 2016               [Page 17]
