 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                               Roger Lapuh
Intended Status: Informational                            Paul Unbehagen
Expires: September 30, 2014                                        Avaya
                                                     Peter Ashwood-Smith
                                                                  Huawei
                                                          Phillip Taylor
                                           Leeds Metropolitan University

                                                          March 31, 2014


                     SPB Deployment Considerations 
                     draft-lapuh-spb-deployment-02


Abstract

   Based on many live deployments, including the Sochi Winter Olympics
   2014 network and multiple interoperability events, this document
   provides advice to network operators about best practices when
   implementing IEEE 802.1aq Shortest Path Bridging (SPB) networks. It
   is principally addressed to system integrators and solution
   providers, including those that do not yet support SPB. Some advice
   to protocol implementers is also provided.  The intention of the
   advice is to facilitate multi vendor network deployments as well as
   provide guidance for new installations.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at       
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at     
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 30th, 2014.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2  Motivation and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  General Deployment Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Infrastructure Configuration Recommendations . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1  IS-IS SYSTEM ID  AND SPB NICKNAME CONFIGURATION . . . . . .  6
     3.2  SPB NETWORK LINKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3  SPB AND SPANNING TREE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.4  SPB FABRIC CONFIGURATION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.5  SPB SERVICES MAPPING  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.6  SPB AND IP ROUTING  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Standard Improvement Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  OA&M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Tenant Separation Considerations and Payment Card Industry
       Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7  Deployment Experiences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.3  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.4  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13















































 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


1  Introduction

   This document provides a set of recommendations and reference points
   for the deployment of IEEE 802.1aq/RFC6329 - Shortest Path Bridging
   (SPB) networks based on MAC in MAC encapsulation. It focuses on the
   key network design items and does not go into describing the protocol
   details.

   The IEEE 802.1aq standard has been ratified in March 2011, thus the
   recommendations described here are focusing on the standards based
   implementations.

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


1.2  Motivation and Background


   This document provides a checklist of recommendations which are based
   on multiple documented multi vendor Interoperability tests [SPBWIKI]
   and more than three years of standards based production deployment
   experiences including the following scenarios: Inter data center
   connectivity for data center migrations and consolidations, hosted
   data center virtualization, multi-site WAN backbone over carrier
   Ethernet service infrastructures, campus LAN switching, IP Multicast
   based video surveillance solutions and event and exposition networks.
     

   It summarizes the learning's and experience acquired during those
   activities. New SPB installations can benefit from following the
   recommendations und deployment guidelines below.  

2.  General Deployment Recommendations

   All the following described deployments have shown sub second
   convergence times in case of link or nodal failures and recovery
   within the SPB fabric.

   Recommendation 1:

   To  achieve quick failure recovery, connection oriented point-to-
   point interfaces have been used, and shared segments between SPB
   fabric nodes have been avoided. Ethernet based methods such as
   Ethernet based remote fault indication (RFI), IEEE 802.ag (CFM) or
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   similar are used to detect link faults quickly to trigger path
   recalculations in case of a link or nodal failure.  

   Recommendation 2:

   The end-point-only provisioning for network virtualization with SPB
   has proven very effective in many of the installations described
   below.

   SPB's service ID (I-SID) with its (24 bit) addressing space has
   helped to keep the VLAN numbering (1 to 4095) local to the respective
   access network region (e.g. Data Center or tenant), avoiding the
   complexity of managing a global VLAN space out of a range of only 12
   bits. In larger networks, it is recommended to define a global
   virtualization schema based on I-SIDs, and not tie VLAN ids directly
   to ISIDs ids in a 1 to 1 relationship throughout the network. 

   Following this practice allows implementing SPB interconnect fabrics
   spanning multiple data centers with independent VLAN addressing
   schemas in each data center. This practice is proven especially
   effective during data center consolidation efforts.

   Recommendation 3:

   It has been seen that using SPB to keep Spanning Tree regions local
   to access networks (therefore reducing the impact of network changes)
   or bringing SPB all the way out to the user access switches, thus
   removing the need for Spanning Tree all together, has significantly
   improved end user experience and at the same time simplified network
   implementations and deployments. Where possible it is recommended to
   use SPB as a Spanning Tree protocol replacement.

   Recommendation 4:

   Besides the need for L2 traffic virtualization for hypervisor
   migrations, most deployments were also required to route virtualized
   traffic between IP subnets/broadcast domains which are provided with
   an SPB service. 

   Routing between services (ISIDs) can be done with dedicated routers
   external to the SPB fabric, but there is a performance and deployment
   advantage if SPB nodes route traffic between services similar to
   traditional routing switches that are able to perform routing between
   VLANs/IP subnets in band (on SPB interconnect links). With this
   approach IEEE 802.1aq based routing deployment models are similar to
   traditional IEEE 802.1Q based networks, with the advantage that the
   routing instance can easily be migrated to any fabric node by
   extending the service accordingly.  
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


3.  Infrastructure Configuration Recommendations

3.1  IS-IS SYSTEM ID  AND SPB NICKNAME CONFIGURATION

   As of this writing the IEEE SPB standard defines a single ISIS area
   for an SPB region, even though large SPB regions can be defined and
   operated. In the future this will likely be extended to multi-area
   support.


   Recommendation 5:

   It is a good practice to manually configure System IDs and SPB
   Nicknames with a simple identification scheme, coordinating the
   system ID numerically with the SPB Nickname for ease of
   troubleshooting. It is also a good practice to define an area per SPB
   region. It is recommended to use the upper 24 bits to indicate the
   area ID.  For example, System IDs start with 00.49.bb00.1000 for the
   first node, 0049.bb00.2000 for the second node and so on.  In these
   System IDs, 0049 indicates a private address, the "00bb" indicates
   area "00bb", and 1000, 2000, etc., indicate the node number (1
   through n). It is also a good practice to keep the first two and last
   two nibbles at 0 so that the System ID looks like this:
   00xx.xxxx.xx00. This is to avoid interfering with the multicast bit
   as well as other locally assigned MAC addresses, especially if the
   system ID is manually derived from the chassis MAC address. These
   System IDs correspond to SPB Nicknames of 1.bb.10, 1.bb,20, 1.bb.30
   for nodes 1, 2 and 3 respectively, and so on. Using manually
   configured BMAC addresses and also coordinating the BMAC with the
   System ID and SPB Nickname enhances-, ease of identification for
   management and troubleshooting as well as making possible future PBB-
   EVPNs.

   As an additional option, with the goal to reduce configuration tasks,
   System-IDs could be automatically inherited from the systems chassis
   MAC addresses. The SPB Nickname could also be derived from the lower
   bits of the chassis MAC. This approach could be targeted for SPB
   access switches where a simplified deployment model would be of most
   interest.

3.2  SPB NETWORK LINKS

   Details on Recommendation 1:

   SPB Fabric inter-connections in the preceding SPB deployments are all
   based on point-to-point Ethernet links, optical CWDM/DWDM connections
   or some sort of transparent E-LINE service. By avoiding connecting
   SPB over a shared segment (or E-LAN) failure detection and network
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   convergence times have been kept very low. Failure detection and
   recovery is thus not dependent on IS-IS hello-multiplier intervals
   but triggered by lower layer protocols. 

   Such E-LINE services (to interconnect SPB nodes) can be based on any
   type of transparent Ethernet service (WDM, MPLS or PBB based), as
   long as they are loop free and the service Maximum Transmission Unit
   (MTU) size allows for a minimum of [MTU] 1544 bytes for non Jumbo
   Frames.

   Tagged IP: = 1522 = 1500(IP MTU)+ 2(Ethertype)+ 12(MAC SA/DA) +
   4(TAG) + 4 (CRC) and MacInMac Header = 22 bytes. 

   On dark-fiber based Ethernet connections, link failures can be
   detected by the Ethernet remote fault detection mechanisms; however,
   on service provider based links, there can be multiple active
   components between two SPB nodes, and thus not all failures can be
   detected by monitoring link status indications. To ensure quick fail-
   over times across an E-LINE service, an end-to-end connectivity check
   mechanism such as 802.1ag based Connectivity Check Mechanism (CCM),
   or similar, is recommended. 


3.3  SPB AND SPANNING TREE

   Details on Recommendation 3:

   Many networks today are still operating with some sort of Spanning
   Tree (MSTP/RSTP or proprietary versions). SPB can be leveraged to
   separate Spanning Tree regions into smaller independent domains.
   Therefore a Spanning Tree root bridge change impacts smaller regions
   only and is not spread across the whole network. Keeping root bridge
   elections and the effect of Topology Change Notifications local has
   proven a significant improvement of network availability in larger
   Spanning Tree deployments.

   Even though SPB allows extending Spanning Tree (MSTP) domains over an
   SPB region by sharing a MSTP-CST tree, it is only recommended keeping
   MSTP enabled on SPB NNI links if those links also need to transport
   non-SBP VLANs in parallel to SPB based L2 services. Result of keeping
   MSTP enabled on SPB NNI links will be, that all VLANs which share the
   same MSTP-CST will be affected by a CST topology change. Disabling
   MSTP on SPB NNI links will avoid any participation of SPB services in
   the CST state transitions and thus will increase network
   availability.



 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


3.4  SPB FABRIC CONFIGURATION

   Recommendation 6:

   SPB is part of the IEEE standard framework, thus it is fully
   interoperable and compatible with all other IEEE standards. Therefore
   SPB can be added to any IEEE standards based network infrastructure
   without changing existing configurations, as long as there is no VLAN
   ID overlap. In an SPB network the Backbone VLAN IDs (BVIDs) are used
   to separate and load-spread SPB traffic across multiple paths. The
   802.1aq standard defines up to 16 BVIDs. These BVIDs need to be
   consistently configured across the SPB region. The BVIDs can be
   selected out of the available VLAN range [1-4095], however, using a
   pre-defined set of VLANs is recommended.

   Usually the lowest 4000 IDs are used by customers for network access
   VLAN configurations; thus it has been seen as a good practice to use
   BVLAN numbering that is in the highest upper addressable range, e.g,
   starting with 4051 for the primary BVLAN and all switches and 4052 to
   4066 for the subsequent ones. It is recommended to use at least two
   BVIDs for load-spreading reasons.

3.5  SPB SERVICES MAPPING

   Details on Recommendation 2:

   When network virtualization is extended between regions, for example,
   to support for Virtual Machine movements, it is very important to use
   a unique virtualization index to achieve this. SPB, with its 802.1ah
   based Service-ID (I-SID) provides an inherent virtualization
   technique which allows local VLAN significance and using the I-SID as
   a global virtualization index. This is especially true in VMWare
   deployments where it is advantageous for the Portgroup IDs of VCenter
   instances to correspond with the VM VLAN memberships. With SPB, it is
   thus easily possible to run a hosted environment with multiple
   VCenter instances in parallel on the same infrastructure, without
   having any VLAN space interference. In the preceding virtual Data
   Center deployment where multiple domains are interconnected, the VLAN
   spaces can be kept independent of each other, and the virtualization
   is achieved by the usage of the 16 million I-SIDs.

3.6  SPB AND IP ROUTING

   Details on Recommendation 4:

   In an SPB network the typical size of broadcast domains of user and
   server subnets are not being changed from what one is used to with
   traditional technologies. This means that there is always a need for
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   routing functionality. The best case is if a SPB node can directly
   route individual IP subnets which consist of I-SIDs, similar to how
   those nodes can route VLAN based IP subnets. Optimally this routing
   should be available within the SPB Ethernet fabric between I-SID
   based services. In order to provide IP routing redundancy for access
   networks, VRRP or similar technologies should be available on fabric
   nodes at the same time.



4.  Standard Improvement Recommendations

   Recommendation 7:

   In an SPB network, link-state update propagation is achieved by SPB
   nodes re-laying topology change notifications through IS-IS on a hop
   by hop basis in the control plane. With an assumption of 10ms relay
   latency per node, a ring of 20 SPB nodes could see up to 100ms of
   propagation latency to reach all nodes in the ring. As an
   optimization of SPB, the default L2 service instance described in
   IEEE 802.1aq could be used to flood all propagation changes into this
   default service, reducing the propagation delay in this example from
   100ms to 10ms. The SPB IEEE standard could be enhanced to also
   include this default-flooding behavior.


5.  OA&M

   Recommendation 8:

   In all deployment experiences, the use of  L2 based OAM capabilities
   have been invaluable in managing the network.

   It is recommended that IEEE 802.1ag based connectivity check
   mechanisms: Layer 2 Ping, Layer 2 Traceroute and Layer 2 Tracetree
   are being implemented.


6.  Tenant Separation Considerations and Payment Card Industry Security
   Requirements

   Customer, tenant and application separation are key requirements in
   provider or cloud hosting solutions, however are also becoming a key
   requirement in any Enterprise network where credit card transactions
   are being relayed. SPB separates any type of traffic at the edge of
   the SPB region into its own service instance (I-SID). Classification
   into the I-SID can be done based on port, vlan, a combination of
   port/vlan or any other unique packet identifier. Once a customer- or
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014               [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   application traffic is classified into an I-SID, it is kept separate
   until it exits the SPB region, very similar to MPLS with its tunnel
   and service labels. In SPB the "tunnel label" is comprised of the
   BMAC pair and the "service label", which is the I-SID. Thus SPB is as
   secure as any other packet switching solution. Today there are many
   service provider based networks in production using the same 802.1ah
   (PBB) packet encapsulation methods as SPB is using.


7  Deployment Experiences

7.1  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO A 

   SPB AS INTER-DATACENTER-FABRIC FOR DC REDUNDANCY OR DC MIGRATIONS 

   Typically in a large enterprise core, it is not viewed as good
   practice to extend L2 broadcast domains across the backbone network.
   However, with the advent of server virtualization, it has become a
   common requirement to extend server VLAN segments between geo-
   redundant Data Centers to dynamically, efficiently and cost
   effectively leverage the ability to perform Virtual Machine
   migrations and run load balancing techniques across multiple Data
   Centers. The deployment of SPB as a data center connect allows the
   following challenges to be addressed:

   In many cases SPB can be deployed on the existing network
   architecture with IS-IS running side by side and independently from
   other routing protocols such as OSPF. IS-IS or OSPF is being used to
   populate the IP routing table and provide L3 routed connectivity. IS-
   IS is being used for SPB, bringing the ability to extend server VLANs
   across the backbone. Typically the server VLANs to be extended across
   the network are locally configured within the Data Centers, on the
   server access (i.g. Top of Rack) switches, the server VLANs are
   assigned to a service ID (I-SID) and then extended across the SPB
   network, thus becoming available in any other server access switch in
   the local or if required remote data center. The distribution nodes
   can act as a routing gateway for the server VLANs. VRRP is also being
   used to create a single default gateway IP address for the server
   VMs. The VRRP instance per Server IP-subnet thus exists on all
   distribution nodes and provides redundant and distributed default
   gateway functionality. Core failure recovery times in the SPB region
   can be kept well below 1 second and L3 recovery times, depends on the
   configured VRRP timers.



7.2  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO B 

 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014              [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   SPB TO RE-ARCHITECT SECURITY ZONES  

   There are other valid reasons why it might be necessary to extend L2
   segments across the enterprise core. A good example is a major
   manufacturing plant which has a very rigorous design based on a pure
   IP routed architecture with a strong focus on firewalling different
   parts of the network. This is achieved by physically wedging
   firewalls within the physical topology in such a way as to deny any
   unwanted interaction between different network zones. The security
   provided by this model has to be offset by the rigidity it imposes in
   terms of where devices are allowed to be connected to the network. In
   this particular example, connecting devices in locations where they
   were not initially intended to be located was addressed by laying
   additional cabling, with the costs and delays that this involves.
   Once deployed, SPB brought to this model the ability to decouple the
   physical infrastructure from the logical connectivity running above
   it. This means that it is no longer necessary to wedge firewalls into
   the physical topology to intercept traffic, but rather let SPB force
   L2 VLANs to reach the desired firewalls, wherever those firewalls
   might be located on the network. It is now possible to connect
   devices anywhere on the physical network infrastructure and simply
   connect these devices to the VLAN segment to which they need to
   belong.


7.3  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO C 

   SPB FOR CAMPUS VIRTUALIZATION 

   Another example of where it is useful to extend L2 segments can be
   found in the health care vertical. An operational challenge, typical
   of most hospitals, is to be able to support network connectivity for
   mobile medical equipment which typically needs to connect to a server
   application hosted in the Data Center. The real challenge with this
   equipment is often the fact that it is supplied and maintained by
   separate, often external, technicians with little or no IP skills. As
   such this equipment is usually not able, or not configured, to use
   DHCP and instead uses a single flat IP subnet which encompasses the
   mobile units as well as the server application in the Data Center.
   The hospital's network team essentially has limited control over the
   IP configuration of these devices and hence a desire to segregate
   such applications within a constrained L2 service. By deploying SPB
   L2 instances, it is now possible to much more easily manage such
   applications.


7.4  DEPLOYMENT SCENARIO D 

 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014              [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   SPB AS MULTI-TENANT FABRIC SOLUTION 

   In a multi-tenant deployment SPB was leveraged to provide secured and
   separated services for several tenants. In this implementation SPB
   leverages 10 Gigabit Ethernet heavily. In the two geo-disbursed data
   centers LAN and IP connectivity is utilized in a way that makes both
   appear as one virtual data center. A common 3-tier design is utilized
   for the entire network. There may be multiple tenants per edge which
   are then segregated into their own private broadcast domain.

   Over 500 L2 services are spread across the network providing IP
   subnet connectivity to any of the tenants. At the data center those
   IP subnets are assigned to over a dozen of Virtual Router Forwarding
   (VRF)instances corresponding to their security requirements. VRRP is
   used to provide router redundancy.

   Layer 3 routing between VRF instances, hence between tenants, to
   external organizations and to the Internet is performed by stateful
   firewalls.

   This simplified model utilizing Layer 2 I-SIDs, including routing
   between service instances, across a common SPB backbone allows this
   solution provider to quickly and effectively extend either Layer 2
   services or Layer 3 services to any location in the network for any
   application.


   For Voice over IP a Quality of Service (QoS) framework for traffic
   prioritization has been employed. IP Differentiated Services
   (DiffServ) EF DSCP and several specific AF DSCP groups are mapped
   into the appropriate 802.1p priority classes at the SPB BEB nodes to
   provide the necessary traffic prioritization within the SPB backbone.
     



8  Security Considerations

   Security implications of SPB deployments are to be discussed in
   separate documents. 


9  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA


5  References
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014              [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


5.1  Normative References


5.2  Informative References


   [RFC6329] Fedyk, D., "IS-IS Extensions Supporting IEEE 802.1aq
   Shortest Path Bridging" July 2011

   [SPBWIKI] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shortest_Path_Bridging

Authors' Addresses


   Roger Lapuh (editor)
   Avaya
   Wallisellen, 8304 Switzerland
   EMail: rogerlapuh@avaya.com


   Paul Unbehagen
   Avaya
   1300 W. 120th Avenue 
   Westminster, CO 80234 USA 
   Email: unbehagen@avaya.com


   Peter Ashwood-Smith (editor)
   Huawei Technologies Canada Ltd.
   303 Terry Fox Drive, Suite 400
   Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3J1 CANADA
   EMail: Peter.AshwoodSmith@huawei.com


   Phillip Taylor
   Leeds Metropolitan University
   404 Portland Building
   Calverley Street
   Leeds, LS1 3HE, UK
   Email: p.p.taylor@leedsmet.ac.uk





   Steven Emert
   Avaya
   225 South Sixth Street, Suite 4350
 


Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014              [Page 13]

INTERNET DRAFT       SPB Deployment Recommendations            March 5th


   Minneapolis, Minnesota  55402-4619 US
   Email:  semert@avaya.com


   Ludovico Stevens (editor)
   Avaya
   25 Allee Pierre Ziller
   06560 Valbonne France
   EMail: ludovicostev@avaya.com


   Srikanth Keesara
   Avaya
   600 Technology Park
   Billerica MA 01821 US
   EMmail: skeesara@avaya.com



































Lapuh, R.              Expires September 30, 2014              [Page 14]
