

                                                                           
   CCAMP Working Group                            Jean-Philippe Vasseur 
   IETF Internet Draft                                         (Editor) 
   Proposed status: Informational                         Cisco Systems 
                                                         Yuichi Ikejiri 
                                                     NTT Communications 
                                                            Corporation 
                                                          Raymond Zhang 
                                            Infonet Service Corporation 
                                                                           
   Expires: November 2005                                      May 2005 
    
    
       Reoptimization of Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Traffic 
            Engineering (TE) loosely routed Label Switch Path (LSP) 
                                      
                draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
 
  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
  applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
  have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
  aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
  other groups may also distribute working documents as 
  Internet-Drafts. 
 
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
 
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
 
  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). All Rights Reserved. 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
Abstract 
    
   This document defines a mechanism for the reoptimization of loosely 
   routed MPLS and GMPLS (Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching) 
   Traffic Engineering LSPs. A loosely routed LSP is defined as one 
   that does not contain a full explicit route identifying each LSR 
   along the path of the LSP at the time it is signaled by the ingress 
   LSR. Such an LSP is signaled with no ERO, with an ERO that contains 
   at least one loose hop, or with an ERO that contains an abstract 
   node that is not a simple abstract node (that is, an abstract node 
   that identifies more than one LSR). This document proposes a 
   mechanism that allows a TE LSP head-end LSR to trigger a new path re-
   evaluation on every hop having a next hop defined as a loose or 
   abstract hop and a mid-point LSR to signal to the head-end LSR that a 
   better path exists (compared to the current path in use) or that the 
   TE LSP must be reoptimized because of some maintenance required on 
   the TE LSP path.   
    
   The proposed mechanism applies to the cases of intra and inter-domain 
   (IGP area or Autonomous System) packet and non-packet TE LSPs 
   following a loosely routed path. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of contents 
 
   1. Notice.........................................................3 
   2. Introduction...................................................3 
   3. Establishment of a loosely routed TE LSP.......................4 
   4. Reoptimization of a loosely routed TE LSP path.................5 
   5. Signalling extensions..........................................6 
      5.1 Path re-evaluation request.................................6 
      5.2 New error value sub-codes..................................6 
   6. Mode of operation..............................................7 
      6.1 Head-end reoptimization control............................7 
      6.2 Reoptimization triggers....................................7 
      6.3 Head-end request versus mid-point explicit notification 
      modes..........................................................7 
   5.3.1 Head-end request mode.......................................7 
   5.3.2 Mid-point explicit notification mode........................9 
   5.3.3 ERO caching.................................................9 
   7. Interoperability..............................................10 
   8. Security considerations.......................................10 
   9. IANA considerations...........................................10 
   10. Acknowledgments..............................................10 
   11. Intellectual property considerations.........................11 
 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 2] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
   12. References...................................................11 
   11.1 Normative references........................................11 
   11.2 Informative references......................................11 
   13. Authors' Addresses...........................................12 
   14. Full Copyright Statement.....................................12 
 
1. Notice 
    
   The procedures described in this document are entirely optional 
   within an MPLS or GMPLS network. Implementations that do not support 
   the procedures described in this document will interoperate 
   seamlessly with those that do. Further, an implementation that does 
   not support the procedures described in this document will not be 
   impacted or implicated by a neighboring implementation that does 
   implement the procedures. 
    
   An ingress implementation that chooses not to support the procedures 
   described in this document may still achieve re-optimization by 
   periodically issuing a speculative make-before-break replacement of 
   an LSP without trying to discovery whether a more optimal path is 
   available in a downstream domain. Such a procedure would not be in 
   conflict with any mechanisms not already documented in [RFC3209] and 
   [RFC3473]. 
    
2. Introduction 
    
   The Traffic Engineering Work Group has specified a set of 
   requirements for inter-area [INTER-AREA-TE-REQ] and inter-AS [INTER-
   AS-TE-REQ] MPLS Traffic Engineering. Both requirements documents 
   specify the need for some mechanism providing an option for the head-
   end to control the reoptimization process, should a more optimal path 
   exist in a downstream domain (IGP area or Autonomous System). 
    
   This document defines a solution to meet this requirement and 
   proposes a set of mechanisms that allow: 
    
      - The TE LSP head-end LSR to trigger a new path re-evaluation on 
     every hop having a next hop defined as a loose hop or abstract 
     node,   
    
      - A mid-point LSR to signal to the head-end LSR that either a 
     better path exists to reach a loose/abstract hop (compared to the 
     current path in use) or that the TE LSP must be reoptimized because 
     of some maintenance required on the TE LSP path. A better path is 
     defined as a lower cost path, where the cost is determined by the 
     metric used to compute the path.  
    



 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 3] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
3. Establishment of a loosely routed TE LSP 
 
   In the context of this document, a loosely routed LSP is defined as 
   one that does not contain a full explicit route identifying each LSR 
   along the path of the LSP at the time it is signaled by the ingress 
   LSR. Such an LSP is signaled with no ERO, with an ERO that contains 
   at least one loose hop, or with an ERO that contains an abstract 
   node that is not a simple abstract node (that is, an abstract node 
   that identifies more than one LSR). As defined in [RFC3209], loose 
   hops are listed in the Explicit Route Object (ERO) of the RSVP Path 
   message with the L flag of the IPv4 or the IPv6 prefix sub-object 
   set.  
    
   Each LSR along the path whose next hop is specified as a loose hop or 
   a non-specific abstract node triggers a path computation (also 
   referred to as an ERO expansion), before forwarding the RSVP Path 
   message downstream. The computed path may either be partial (up to 
   the next loose hop) or complete (set of strict hops up to the TE LSP 
   destination). 
    
   Note that the examples in the rest of this document are provided in 
   the context of MPLS inter-area TE but the proposed mechanism equally 
   applies to loosely routed paths within a single routing domain and 
   across multiple Autonomous Systems. 
    
   The examples below are provided with OSPF as the IGP but the 
   described set of mechanisms similarly apply to IS-IS. 
    
   An example of an explicit loosely routed TE LSP signaling. 
    
   <---area 1--><-area 0--><-area 2-> 
    
    R1---R2----R3---R6    R8---R10 
     |          |    |   / | \  |    
     |          |    |  /  |  \ | 
     |          |    | /   |   \| 
    R4---------R5---R7----R9---R11 
    
   Assumptions 
   - R3, R5, R8 and R9 are ABRs 
   - The path of an inter-area TE LSP T1 from R1 (head-end LSR) to R11 
   (tail-end LSR) is defined on R1 as the following loosely routed path: 
   R1-R3(loose)-R8(loose)-R11(loose). R3, R8 and R11 are defined as 
   loose hops. 
    
   Step 1: R1 determines that the next hop (R3) is a loose hop (not 
   directly connected to R1) and then performs an ERO expansion 
   operation to reach the next loose hops R3. The new ERO becomes: 
   R2(S)-R3(S)-R8(L)-R11(L) where: 
      S: Strict hop (L=0) 
 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 4] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
      L: Loose hop (L=1) 
    
   The R1-R2-R3 path obeys T1's set of constraints. 
    
   Step 2: the RSVP Path message is then forwarded by R1 following the 
   ERO path and reaches R3 with the following content: R8(L)-R11(L) 
    
   Step 3: R3 determines that the next hop (R8) is a loose hop (not 
   directly connected to R3) and then performs an ERO expansion 
   operation to reach the next loose hops R8. The new ERO becomes: 
   R6(S)-R7(S)-R8(S)-R11(L).  
    
   Note: in this example, the assumption is made that the path is 
   computed on a per loose hop basis, also referred to a partial route 
   computation. Note that some path computation techniques may result in 
   complete paths (set of strict hops up to the final destination). 
    
   Step 4: the same procedure applies at R8 to reach T1's destination 
   (R11). 
    
4. Reoptimization of a loosely routed TE LSP path 
 
   Once a loosely routed explicit TE LSP is set up, it is maintained 
   through normal RSVP procedures. During TE LSP life time, a more 
   optimal path might appear between an LSR and its next loose hop (for 
   the sake of illustration, suppose in the example above that a link 
   between R6 and R8 is added or restored that provides a preferable 
   path between R3 and R8 (R3-R6-R8) than the existing R3-R6-R7-R8 
   path). Since a preferable (e.g. shorter) path might not be visible 
   from the head-end LSR by means of the IGP if it does not belong to 
   the head-end IGP area, the head-end cannot make use of this shorter 
   path (and reroute the LSP using a make before break) when 
   appropriate. Hence, some mechanism is required to detect the 
   existence of such a preferable path and to notify the head-end 
   accordingly. 
    
   This document defines a mechanism that allows:  
    
        - A head-end LSR to trigger on every LSR whose next hop is a 
        loose hop or an abstract node the re-evaluation of the current 
        path in order to detect a potential more optimal path, 
    
        - A mid-point LSR whose next hop is a loose-hop or an abstract 
        node to signal (using a new Error value sub-code carried in a 
        RSVP PathErr message) to the head-end that a more preferable 
        path exists (a path with a lower cost, where the cost definition 
        is determined by some metric). 
    
   Then once the existence of such a preferable path is notified to the 
   head-end LSR, the head-end LSR can decide (depending on the TE LSP 
 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 5] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
   characteristics) whether to perform a TE LSP graceful reoptimization 
   such as the "Make Before Break" procedure defined in [RFC3209].  
    
   There is another scenario whereby notifying the head-end of the 
   existence of a better path is desirable: if the current path is about 
   the fail due to some (link or node) required maintenance. 
    
   This allows the head-end to reoptimize a TE LSP making use of the non 
   disruptive make before break procedure if and only if a preferable 
   path exists and if such a reoptimization is desired. 
    
5. Signalling extensions 
    
   A new flag in the SESSION ATTRIBUTE object and new Error value sub-
   codes in the ERROR SPEC object are proposed in this document (to be 
   assigned by IANA). 
    
5.1 Path re-evaluation request 
    
   The following new flag of the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object (C-Type 1 and 
   7) is defined (suggested value to be confirmed by IANA): 
    
           Path re-evaluation request:  0x20 
    
   This flag indicates that a path re-evaluation (of the current path in 
   use) is requested. Note that this does not trigger any LSP Reroute 
   but instead just signals the request to evaluate whether a preferable 
   path exists.  
    
   Note: in case of link bundling for instance, although the resulting 
   ERO might be identical, this might give the opportunity for a mid-
   point LSR to locally select another link within a bundle, although 
   strictly speaking, the ERO has not changed. 
    
5.2 New error value sub-codes 
    
   As defined in [RFC3209], the ERROR-CODE 25 in ERROR SPEC object 
   corresponds to a Notify Error.  
    
   This document adds three new error value sub-codes (suggested values 
   to be confirmed by IANA): 
    
      6  Preferable path exists 
      7  Local link maintenance required 
      8  Local node maintenance required 
    
   The details about the local maintenance required modes are detailed 
   in section 5.3.2 
    

 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 6] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
6. Mode of operation 
    
6.1 Head-end reoptimization control 
    
   The notification process of a preferable path (shorter path or new 
   path due to some maintenance required on the current path) is by 
   nature de-correlated from the reoptimization operation. In other 
   words, the location where a potentially preferable path is discovered 
   does not have to be where the TE LSP is actually reoptimized. This 
   document applies to the context of a head-end reoptimization. 
    
6.2 Reoptimization triggers 
    
   There are three possible reoptimization triggers: 
    
   - Timer-based: a reoptimization is triggered (process evaluating 
   whether a more optimal path can be found) when a configurable timer 
   expires, 
   - Event-driven: a reoptimization is triggered when a particular 
   network event occurs (such as a "Link-UP" event), 
   - Operator-driven: a reoptimization is manually triggered by the 
   Operator. 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED for an implementation supporting the extensions 
   proposed in this document to support the aforementioned modes as path 
   re-evaluation triggers. 
    
6.3 Head-end request versus mid-point explicit notification modes 
    
   This document defines two modes: 
    
        1) "Head-end requesting mode": the request for a new path 
        evaluation of a loosely routed TE LSP is requested by the head-
        end LSR. 
         
        2) "Mid-point explicit notification": a mid-point LSR having 
        determined that a preferable path (than the current path is use) 
        exists or having the need to perform a link/node local 
        maintenance explicitly notifies the head-end LSR which will in 
        turn decide whether to perform a reoptimization. 
    
6.3.1 Head-end request mode 
 
   In this mode, when a timer-based reoptimization is triggered on the 
   head-end LSR or the operator manually requests a reoptimization, the 
   head-end LSR immediately sends an RSVP Path message with the "Path 
   re-evaluation request" bit of the SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object set. This 
   bit is then cleared in subsequent RSVP path messages sent downstream. 
   In order to handle the case of a lost Path message, the solution 

 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 7] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
   consists of relying on the reliable messaging mechanism described in 
   [REFRESH-REDUCTION]. 
    
   Upon receiving a Path message with the "Path re-evaluation request" 
   bit set, every LSR for which the next abstract node contained in the 
   ERO is defined as a loose hop/abstract node, performs the following 
   set of actions: 
    
   A path re-evaluation is triggered and the newly computed path is 
   compared to the existing path: 
         
        - If a preferable path can be found, the LSR performing the path 
        re-evaluation MUST immediately send an RSVP PathErr to the head-
        end LSR (Error code 25 (Notify), Error sub-code=6 (better path 
        exists)). At this point, the LSR MAY decide to not propagate 
        such bit in subsequent RSVP Path messages sent downstream for 
        the re-evaluated TE LSP: this mode is the RECOMMENDED mode for 
        the reasons described below.  
                 
        The sending of an RSVP PathErr Notify message "Preferable path 
        exists" to the head-end LSR will notify the head-end LSR of the 
        existence of a preferable path (e.g in a downstream area/AS or 
        in another location within a single domain). Hence, triggering 
        additional path re-evaluations on downstream nodes is 
        unnecessary. The only motivation to forward subsequent RSVP Path 
        messages with the "Path re-evaluation request" bit of the 
        SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object set would be to trigger path re-
        evaluation on downstream nodes that could in turn cache some 
        potentially better paths downstream with the objective to reduce 
        the signaling setup delay, should a reoptimization be performed 
        by the head-end LSR. 
                 
        - If no preferable path can be found, the recommended mode is 
        for an LSR to relay the request (by setting the "Path re-
        evaluation" bit of the SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object in RSVP path 
        message sent downstream).  
         
   Note that, by preferable path, we mean a path having a lower cost.  
    
   If the RSVP Path message with the "Path re-evaluation request" bit 
   set is lost, then the next request will be sent when the next 
   reoptimization trigger will occur on the head-end LSR. The solution 
   to handle RSVP reliable messaging has been defined in [REFRESH-
   REDUCTION]. 
    
   The network administrator may decide to establish some local policy 
   specifying to ignore such request or to consider those requests not 
   more frequently than a certain rate. 
    

 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 8] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
   The proposed mechanism does not make any assumption of the path 
   computation method performed by the ERO expansion process. 
 
6.3.2 Mid-point explicit notification mode 
 
   In this mode, a mid-point LSR whose next hop is a loose hop or an 
   abstract node can locally trigger a path re-evaluation when a 
   configurable timer expires, some specific events occur (e.g. link-up 
   event for example) or the user explicitly requests it. If a 
   preferable path is found compared to the existing one, the LSR sends 
   an RSVP PathErr to the head-end LSR (Error code 25 (Notify), Error 
   sub-code=6 ("preferable path exists").  
    
   There are other circumstances whereby any mid-point LSR MAY send an 
   RSVP PathErr message with the objective for the TE LSP to be rerouted 
   by its head-end LSR: when a link or a node will go down for local 
   maintenance reasons. In this case, the LSR where a local maintenance 
   must be performed is responsible for sending an RSVP PathErr message 
   with Error code 25 and Error sub-code=7 or 8 depending on the 
   affected network element (link or node). Then the first upstream node 
   having performed the ERO expansion MUST perform the following set of 
   actions: 
         
        - The link (sub-code=7) or the node (sub-code=8) MUST be 
        locally registered for further reference (the TE database must 
        be updated) 
         
        - The RSVP PathErr message MUST be immediately forwarded 
        upstream to the head-end LSR. Note that in the case of TE LSP 
        spanning multiple administrative domains, it may be desirable 
        for the boundary LSR to modify the RSVP PathErr message and 
        insert its own address for confidentiality reason. 
         
   Upon receiving an RSVP PathErr message with Error code 25 and Error 
   sub-code 7 or 8, the Head-end LSR MUST perform a TE LSP 
   reoptimization. 
    
   Note that those modes are not exclusive: both the timer and event-
   driven reoptimization triggers can be implemented on the head-end 
   and/or any mid-point LSR with potentially different timer values for 
   the timer driven reoptimization case. 
    
   A head-end LSR MAY decide upon receiving an explicit mid-point 
   notification to delay its next path re-evaluation request. 
    
6.3.3 ERO caching 
 
   Once a mid-point LSR has determined that a preferable path exists 
   (after a reoptimization request has been received by the head-end LSR 
   or the reoptimization timer on the mid-point has fired), the more 
 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                    [Page 9] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
   optimal path MAY be cached on the mid-point LSR for a limited amount 
   of time to avoid having to recompute a path once the head-LSR 
   performs a make before break. This mode is optional. A default value 
   of 5 seconds is suggested. 
    
7. Interoperability 
    
   An LSR not supporting the "Path re-evaluation request" bit of the 
   SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object SHALL forward it unmodified.  
    
   A head-end LSR not supporting an RSVP PathErr with Error code 25 
   message and Error sub-code = 6, 7 or 8 MUST just silently ignore such 
   RSVP PathErr message. 
    
    
8. Security considerations 
 
   This document defines a mechanism for a mid-point LSR to notify the 
   head-end LSR of this existence of a preferable path or the need to 
   reroute the TE LSP for maintenance purposes. Hence, in case of a TE 
   LSP spanning multiple administrative domains, it may be desirable for 
   a boundary LSR to modify the RSVP PathErr message (Code 25, Error 
   sub-code=6,7 or 8) so as to preserve confidentiality across domains. 
   Furthermore, a head-end LSR may decide to ignore explicit 
   notification coming from a mid-point residing in another domain. 
   Similarly, an LSR may decide to ignore (or accept but up to a pre-
   defined rate) path re-evaluation requests originated by a head-end 
   LSR of another domain.  
    
9. IANA considerations 
    
   IANA will assign a new flag named "Path re-evaluation request" in the 
   SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object (C-Type 1 and 7) specified in [RFC3209]. 
   Suggested value is (to be confirmed by IANA) 0x20. 
    
   IANA will also assign three new error sub-code values for the RSVP 
   PERR Notify message (Error code=25). Suggested values are (to be 
   confirmed by IANA): 
    
      6  Preferable path exists 
      7  Local link maintenance required 
      8  Local node maintenance required 
    
10. Acknowledgments 
 
   The authors would like to thank Carol Iturralde, Miya Kohno, Francois 
   Le Faucheur, Philip Matthews, Jim Gibson, Jean-Louis Le Roux, Kenji 
   Kumaki, Anca Zafir, Dimitri Papadimitriou for their useful comments. 
   A special thank to Adrian Farrel for his very valuable inputs. 

 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                   [Page 10] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
 
11. Intellectual property considerations 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
12. References 
 
12.1 Normative references 
 
   [RFC] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
   Levels," RFC 2119. 
    
   [RFC3209] Awduche et al, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
   Tunnels",  RFC3209, December 2001. 
    
   [RFC3473] Berger L. et al.,"Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic 
   Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003. 
    
   [REFRESH-REDUCTION] Berger et al, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction 
   Extensions", RFC2961, April 2001. 
     
12.2 Informative references 
    
   [TE-REQ] Awduche et al, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering over 
   MPLS", RFC2702, September 1999. 
    
   [INTER-AREA-TE-REQ], Le Roux, Vasseur, Boyle et al. "Requirements 
   for Inter-area MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-tewg-interarea-
   mpls-te-req-03, November 2004. 
 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                   [Page 11] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
    
   [INTER-AS-TE-REQ] Zhang et al, "MPLS Inter-AS Traffic Engineering 
   requirements", draft-ietf-tewg-interas-mpls-te-req-09.txt, September 
   2004, Work in progress. 
    
   [INTER-DOMAIN-FW] Farrel A., Vasseur JP. and Ayyangar A., "A 
   Framework for Inter-Domain MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-
   ccamp-inter-domain-framework-02.txt, May 2005. Work in progress. 
    
   [INTER-DOMAIN-SIG] Ayyangar A. and Vasseur JP., "Inter domain GMPLS 
   Traffic Engineering - RSVP-TE extensions", draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-
   domain-rsvp-te-00.txt", February 2005. Work in progress. 
    
   [INTER-DOMAIN-PATH-COMP] Vasseur JP., Ayyangar A., "A Per-domain 
   path computation method for computing Inter-domain Traffic  
   Engineering (TE) Label Switched Path (LSP)", draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-
   domain-pd-path-comp-00.txt, February 2005. Work in progress. 
 
13. Authors' Addresses 
    
      Jean-Philippe Vasseur (Editor) 
      CISCO Systems, Inc. 
      300 Beaver Brook 
      Boxborough, MA 01719 
      USA 
      Email: jpv@cisco.com  
    
      Yuichi Ikejiri  
      NTT Communications Corporation  
      1-1-6, Uchisaiwai-cho, Chiyoda-ku  
      Tokyo 100-8019  
      JAPAN  
      Email: y.ikejiri@ntt.com  
       
      Raymond Zhang 
      Infonet Services Corporation 
      2160 E. Grand Ave. 
      El Segundo, CA 90025 
      USA 
      Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com  
    
    
14. Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                   [Page 12] 

draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-reopt-01.txt                  January 2005 
 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED,INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
    
    
    
    









































 
 
Vasseur, Ikejiri and Zhang                                   [Page 13] 

