





INTERNET-DRAFT                                                C. Finseth
                                                      Firwood Consulting
                                                           28 March 2000

Referencing ISAN Identifiers with the Local Identifier (lid:) URI Scheme
                      draft-finseth-isanlid-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This document expires 28 September 2000.

Status of this Memo

   This memo provides information for the Internet community.  This memo
   does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of
   this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document specifies a method to use when referencing ISAN
   identifiers with the local identifier ("lid:") URI scheme.  By
   specifying such referencing, broadcasts can avoid the overhead of
   sending the same information multiple times and implementation
   overhead can be reduced.




Finseth                                                         [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Referencing ISAN from lid:          28 March 2000


ISAN Identifiers

   (This section is written using the author's best judgement of how the
   system will eventually work.  It will be updated as the in progress
   work completes.)

   These identifiers are the subject of a draft-ISO standard.  Briefly,
   ISAN identifiers are assigned to complete audio/visual works such as
   television programs, movies, commercials, promotional spots, and so
   forth.  Each version of each work is assigned its own identifer.

   ISAN Identifers are hexadecimal numbers written in the following
   format:

           AAAAAAAAAA-BBBB-CCCCC-D

   where

   - AAAAAAAAAA is a ten-digit hexadecimal number designating the work.
   For television series, one of these identifiers is assigned for the
   series as a whole.

   - BBBB is a four-digit hexadecimal number designating the episode of
   the series.  For works that are not series, this value is always
   "0000".

   - CCCCC is a five-digit hexadecimal number designating the version.
   Each materiela change in the work is assigned its own version number.

   - D is a one-digit hexadecimal number that is a check digit.

   The upper/lower case of the letters a-f is not significant.

Transmission

   ISAN identifers can appear in a number of places in a broadcast.  The
   main locations will be in the electronic program guide and in the
   information describing the program currently on the air.  Each
   transport (ATSC, DVB, etc.) will carry this information in a
   different way, so consult the documentation on those systems for
   specifics.

Mapping

   Each receiver that implements the lid: URI scheme should take the
   already-transmitted ISAN identifier and use it as a source of lid:
   mapping information.  The mapping is as follows.




Finseth                                                         [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Referencing ISAN from lid:          28 March 2000


   For an ISAN identifier of the form:

           AAAAAAAAAA-BBBB-CCCCC-D

   act as if a lid: identifier of the form:

           lid://isan.smpte.org/AAAAAAAAAA/BBBB/CCCCC/D

   had been transmitted with the relevant mapping information.  For
   example, if the ISAN identifier had been encountered in the
   electronic program guide, act as if the lid: had been transmitted
   with mapping information targeting the relevant electronic program
   guide slot.

Matching

   With the above mapping in mind, lid: URI matching for references to
   ISAN identifiers can proceed exactly the same as any other lid:
   matching.  There are, however, two special cases to consider.

   First, a lid: URI of the form:

           lid://isan.smpte.org/AAAAAAAAAA/BBBB

   or

           lid://isan.smpte.org/AAAAAAAAAA/BBBB/

   should successfully match all versions of the material that the
   receiver is aware of.

   Second, a lid: URI of the form:

           lid://isan.smpte.org/AAAAAAAAAA

   or

           lid://isan.smpte.org/AAAAAAAAAA/

   should successfully match all versions of all episodes of the
   material that the receiver is aware of.  If the material is not a
   series (e.g., is a move, commercial, etc.), this form returns the
   same matches as the same as the match-all-versions form.

Security Considerations

   This specification does not address security.  It assumes that
   security and access control are handled by policies and procedures



Finseth                                                         [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Referencing ISAN from lid:          28 March 2000


   implemented in the systems themselves.

   While this specification appears to provide a level of security by
   virtue of the fact that the only resources accessible by an
   application are those named in the broadcast stream, such is not the
   case.  Absent other policies and procedures, an ill-behaved
   application can access resources by using device-specific mechanisms.

References


   [1] "Uniform Resource Identifiers for Television Broadcasts", Mark
   Vickers, Dan Zigmond, 02/21/2000. (10914bytes),
   http://ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-zigmond-tv-url-04.txt

   [2] "The Local Identifier (lid:) URI Scheme", C. Finseth, Dean
   Blackketter, Dan Zigmond, Gomer Thomas, Michael Dolan,
   02/24/2000. (12122 bytes),
   http://ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-blackketter-lid-00.txt

   [3] ten Kate, Warner; Thomas, Gomer; Finseth, Craig, "TV Broadcast URI
   Schemes Requirements", 11 March 1999.
           http://www.w3.org/TV/TVWeb/TVWeb-URI-Requirements-19990311

   [4] "Guide to TV Broadcast URLs", C. Finseth, Gomer Thomas,
   03/28/2000,
   http://ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-finseth-guide-01.txt

   [RFC2396] Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter,
             "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC
             2396, August 1998.

Author's Address

   Craig A. Finseth
   Firwood Consulting
   1343 Lafond
   St Paul MN 55104
   Phone: +1 651-644-4027
   Email: craig@firwood.net

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and



Finseth                                                         [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Referencing ISAN from lid:          28 March 2000


   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

   This document expires 28 September 2000





























Finseth                                                         [Page 5]


