

ICAR                                                          D. Partain
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Expires: November 22, 2004                                  May 24, 2004



                   ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)
                     draft-partain-icar-pear-00.txt


Status of this Memo


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 22, 2004.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   This memo proposes a lightweight and incremental approach to
   improving early cross-area review in the IETF.  This proposal has two
   specific goals. Firstly, the current perception is that the IETF
   standardization process is bogged down and takes far too long.  One
   factor in this slowness appears to be the workload placed upon the
   IESG when documents are brought to them.  Given that one role of the
   IESG has been to provide cross-area review, offloading some portion
   of that work may increase the speed of the process.  Secondly,
   cross-area review done early in the process may be a good tool for
   identifying significant problems with a Working Group's efforts long
   before the documents reach the IESG.  As such, the early cross-area




Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



   review can improve the quality of the output from the Working Group
   by sifting the wheat from the chaff.


Table of Contents


   1.   What is cross-area review? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   The proposal for Improved Cross-Area Review  . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1  ADs select Area's review team leaders(s) . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2  Review volunteers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3  Who may be a reviewer? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.4  Role of the review process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.5  WG Chair(s) determine that the time is ripe  . . . . . . .   5
     2.6  WG Chair(s) request early review . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.7  Reviewers chosen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.8  The review team does its thing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.9  Using the results of the review  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.10   Report results to AD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.   Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.   Significant open issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  11






























Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



1.  What is cross-area review?


   Working groups tend to work somewhat in isolation. While by no means
   always the case, they tend not to get very much input from outside
   the working group (or, at best, their Area) until their work is
   presented to the IESG.  At that point, the ADs are expected to review
   the work to provide a "sanity check" from the AD's area's
   perspective.


   The author would like to see this "sanity check" take place MUCH
   earlier than this.  The idea of "review early, review often" has the
   potential of improving both the quality of documents and the speed of
   the standardization process.


   "Cross-area review" simply means that reviewers with competence
   outside of the WG's particular work area read and provide feedback on
   the document, with particular emphasis on how the document(s)
   interact with their area of competence.  For simplicity, at least at
   the outset we define the "competence areas" as being equivalent to
   the IETF's Areas.


   This proposal specifically avoids giving "power" or "authority" to
   the reviewers.  Instead, it attempts to fit into the IETF's
   consensus-based decision model.  The author considers the
   consensus-based model to be a fundamental part of what makes the IETF
   unique and strongly desires to maintain that model.


























Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



2.  The proposal for Improved Cross-Area Review


   This section outlines the suggested steps that need to be taken prior
   to introduction of these reviews, the steps taken for initiating a
   review, and how the output of the review should be handled.


2.1  ADs select Area's review team leaders(s)


   There must be a set of people who are responsible for coordinating
   the review work.  However, it is important that the introduction of
   early cross-area review does NOT result in additional administrative
   work to be done by the IESG.


   This proposal suggests that the AD has a group of people (perhaps a
   group of one initially) who are responsible for leading the early
   reviews for the Area's working groups.  This "review leader" can then
   build early review teams from a pool of volunteers.


   This proposal suggests that the ADs choose a set of team leaders.
   Obviously, there are other ways in which this could be handled (e.g.,
   with the nomcom), but that will introduce additional bureaucracy that
   does not appear to be necessary.


2.2  Review volunteers


   Each Area in the IETF will have a set of volunteers willing to
   participate in early reviews.  Those willing to help with reviews
   will submit their names to the AD or the AD may ask specific
   individuals.  The group needs to be sufficiently large such that the
   work does not overburden the volunteers.


2.3  Who may be a reviewer?


   In a volunteer organization like the IETF, it seems dangerous to put
   too many constraints on who may be a volunteer.  As such, this list
   should initially include all who wish to volunteer (see, however, the
   open issues in Section 4).


   Over time, the ambition is that the volunteer's level of expertise
   will become clear and thus make it easier to know which volunteers
   are appropriate in a particular review.


2.4  Role of the review process


   The review teams are expected to provide technical feedback based
   upon their technical area of expertise.


   As far as the working group is concerned, the review is not binding




Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



   in any way.  The working group can choose to ignore the results of
   the review if they wish to, but the reasons for doing so must be
   clearly documented. See Section 2.10 below for further discussion.


   As far as the IESG is concerned, the review is a tool to provide
   valuable input to their decision-making process.  The review does not
   obviate the need for the IESG to review documents themselves ("late"
   review) but may help improve the speed with which documents can move
   through the IESG.


2.5  WG Chair(s) determine that the time is ripe


   The WG chair(s) determine when a work item has progressed
   sufficiently to warrant a review. This must be the pervue of the
   chair(s). Of course, document editors can request that the chair(s)
   make the request.


   There is nothing preventing a WG from requesting review multiple
   times during a document's life cycle.  In fact, this should be
   encouraged if there are enough people to provide quality reviews.


2.6  WG Chair(s) request early review


   The WG chair(s) submits a request for early review to the AD.  This
   request must include:


   1.  a list of IETF areas that the chair(s) consider particularly
       important that they be included in the review.  This list should
       be considered "advisory".  That is, reviewers from other areas
       can, of course, participate.  However, if at all possible, at
       least the areas requested by the chair(s) should be included in
       the review.
   2.  the date by which the review should be complete.  This helps the
       reviewers plan and gives the WG some idea of when the work will
       be done.
   3.  a list of documents to be reviewed.


2.7  Reviewers chosen


   The AD asks a review leader to select a group of reviewers from the
   pool of volunteers for the relevant areas.  The review leader selects
   the reviewers in such a way as to balance the workload to the degree
   possible and to ensure that a reasonable "cross-area" review can be
   accomplished.  It is important that this be done without the
   influence of the AD so that reviews are not simply seen as a tool
   that the IESG (or specific AD) uses to push a particular "agenda".


   If the review leader cannot put together a review team with




Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



   volunteers from all requested areas, s/he will inform the AD and
   relevant WG chair(s) of the makeup of the review team s/he was able
   to put together and ask for a go/no-go with that review team.   The
   AD and chair(s) will decide whether the review should proceed or not.


2.8  The review team does its thing


   The review process itself is not formalized. The review team is
   expected to coordinate the review internally and to provide a
   coordinated response.  The response should take the form of specific
   recommendations with respect to the work.  These recommendations
   might be, for example, to change approach significantly, to change
   particular details, to start again, etc.


   Without specific recommendations, it will be difficult for the
   working group to determine an appropriate response to the review.


   Note that it is extremely important that the review is clearly
   documented and archived for future reference.


2.9  Using the results of the review


   Upon receipt of the results of the review, the WG should carefully
   consider the review team's recommendations.  At this point, the WG
   can take one of two approaches in considering each recommendation:


   1.  If the WG agrees with the recommendation, it will so note and
       begin taking appropriate action to follow the recommendation.
   2.  If the WG disagrees with the recommendation, it will document the
       reason(s) for doing so. This will then be discussed with the
       review team (or the person who made that specific recommendation)
       and the WG will attempt to reach rough consensus with the review
       team. If, in the end, the reviewer and the WG cannot agree, the
       reasons will be documented.


   To reiterate:  it is extremely important that the review team's
   results are clearly documented and archived, and that the WG's
   response to those results is also clearly documented and archived.


2.10  Report results to AD


   When the review is complete and the review team and WG have concluded
   their discussion, the results will be reported to the ADs responsible
   for the WG.  This report should be as simple as possible and should
   include (there's almost certain to be more):


   1.  The issue raised by the reviewer





Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



   2.  The recommendation of the reviewer
   3.  The WG's response
   4.  Any relevant discussion for future reference


   The purpose of this historical record is to help the IESG in its
   deliberation.  If a review team's recommendations have been dismissed
   by a WG, there must be enough information in the record to allow the
   IESG to determine the merits of the decision to disregard the
   recommendation.











































Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



3.  Implementation


   It is important to understand that the author sees a stepwise
   introduction of early cross-area review as the only way to introduce
   such a change in the way the IETF works.  It seems appropriate to run
   an "early review experiment" in a small set of WGs in one or a small
   number of IETF Areas before trying to introduce this on a wider
   scale.  This allows us to (1) verify that the results are worth the
   pain and (2) to find bugs in the system.


   Introduction of early cross-area review does not need to imply a
   large set of new complicated processes. Rather, a small interested
   subset of ADs could choose to subject their area to cross-area review
   experimentation using specific working groups as guinea pigs.  If
   these experiments prove to be successful, other ADs can join the ICAR
   parade.  If, instead, we attempt to introduce such a process across
   the entire IETF, it is likely to become bogged down in endless
   administrative and process discussions. Let interested WGs prove or
   disprove the value of early cross-area review as well as providing
   input into how the process for early review can be improved.
































Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



4.  Significant open issues


   1.  How does one measure the sucess/failure of ICAR experiments?
   2.  Can the review process be run without any IESG involvement in
       order to cement its independent nature?  That is, can the ADs
       also be removed from (the admittedly small) administrative role
       envisioned in this document?
   3.  Where do we find the volunteers?  It remains unclear where the
       pool of volunteers for this effort are.  In order for this effort
       to be successful, a group of highly-qualified individuals (and
       their employers) must be willing to set aside a significant chunk
       of their time for doing reviews.  The process of finding these
       people is not yet clear.
   4.  There may need to be some clearly defined procedures for handling
       adding/removal of review leaders, but I am anxious to avoid
       adding any "process" if it is not truly needed.
   5.  How do we ensure that the reviewers are competent? For the
       process to be of any value, high-quality reviews are essential.
       Perhaps there need to be mechanisms by which reviewers are
       removed from the volunteer pool?  Should this be the decision of
       the two ADs in concert with the review leader(s) (i.e., if they
       agree, the reviewer is removed)? This would by no means preclude
       their providing input, but simply that they could not do so in
       the name of "official" cross-area review.  Should the AD be able
       to add/remove people without the list becoming a hand-picked set
       of "favorites"?
   6.  Choosing reviewers seems simple at first glance but is
       administratively an issue.
   7.  Do there need to be formal ways for the review team to provide
       feedback to the working group? I am inclined to say no at this
       point.
   8.  How should reviews be archived?




















Partain                Expires November 22, 2004                [Page 9]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



5.  Security Considerations


   None.



Author's Address


   David Partain
   Ericsson AB
   P.O. Box 1248
   SE-581 12 Linkoping,
   Sweden


   EMail: david.partain@ericsson.com






































Partain                Expires November 22, 2004               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft     ICAR Proposed EArly Review (PEAR)            May 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Disclaimer of Validity


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





Partain                Expires November 22, 2004               [Page 11]