

Network Working Group                                        M. Mealling
Internet-Draft                                            VeriSign, Inc.
Expires: May 14, 2002                                  November 13, 2001


  Digital Rights Management Using the URI Resolution DDDS Application
                     draft-irtf-idrm-uri-res-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 14, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This documenet describes how the URI Resolution DDDS Application plus
   the RESCAP protocol can be utilized as a digital rights publication
   platform.

1. Introduction

   Many of the existing and developing digital rights management
   platforms suffer from being very vertical solutions in a world that
   is moving toward general metadata services of which rights metadata
   is just one small part.  This document proposes that digital rights
   be published via a RESCAP service that is discovered via the URI
   Resolution DDDS application.  By virtue of URI Resolution being a



Mealling                  Expires May 14, 2002                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DRM via the DDDS               November 2001


   general case for all URIs, it becomes possible for a DRM solution to
   deployed for all resolvable URI schemes.

2. URI Resolution

   The URI Resolution DDDS Application defined in RFC YYYY [3] allows
   for the easy discovery of services associated with URIs in a dynamic,
   out of band mechanism.  Using that DDDS Application it is possible to
   find a server that can answer rights and policy questions for any
   resolvable URI scheme (local context dependent schemes cannot be
   resolved globally).

   One question to be answered: the URI Resolution application defines
   the 'I2C' (URI to Characteristics) service as the default service for
   complex metadata queries.  Is that sufficent for a DRM application or
   is a further qualified service distinction (I2DRM?) needed to
   differentiate policy from general metadata?

   The URI Resolution application only provides the DRM metadata
   discovery portion of the solution.  It does not provide a way of
   asking DRM related questions.  It does provide for the use of
   multiple protocols and services in the case where some vertical or
   proprietary solution desires to be discoverable.  But the current
   state of the art is that none of the currently available solutions
   provide for a general purpose query protocol.

3. RESCAP

   This document suggests that the use of the RESCAP [2] protocol is
   appropriate for small and/or discrete chunks of DRM metadata.  The
   protocol as proposed is a lightweight, secure and extensible protocol
   for requesting attributes and values associated with some URI.
   Examples include:

   o  file sizes

   o  availability (mailbox is full, file not available, etc)

   o  relationships to other URIs (mirrors, collections, etc)

   o  capabilities (can display postscript, Unicode capable viewer, etc)

   Many pieces of DRM related metadata fall into this lightweight model
   since many items can easily fit into one or two UDP packets, still
   keeping round trip times lower than those needed to even setup the
   TCP session for protocols such as HTTP.

   The main problem to solve is the management of the attribute



Mealling                  Expires May 14, 2002                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DRM via the DDDS               November 2001


   namespace.  The RESCAP protocol is based on attributes and their
   values being associated with the URI.  The intent is that complexity
   of metadata is kept opaquely inside an attribute's value.  Thus, DRM
   metadata would not exist as specific attribute value pairs, but
   instead would exist as an opaque attribute value.  RESCAP's proposed
   attribute naming structure would suggest the top level be 'drm' for
   Digital Rights Management.  Subdelegations below that would be up for
   discussion.  At a minimum the author suggests that two levels be
   created:

   o  drm.defaults -- includes IETF standardized DRM attributes and
      values.  For example:

      *  drm.default.rights-holders

      *  drm.default.rights-holders.author

      *  drm.default.rights-holders.producer

      *  drm.default.rights-holders.performer

   o  drm.<drm-system> -- includes non-IETF DRM systems.  For example:

      *  drm.indecs.role.agent.creator

      *  drm.indecs.input.sourceCreation

      *  drm.mpeg7.financial.payment

      *  drm.odrl.permission.display

   The management of these attribute names and their granularity is the
   area that needs the most work.  The fundamental question is: will the
   world of IDRM involve small pieces of metadata intermingling or will
   applications be vertical enough that entire blobs of metadata will be
   retrieved as one large, indivisible chunk?

References

   [1]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August 1998.

   [2]  Moore, K., "The Binary Low-Overhead Block Presentation
        Protocol", draft-moore-rescap-rc-01.txt (work in progress), June
        2001.

   [3]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Four: The URI Resolution Application", RFC YYYY, draft-ietf-urn-



Mealling                  Expires May 14, 2002                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DRM via the DDDS               November 2001


        uri-res-ddds-05.txt (work in progress), October 2000.


Author's Address

   Michael Mealling
   VeriSign, Inc.

   Sterling, CA
   US

   URI:   http://www.verisignlabs.com







































Mealling                  Expires May 14, 2002                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DRM via the DDDS               November 2001


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mealling                  Expires May 14, 2002                  [Page 5]

