



	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


			RSVP Cryptographic Authentication		  |
			    draft-ietf-rsvp-md5-04.txt			  |







			       Status of this Memo

	  This document	is an Internet Draft.  Internet	Drafts are
	  working documents of the Internet Engineering	Task Force
	  (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that	other
	  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
	  Drafts.

	  Internet Drafts are valid for	a maximum of six months	and may
	  be updated, replaced,	or obsoleted by	other documents	at any
	  time.	 It is inappropriate to	use Internet Drafts as reference
	  material or to cite them other than as a "work in progress".
	  Comments should be made on the list rsvp@isi.edu.

	  Abstract

	  This document	describes the format and use of	RSVP's INTEGRITY
	  object to provide hop-by-hop integrity and authentication of
	  RSVP messages.
























	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 1]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  1.  Introduction

	  The Resource ReSerVation Protocol RSVP [1] is	a protocol for
	  setting up distributed state in routers and hosts, and in
	  particular for reserving resources to	implement integrated
	  service.  RSVP allows	particular users to obtain preferential
	  access to network resources, under the control of an admission
	  control mechanism.  Permission to make a reservation will
	  depend both upon the availability of the requested resources
	  along	the path of the	data, and upon satisfaction of policy
	  rules.

	  To protect the integrity of this admission control mechanism,
	  RSVP requires	the ability to protect its messages against
	  corruption and spoofing.  This document proposes a mechanism
	  to protect RSVP message integrity hop-by-hop.	 The proposed
	  scheme transmits the result of applying a cryptographic
	  algorithm to a one-way function or "digest" of the message
	  together with	a secret Authentication	Key.  This scheme
	  affords protection against forgery or	message	modification,
	  but not replays.  It is possible to replay a message until the
	  sequence number changes, but the sequence number makes replays
	  less of an issue.  The proposed mechanism does not afford
	  confidentiality, since messages stay in the clear; however,
	  the mechanism	is also	exportable from	most countries,	which
	  would	be impossible were a privacy algorithm to be used.

	  The proposed mechanism is independent	of a specific
	  cryptographic	algorithm, but the document describes the use of
	  Keyed-Hashing	for Message Authentication using H-MD5 [8] for	  |
	  this purpose.	 As noted in [8], there	exist stronger hashes,
	  such as H-SHA-1; where warranted, implementations will do well
	  to make them available.  However, in the general case, [8]	  |
	  suggests that	H-MD5 is adequate to the purpose at hand and has  |
	  preferable performance characteristics.  [8] also offers	  |
	  source code and test vectors for this	algorithm, a boon to
	  those	who would test for interoperability.  The author
	  therefore suggests that H-MD5	should be the baseline,
	  universally implemented by RSVP implementations implementing
	  cryptographic	authentication,	with other proposals optional.

	  The cost of computing	an H-MD5 message digest	far exceeds the
	  cost of computing an RSVP checksum; therefore	the RSVP
	  checksum should be disabled (set to zero) ifH-MD5
	  authentication is used, as theH-MD5 digest is	a much stronger
	  integrity check.






	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 2]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  Two uses are envisioned: authentication of RSVP messages or
	  message fragments (should a fragmentation procedure be defined
	  in the future), and authentication of	sessions.  The INTEGRITY
	  object used in both is the same, and is defined in this
	  document.  The use of	the INTEGRITY object for those purposes
	  is defined in	other more appropriate documents [1] [7].	  |

	  1.1.	Why not	use the	Standard IPSEC Authentication Header?

	  One obvious question is why, since there exists a standard
	  mechanism for	authentication,	we would choose	to not use it.
	  This was discussed at	length in the working group, and was
	  rejected due to the operational impact of manually opening a
	  new security association among the routers that a flow
	  traverses for	each flow making reservations.	In addition, it
	  was noted that neighbor relationships	between	RSVP systems are
	  not limited to those which face one another across a
	  communication	channel; RSVP relationships across non-RSVP
	  clouds, such as those	described in section 2.8 of [1], are not
	  necessarily visible to the sending system, suggesting	that key
	  management based on the source address may be	a simpler key
	  management strategy.

	  It is	also not clear that RSVP messages are well defined for
	  the security associations, as	a router must forward PATH and
	  PATH TEAR messages using the same source address as the sender
	  listed in the	SENDER TEMPLATE, as in RSVP traffic may
	  otherwise not	follow exactly the same	IP path	as data	traffic.


	  These	matters	are simplified if a secure key management
	  protocol exists which	can be used to open and	key the	security
	  associations;	should such a protocol come into existence, it
	  may be worthwhile reviewing this decision.  However, the non-
	  RSVP cloud considerations conspire against using the same
	  solution as one which	would work for IPSEC.  Therefore, this
	  consideration	cannot be understood as	a promise that this
	  procedure will go away.


	  2.  Data Structures

	  2.1.	INTEGRITY Object Format

	  The RSVP Message consists of a sequence of "objects,"	which
	  are type-length-value	encoded	fields having specific purposes.
	  The information required for hop-by-hop integrity checking is





	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 3]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  carried in an	INTEGRITY object.

	  The contents of INTEGRITY object are defined as a "Keyed
	  Message Digest" structure, with one of the following formats:

		 IP4 Keyed Message Digest INTEGRITY Object: Class = 4,
				      C-Type = 1

	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |		    Key	Identifier		       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |		    Sequence Number		       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |	       Sending System IP4 Address	       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |						       |
	       +						       +
	       |						       |
	       +	      Keyed Message Digest		       |
	       |						       |
	       +						       +
	       |						       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

		 IP6 Keyed Message Digest INTEGRITY Object: Class = 4,
				      C-Type = 2

	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |		    Key	Identifier		       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |		    Sequence Number		       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |						       |
	       +						       +
	       |						       |
	       +	      Sending System IP6 Address	       +
	       |						       |
	       +						       +
	       |						       |
	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
	       |						       |
	       +						       +
	       |						       |
	       +	      Keyed Message Digest		       +
	       |						       |
	       +						       +
	       |						       |





	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 4]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	       +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

	  (1)  Key Identifier

		  An unsigned 32-bit number that acts as a key selector.
		  With the key,	the system stores an algorithm for its
		  application.

	  (2)  Sending System Address

		  This is the same address as would be carried in the
		  Next Hop or Previous Hop object, the address of the
		  interface of the RSVP	system that sent this message.

	  (3)  Sequence	Number

		  unsigned 32-bit non-decreasing sequence number.

		  Any non-decreasing sequence of numbers may be	used as
		  Sequence Number values.  For example,	a timestamp on
		  the message's	creation or a simple message counter
		  might	be used.

		  This sequence	number is reset	to zero	upon any key
		  change.

		  Note that when procedures such as the	Network	Time
		  Protocol [10]	are in use to synchronize clocks, it is
		  feasible and advisable to use	the current time as a
		  sequence number.  Doing this obviates	the need to
		  store	sequence numbers in memory that	survives a
		  system or process failure.

	  (4)  Keyed Message Digest

		  The digest must be a multiple	of 4 octets long.  For
		  H-MD5, it will be 16 bytes long.

	  2.2.	H-MD5 Message Header and Trailer

	  The H-MD5 algorithm requires affixing	a header and trailer to
	  the message to be sent before	the hash is computed.  This
	  extra	information is not transmitted,	since the receiver can
	  reconstruct it knowing the message length and	hash algorithm.

	  The content of this trailer is specified by [8].		  |






	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 5]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  3.  Message Processing Rules

	  3.1.	Message	Generation

	  An RSVP message is created as	specified in [1], with these
	  exceptions:

	  (1)  The RSVP	checksum is not	calculated, but	is set to zero.

	  (2)  The INTEGRITY object is inserted	in the appropriate
	       place, and its location in the message is remembered for
	       later use.

	  (3)  The current sequence number is placed in	the Sequence
	       Number field of the INTEGRITY object.

	       If several messages are being created simultaneously (for
	       example,	in a periodic refresh generated	by a router),
	       the messages should all use the same sequence number.
	       This is to assure that message reordering between RSVP
	       peers (in non-FIFO queues or in an RSVP tunnel) does not
	       cause authentication to fail for	some of	them.

	  (4)  The appropriate Authentication Key is selected and placed
	       in the Keyed Message Digest field of the	INTEGRITY
	       object.

	  (5)  The Key Identifier is placed into the INTEGRITY object.

	  (6)  The H-MD5 message header	and trailer are	placed in memory  |
	       as described in [8].

	  (7)  A Keyed Message Digest of the augmented message is
	       calculated using	the appropriate	hash algorithm.	 When
	       the H-MD5 algorithm is used, the	hash calculation is	  |
	       described in [8].

	  (8)  The digest is written into the Cryptographic Digest field
	       of the INTEGRITY	object,	overlaying the Authentication
	       Key.

	  In the sender, Authentication	Key selection is based on the
	  interface through which the message is sent, there being a key
	  configured per interface.  While administrations may configure
	  all the routers and hosts on a subnet	(or for	that matter, in
	  their	network) with the same key, implementations should
	  assume that each sender may send with	a different key	on each





	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 6]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  numbered interface, and that they keys are simplex - the key
	  that a system	uses to	sign its messages need he same key that
	  its recievers	use to sign theirs.  Implementations SHOULD
	  maintain a separate key per ip address that they sign	with.

	  This restriction to numbered interfaces is intentional; if an
	  RSVP system peers with another through a set of non-RSVP
	  routers, and it might	be able	to reach systems through that
	  domain from either a numbered	interface or an	unnumbered
	  interface using the same address as a	router id, the choice of
	  key would otherwise be ambiguous.  Therefore,	on unnumbered
	  interfaces, an RSVP router must use the same key as it uses on
	  the related numbered interface.  User	interfaces SHOULD
	  provide convenient ways to configure these keys.

	  3.2.	Message	Reception

	  When the message is received,	the process is reversed:

	  (1)  The RSVP	checksum is not	calculated.

	  (2)  The Cryptographic Digest	field of the INTEGRITY object is
	       set aside.

	  (3)  The Key Identifer field and Sending System Address are
	       used to determine the Authentication Key	and the	hash
	       algorithm to be used.  Implementations SHOULD maintain a
	       key per neighboring RSVP	system address or CIDR prefix,
	       as the keys used	by neighbors to	sign their messages need
	       not be the same key that	the recieving system uses.

	  (4)  If the received sequence	number is less than the	last
	       sequence	number received	from the sending system	with
	       that key	identifier, the	message	is discarded
	       unprocessed.

	  (5)  The Cryptographic Digest	field of the INTEGRITY object is
	       overlaid	with the Authentication	Key.

	  (6)  The message header and trailer are reconstructed.

	  (7)  A new digest is calculated using	the indicated algorithm.

	  (8)  If the calculated digest	does not match the received
	       digest, the message is discarded	without	further
	       processing.






	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 7]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  If a system detects the loss of a neighbor or	interface, or
	  the RSVP process is restarted	on a system, the system	should
	  start	with a new key if possible.  In	this way, the sequence
	  number may be	reset without exposure to a replay attack.  In
	  the event that no other key is available, the	sequence number
	  should be stored in non-volatile memory around failures, so
	  that it may continue without decreasing, or (if the NTP
	  timestamp is being used as a sequence	number), RSVP
	  resynchronization should await NTP synchronization.

	  4.  Key Management

	  It is	likely that the	IETF will define a standard key
	  management protocol.	It is strongly desirable to use	that key
	  management protocol to distribute RSVP Authentication	Keys
	  among	communicating RSVP implementations.  Such a protocol
	  would	provide	scalability and	significantly reduce the human
	  administrative burden.  The Key ID can be used as a hook
	  between RSVP and such	a future protocol.  Key	management
	  protocols have a long	history	of subtle flaws	that are often
	  discovered long after	the protocol was first described in
	  public.  To avoid having to change all RSVP implementations
	  should such a	flaw be	discovered, integrated key management
	  protocol techniques were deliberately	omitted	from this
	  specification.


	  4.1.	Key Management Procedures

	  Each key has a lifetime associated with it.  No key is ever
	  used outside its lifetime.  If more than one key is currently
	  alive, then the youngest key (the key	whose lifetime most
	  recently started) should be sent, and	all "live" keys	should
	  be tested upon message receipt.

	  Possible mechanisms for managing key lifetime	include: the use
	  of the Network Time Protocol,	hardware time-of-day clocks, or
	  waiting some time before emitting the	first message to
	  determine what key other systems are signing with.  The matter
	  is left for the implementor.	Note that the concept of a "key
	  lifetime" does not require a hardware	time-of-day clock or the
	  use of NTP, although one or the other	is advised; it merely
	  requires that	the earliest and latest	times that the key is
	  valid	must be	programmable in	a way the system understands.

	  To maintain security,	it is advisable	to change the RSVP
	  Authentication Key on	a regular basis.  It should be possible





	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 8]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  to switch the	RSVP Authentication Key	without	loss of	RSVP
	  state	or denial of reservation service, and without requiring
	  people to change all the keys	at once.  This requires	the RSVP
	  implementation to support the	storage	and use	of more	than one
	  RSVP Authentication Key on a given interface at the same time.

	  For each key there will be a locally-stored Key Identifier.
	  The combination of the Key Identifier	and the	interface
	  associated with the message uniquely identifies the
	  cryptographic	algorithm and Authentication Key in use	by RSVP.
	  As noted above, the party creating the RSVP message will
	  select a valid key from the set of valid keys	for that
	  interface.  The receiver will	use the	Key Identifier and
	  interface to determine which key to use for authentication of
	  the received message.	 More than one key may be associated
	  with an interface at the same	time.

	  To ensure a smooth switch-over, each communicating RSVP system
	  must be updated with the new key before the current key will
	  expire and before the	new key	lifetime begins.  The new key
	  should have a	lifetime that starts several minutes before the
	  old key expires.  This gives time for	each system to learn of
	  the new RSVP Authentication Key before that key will be used.
	  It also ensures that the new key will	begin being used and the
	  current key will go out of use before	the current key's
	  lifetime expires.  For the duration of the overlap in	key
	  lifetimes, a system may receive messages using either	key and
	  authenticate the message.

	  There	are four important times for each key:

	    o KeyStartReceive: the time	the system starts accepting
	       received	packets	signed with the	key.

	    o KeyStartSign: the	time the system	starts signing packets
	       with the	key.

	    o KeyStopSign: the time the	system stops signing packets
	       with the	key, which implies that	it starts signing with
	       the next	key, if	any.

	    o KeyStopReceive: the time the system stops	accepting
	       received	packets	signed with the	key.

	  The times in the order listed	SHOULD form a non-decreasing
	  sequence.  There needs to be some distance between start times
	  and stop times, to achieve a seamless	transition.  Each system





	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998		[Page 9]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  sends	using the key with the most recent "start" time	and
	  makes	its first attempt at validation	of incoming traffic with
	  this same key.  If this validation fails and another (older)
	  key is also active, the system should	attempt	to validate with
	  any other active keys	it may possess.

	  4.2.	Key Management Requirements

	  Requirements on an implementation are	as follows.

	  (1)  It is strongly desirable	that a hypothetical security
	       breach in one Internet protocol not automatically
	       compromise other	Internet protocols.  The Authentication
	       Key of this specification SHOULD	NOT be stored using
	       protocols or algorithms that have known flaws.

	  (2)  An implementation MUST support the storage of more than
	       one key at the same time, although normally only	one key
	       will be active on an interface.

	  (3)  An implementation MUST associate	a specific lifetime
	       (i.e., KeyStartSign and KeyStopSign) with each key and
	       corresponding Key Identifier.

	  (4)  An implementation MUST support manual key distribution
	       (e.g., the privileged user manually typing in the key,
	       key lifetime, and key identifier	on the console).  The
	       lifetime	may be infinite.

	  (5)  If more than one	algorithm is supported,	then the
	       implementation MUST require that	the algorithm be
	       specified for each key at the time the other key
	       information is entered.

	  (6)  Keys that are out of date MAY be	deleted	at will	by the
	       implementation without requiring	human intervention.

	  (7)  Manual deletion of active keys SHOULD also be supported.

	  (8)  Key storage SHOULD persist across a system restart, warm
	       or cold,	to avoid operational issues, and an acceptable
	       sequence	number SHOULD be derivable either from non-
	       volatile	memory or a procedure such as NTP.









	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998	       [Page 10]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  4.3.	Pathological Cases

	  An implementation of this document must handle two
	  pathological cases.  Both of these should be exceedingly rare.

	  (1)  During key switch-over, devices may exist which have not
	       yet been	successfully configured	with the new key.

	       Therefore, systems MAY implement	(and would be well
	       advised to implement) an	algorithm that detects the set
	       of keys being used by its neighbors, and	transmits its
	       messages	using both the new and old keys	until all the
	       neighbors are using the new key or the lifetime of the
	       old key expires.	 Under normal circumstances, this
	       elevated	transmission rate will exist for a single
	       refresh interval.

	  (2)  It is possible that the last key	associated with	an
	       interface may expire.

	       When this happens, it is	unacceptable to	revert to an
	       unauthenticated condition, and not advisable to disrupt
	       current reservations.  Therefore, the system should send
	       a "last authentication key expiration" notification to
	       the network manager and treat the key as	having an
	       infinite	lifetime until the lifetime is extended, the key
	       is deleted by network management, or a new key is
	       configured.

	  5.  Conformance Requirements

	  To conform to	this specification, an implementation MUST
	  support all of its aspects.  The H-MD5 authentication		  |
	  algorithm defined in [8] MUST	be implemented by all conforming
	  implementations.  A conforming implementation	MAY also support
	  other	authentication algorithms such as NIST's Secure	Hash
	  Algorithm (SHA).  Manual key distribution as described above
	  MUST be supported by all conforming implementations.	All
	  implementations MUST support the smooth key rollover described
	  under	"Key Change Procedures."

	  The user documentation provided with the implementation MUST
	  contain clear	instructions on	how to ensure that smooth key
	  rollover occurs.

	  Implementations SHOULD support a standard key	management
	  protocol for secure distribution of RSVP Authentication Keys





	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998	       [Page 11]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  once such a key management protocol is standardized by the
	  IETF.

	  6.  Acknowledgments

	  This document	is derived directly from similar work done for
	  OSPF and RIP Version II, jointly by Ran Atkinson and Fred
	  Baker.  Significant editing was sone by Bob Braden, resulting
	  in increased clarity.	 (if you think this document was hard to
	  read,	think about what Bob read).  Signifiant	comments were
	  submitted by Steve Bellovin, who actually understands	this
	  stuff.


	  7.  References

	  [1]  Braden, R., Ed.,	Zhang, L., Estrin, D., Herzog, S., and
	       S.  Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation	Protocol (RSVP)	--
	       Version 1 Functional Specificationq.  Internet Draft
	       draft-ietf-rsvp-spec-14.ps, January 1997.

	  [2]  S.  Bellovin, "Security Problems	in the TCP/IP Protocol
	       Suite", ACM Computer Communications Review, Volume 19,
	       Number 2, pp.32-48, April 1989.

	  [3]  N.  Haller, R.  Atkinson, "Internet Authentication
	       Guidelines", Request for	Comments 1704, October 1994.

	  [4]  R.  Braden, D.  Clark, S.  Crocker, & C.	 Huitema,
	       "Report of IAB Workshop on Security in the Internet
	       Architecture", Request for Comments 1636, June 1994.

	  [5]  R.  Atkinson, "IP Authentication	Header", Request for
	       Comments	1826, August 1995.

	  [6]  R.  Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security	Payload",
	       Request for Comments 1827, August 1995.

	  [7]  S.  Herzog, "RSVP Extensions for	Policy Control", draft-	  *
	       ietf-rsvp-policy-ext-02.txt, March 1997.			  |

	  [8]  Krawczyk, Bellare, and Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for	  *
	       Message Authentication",	Request	for Comments 2104, March
	       1996.








	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998	       [Page 12]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  8.  Security Considerations

	  This entire memo describes and specifies an authentication
	  mechanism for	RSVP that is believed to be secure against
	  active and passive attacks.  Passive attacks are widespread in
	  the Internet at present.  Protection against active attacks is
	  also needed even though such attacks are not as widespread.

	  Users	need to	understand that	the quality of the security
	  provided by this mechanism depends completely	on the strength
	  of the implemented authentication algorithms,	the strength of
	  the key being	used, and the correct implementation of	the
	  security mechanism in	all communicating RSVP implementations.
	  This mechanism also depends on the RSVP Authentication Keys
	  being	kept confidential by all parties.  If any of these
	  assumptions are incorrect or procedures are insufficiently
	  secure, then no real security	will be	provided to the	users of
	  this mechanism.

	  Confidentiality is not provided by this mechanism; if	this is
	  required, IPSEC ESP may be the best approach,	although it is
	  subject to the same criticisms as IPSEC Authetication, and
	  therefore would be applicable	only in	specific environments.
	  Protection against traffic analysis is also not provided.
	  Mechanisms such as bulk link encryption might	be used	when
	  protection against traffic analysis is required.

	  9.  Author's Address

	       Fred Baker
	       Cisco Systems
	       519 Lado	Drive
	       Santa Barbara,
	       California 93111
	       Phone: (408) 526-4257
	       Email: fred@cisco.com
















	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998	       [Page 13]




	  Draft		RSVP Cryptographic Authentication      July 1997


	  Table	of Contents


	  1 Introduction ..........................................    2
	  1.1 Why not  use  the	 Standard  IPSEC  Authentication
	       Header?	...........................................    3
	  2 Data Structures .......................................    3
	  2.1 INTEGRITY	Object Format .............................    3
	  2.2 H-MD5 Message Header and Trailer ....................    5
	  3 Message Processing Rules ..............................    6
	  3.1 Message Generation ..................................    6
	  3.2 Message Reception	...................................    7
	  4 Key	Management ........................................    8
	  4.1 Key Management Procedures	...........................    8
	  4.2 Key Management Requirements .........................   10
	  4.3 Pathological Cases ..................................   11
	  5 Conformance	Requirements ..............................   11
	  6 Acknowledgments .......................................   12
	  7 References ............................................   12
	  8 Security Considerations ...............................   13
	  9 Author's Address ......................................   13































	  Fred Baker	     Expiration: January 1998	       [Page 14]
