

Network Working Group                                        M. Blanchet
Internet-Draft                                                  Viagenie
Expires: December 31, 2001                                  July 2, 2001


              IPv6 Address Space Reserved for Documentation
                  draft-blanchet-ngtrans-exampleaddr-01

Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2001.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

    To reduce the likelihood of conflict and confusion, an IPv6 prefix is
    reserved for use in examples in RFCs, books, documentation, and the
    like.  Since site local addresses have special meaning in IPv6, these
    cannot be used in many example situations and are confusing.
    Instead, an IPv6 prefix 3ffe:ffff::/32 is reserved in the range of
    the test address space.

1. Rationale

    IPv6 introduces many types of addresses in its addressing
    architecture [1], like scoped addresses (link-local, site-local) and
    global addresses.  It also introduces mechanisms for renumbering



Blanchet                Expires December 31, 2001               [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    IPv6 Address Space Reserved for DocumentationJuly 2001


    [2][5].  Since IPv6 has many new ways to use addresses, this means an
    increase use of examples and scenarios for documenting the use of
    addresses.

    RFCs, vendor documentation, books and the like use examples with
    addresses.  Authors always have an issue of using: already allocated
    addresses, not currently allocated addresses or private (site-local
    in IPv6) addresses in their examples.  Using the configuration
    examples in a real environment can cause a problem.  If the example
    uses site-local as global address example, then the actual mechanism
    for handling scoped addresses with site-local scoping can not be
    done.  If allocated addresses are used, then this obviously can make
    address spoofing inadvertly if the environment is connected to the
    internet.  Same could happen for a non-currently allocated address
    space that becomes allocated.

    Similar, but different, discussion also applies to top level domain
    names and some have been reserved for similar purposes [4].

2. Non Use

    This reserved address space MUST NOT be used for private networks or
    test networks.  Use instead site-local [1].

3. Multicast

    Multicast addresses can also be reserved for documentation using this
    document reserved address space together with the Unicast prefix-
    based proposal [6] for multicast addresses.

4. Assignment

    The prefix 3ffe:ffff::/32, out of the test address space [3]
    currently used on the 6bone, is reserved for the purpose of this
    draft.  The 6bone and the Internet MUST never use that prefix.

    A /32 was chosen as a compromise.  Multiple site prefixes and
    multihoming could not be demonstrated with a prefix greater than /47.
    A /24, which could be used for multiple TLA in exchange examples, was
    seen as too much space consumed for documentation.  The compromise
    was /32.  3ffe:ffff::/32 was chosen as the last /32 in the current
    reserved test space[3].

5. IANA Considerations

    IANA reserves 3ffe:ffff::/32 address space out of the test address
    space so that no one will ever receive this allocation, even if the
    3ffe::/16 test address space is reallocated.



Blanchet                Expires December 31, 2001               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    IPv6 Address Space Reserved for DocumentationJuly 2001


6. Security Considerations

    This document encourages the use of test addresses in documentation
    so that less issues will arise from people that could instead use
    address space already allocated or to be allocated in the future.
    These could cause ip address spoofing.  This proposal minimize such
    possible conflicts.

7. Acknowledgements

    In alphabetical order, Alain Durand, Robert Elz, Bob Fink and Dave
    Thaler contributed to the discussion and improvements of this draft.

References

    [1]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
         Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998.

    [2]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
         Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

    [3]  Hinden, R., Fink, R. and J. Postel, "IPv6 Testing Address
         Allocation", RFC 2471, December 1998.

    [4]  Eastlake, D. and A. Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS Names", BCP
         32, RFC 2606, June 1999.

    [5]  Crawford, M., "Router Renumbering for IPv6", RFC 2894, August
         2000.

    [6]  Haberman, B. and D. Thaler, "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 Multicast
         Addresses", Internet-draft, Work in progress draft-ietf-ipngwg-
         uni-based-mcast-01.txt, January 2001.


Author's Address

    Marc Blanchet
    Viagenie
    2875 boul. Laurier, bureau 300
    Sainte-Foy, QC  G1V 2M2
    Canada

    Phone: +1 418 656 9254
    EMail: Marc.Blanchet@viagenie.qc.ca
    URI:   http://www.viagenie.qc.ca/





Blanchet                Expires December 31, 2001               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    IPv6 Address Space Reserved for DocumentationJuly 2001


Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
    included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
    Internet Society.


