
Network Working Group                               Padma Pillay-Esnault
Internet Draft                                          Juniper Networks
                                                            October 2002
Category: Standards Track
Expires: April 2003

                         Grace LSA in OSPFv3
               draft-pillay-esnault-ospf-v3-grace-lsa-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
              http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
              http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract

   This memo describes the OSPF version 3 specific Grace LSA TLV for 
   router-id required for broadcast links (equivalent to the TLV 3 in
   [HITLESS]).









Pillay-Esnault               Standards Track                    [Page 1]

Internet Draft             Grace LSA in OSPFv3              October 2002


1. Introduction

   OSPF hitless Restart[HITLESS] describes a mechanism to restart the 
   control plane of an OSPFv2 router which still has its forwarding plane 
   intact with a minimum of disruption to the network.
 
   The methods described in [HITLESS] just work for point to point links
   for OSPF version 3. In [HITLESS] broadcast and point to multipoint links
   use the Interface Address TLV for OSPF version 2 which is inapplicable
   in OSPF version 3. This memo describes the new TLV (equivalent to TLV 3
   of the Grace LSA) specific to OSPF version 3. 
   


2. Grace LSA

   The Grace LSA header format discussion is in progress in the WG and is
   beyond the scope of this memo. The Grace LSA body format will remain the
   same as described in [HITLESS]. The Grace LSA TLV will remain unchanged 
   for point-to-point interfaces. 

   In  OSPF version 3, the Designated router is identified by its 
   router-id as opposed to its interface address in version 2 on the 
   broadcast segment. The Grace LSA for OSPF version 2 carries the 
   interface address of the restarting router for the helper to identify 
   the restarting neighbor.

   Broadcast and point-to-multi-point segments will now need to carry
   a new TLV is added to carry the router ID for a broadcast segment in 
   OSPF version 3. This new TLV is the equivalent of the IP address TLV 
   (type 3) for OSPF version 2.

	Router Identifier (Type=1003, length=4). The router ID
        on broadcast, NBMA and Point-to-MultiPoint segments, where the 
	helper uses it to eventually identify the restarting router.














Pillay-Esnault               Standards Track                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft            Grace LSAs in OSPFv3              October 2002


Normative References

   [OSPFv3] Coltun, R., D. Ferguson, and J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6", RFC
       2740, December 1999

   [HITLESS] Moy, J., "Hitless OSPF Restart", work in progress



Security Considerations

   The OSPF v3 security mechanisms to prevent tampering and spoofing of 
   LSAs suffice.


Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Kireeti Kompella with whom much of this was discussed.


Authors' Addresses

   Padma Pillay-Esnault
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: padma@juniper.net




















Pillay-Esnault               Standards Track                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft              Grace LSA in OSPFv3             October 2002


IPR Notice

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Pillay-Esnault               Standards Track                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft              Grace LSA in OSPFv3             October 2002


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Pillay-Esnault                    Standards Track                    [Page 5]










