



Network Working Group                                    Randall Atkinson
Internet Draft                                              cisco Systems
draft-ietf-ipsec-arch-sec-00.txt                              4 June 1996




            Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol





STATUS OF THIS MEMO
     This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and
   its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet Drafts.

     Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 6 months.
   Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

     This particular Internet Draft is a product of the IETF's IP Security
   (IPsec) working group.  It is intended that a future version of this draft
   be submitted to the IESG for publication as a Draft Standard RFC.  Comments
   about this draft may be sent to the author or to the IPsec WG mailing list
   <ipsec@tis.com>.

1. INTRODUCTION

    This memo describes the security mechanisms for IP version 4 (IPv4)
   and IP version 6 (IPv6) and the services that they provide.  Each
   security mechanism is specified in a separate document.  This document
   also describes key management requirements for systems implementing
   those security mechanisms.  This document is not an overall Security
   Architecture for the Internet and is instead focused on IP-layer
   security.

1.1 Technical Definitions

   This section provides a few basic definitions that are applicable to
   this document.  Other documents provide more definitions and background
   information. [VK83, HA94]

   Authentication
        The property of knowing that the data received is the same as



Atkinson                                                        [Page 1]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


        the data that was sent and that the claimed sender is in fact
        the actual sender.

   Integrity
        The property of ensuring that data is transmitted from source
        to destination without undetected alteration.

   Confidentiality
        The property of communicating such that the intended recipients
        know what was being sent but unintended parties cannot determine
        what was sent.

   Encryption
        A mechanism commonly used to provide confidentiality.

   Non-repudiation
        The property of a receiver being able to prove that the sender
        of some data did in fact send the data even though the sender
        might later desire to deny ever having sent that data.

   SPI
        Acronym for "Security Parameters Index".  An unstructured opaque
        index which is used in conjunction with the Destination Address
        to identify a particular Security Association.

   Security Association
        The set of security information relating to a given network
        connection or set of connections.  This is described in
        detail below.

   Security Gateway
        A system which acts as the communications gateway between external
        untrusted systems and trusted hosts on their own subnetwork.  It
        also provides security services for the trusted hosts when they
        communicate with the external untrusted systems.

   Traffic Analysis
        The analysis of network traffic flow for the purpose of
        deducing information that is useful to an adversary.
        Examples of such information are frequency of transmission,
        the identities of the conversing parties, sizes of packets,
        Flow Identifiers used, etc. [Sch94]

   Trusted Subnetwork
        A subnetwork containing hosts and routers that trust each other
        not to engage in active or passive attacks and trust that the
        underlying communications channel (e.g. an Ethernet) isn't being
        attacked.



Atkinson                                                        [Page 2]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


1.2 Requirements Terminology

     In this document, the words that are used to define the significance
   of each particular requirement are usually capitalised.  These words
   are:

   - MUST

     This word or the adjective "REQUIRED" means that implementation of
   the item is an absolute requirement of the specification.

   - SHOULD

     This word or the adjective "RECOMMENDED" means that there might
   exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to not implement this item,
   but the full implications should be understood and the case carefully
   weighed before taking a different course.

   - MAY

     This word or the adjective "OPTIONAL" means that this item is truly
   optional to implement.  One vendor might choose to include the item because
   a particular marketplace requires it or because it enhances the product,
   for example; another vendor may omit the same item.


1.3 Typical Use
     There are two specific headers that are used to provide security
   services in IPv4 and IPv6.  These headers are the "IP Authentication
   Header (AH)" [Atk95a] and the "IP Encapsulating Security Payload
   (ESP)" [Atk95b] header.  There are a number of ways in which these IP
   security mechanisms might be used.  This section describes some of the
   more likely uses.  These descriptions are not complete or exhaustive.
   Other uses can also be envisioned.

     The IP Authentication Header is designed to provide integrity and
   authentication without confidentiality to IP datagrams.  In many cases,
   only authentication is needed.  Also, the lack of confidentiality ensures
   that implementations of the Authentication Header will be widely available
   on the Internet, even in locations where the export, import, or use of
   encryption to provide confidentiality is regulated.  The Authentication
   Header supports security between two or more hosts implementing AH, between
   two or more gateways implementing AH, and between a host or gateway
   implementing AH and a set of hosts or gateways.

     In the case where a security gateway is providing services on behalf
   of one or more hosts on a trusted subnet, the security gateway is
   responsible for establishing the security association on behalf of its



Atkinson                                                        [Page 3]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   trusted host and for providing security services between the security
   gateway and the external system(s).  In this case, only the gateway
   need implement AH, while all of the systems behind the gateway on the
   trusted subnet may take advantage of AH services between the gateway
   and external systems.

     A security gateway which receives a datagram containing a recognised
   sensitivity label, for example IPSO [Ken91], from a trusted host MUST
   take that label's value into consideration when creating/selecting an
   Security Association for use with AH between the gateway and the external
   destination.  In such an environment, a gateway which receives a IP packet
   containing the IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) should add
   appropriate authentication, including implicit (i.e. contained in the
   Security Association used) or explicit label information (e.g. IPSO), for
   the decrypted packet that it forwards to the trusted host that is the
   ultimate destination.  The IP Authentication Header should always be used
   on packets containing explicit sensitivity labels to ensure end-to-end
   label integrity.  In environments using security gateways, those gateways
   MUST perform address-based IP packet filtering on unauthenticated packets
   purporting to be from a system known to be using IP security.

     The IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) is designed to provide
   integrity, authentication, and confidentiality to IP datagrams.  [Atk95b]
   ESP can also provide replay protection when used with certain transforms.
   The ESP supports security between two or more hosts implementing ESP,
   between two or more gateways implementing ESP, and between a host or
   gateway implementing ESP and a set of hosts and/or gateways.

     Gateway-to-gateway encryption is most commonly used for building Virtual
   Private Networks (VPNs) across an untrusted backbone such as the Internet.
   It does this by excluding outsiders.  As such, it is often not a substitute
   for host-to-host encryption, and indeed the two can be and often should be
   used together.

     In the case where a security gateway is providing services on behalf
   of one or more hosts on a trusted subnet, the security gateway is
   responsible for establishing the security association on behalf of its
   trusted host and for providing security services between the security
   gateway and the external system(s).  In this case, only the gateway
   need implement ESP, while all of the systems behind the gateway on the
   trusted subnet may take advantage of ESP services between the gateway
   and external systems.  In many cases, the security gateway might also
   perform packet filtering and other firewall-related functions.

     A gateway which receives a datagram containing a recognised sensitivity
   label from a trusted host should take that label's value into consideration
   when creating/selecting a Security Association for use with ESP between the
   gateway and the external destination.  In such an environment, a gateway



Atkinson                                                        [Page 4]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   which receives a IP packet containing the ESP should appropriately label
   the decrypted packet that it forwards to the trusted host that is the
   ultimate destination.  IP security should always be used on packets
   containing explicit sensitivity labels in a manner to ensure end-to-end
   label integrity.

     If there are no security gateways present in the connection, then
   two end systems that implement ESP may also use it to encrypt only the
   user data (e.g. TCP or UDP) being carried between the two systems.
   ESP is designed to provide maximum flexibility so that users may
   select and use only the security that they desire and need.

     Routing headers for which integrity has not been cryptographically
   protected SHOULD be ignored by the receiver.  If this rule is not
   strictly adhered to, then the system will be vulnerable to various
   kinds of attacks, including source routing attacks. [Bel89][CB94][CERT95]

1.4 Security Associations
     The concept of a "Security Association" is fundamental to both the IP
   Encapsulating Security Payload and the IP Authentication Header.  The
   combination of a given Security Parameter Index (SPI) and Destination
   Address uniquely identifies a particular "Security Association".  An
   implementation of the Authentication Header or the Encapsulating Security
   Payload MUST support this concept of a Security Association.  An
   implementation MAY also support other parameters as part of a Security
   Association.

     A single IPsec Security Association is for either AH or ESP, but is never
   for both ESP and AH.  If ESP and AH were both used on a packet, there would
   have to be 2 separate IPsec Security Associations, one for ESP and one for
   AH.

   An IPsec Security Association includes at least the parameters listed
   below, but might include additional parameters as well:

        - Authentication algorithm and algorithm mode being used.
          [REQUIRED for all implementations].
        - Authentication Key(s) used with the above authentication algorithm.
          [REQUIRED for all implementations].
        - Encryption algorithm, algorithm mode, and transform being
          used with the IP Encapsulating Security Payload [REQUIRED for
          ESP implementations]
        - Key(s) used with the encryption algorithm in use with the
          Encapsulating Security Payload [REQUIRED for ESP implementations]
        - Presence/absence and size of a cryptographic synchronisation or
          initialisation vector field for the encryption algorithm
          [REQUIRED for ESP implementations]
        - Lifetime of the key or time when key change should occur



Atkinson                                                        [Page 5]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


          [REQUIRED for all implementations].
        - Lifetime of this Security Association [REQUIRED for all
          implementations].
        - Source Address(es) of the Security Association, might be a
          wildcard address if more than one sending system shares the
          same Security Association with the destination [REQUIRED
          for all implementations]
        - Replay Protection information, including whether it is in use,
          information on the window size for the sequence numbers, etc.
          [REQUIRED for all implementations]
        - Sensitivity level (for example, Secret or Unclassified)
          of the protected data [REQUIRED for all systems claiming
             to provide multi-level security, RECOMMENDED for all other systems]

     A sending host uses the sending userid and Destination Address (and
   possibly  also  other  data)  to  select  an   appropriate   Security
   Association  for  outbound  traffic.   A  security  gateway  does not
   generally know the sending userid  for  traffic  that  originates  on
   other nodes and so may use the Source Address and Destination Address
   (and possibly also other data) instead.

     The  receiving  host  uses  the  combination  of  SPI   value   and
   Destination  Address  to distinguish the correct association.  Hence,
   an  AH  implementation  will  always  be  able  to  use  the  SPI  in
   combination  with  the  Destination Address to determine the security
   association and related security configuration  data  for  all  valid
   incoming packets.  When a formerly valid Security Association becomes
   invalid, the destination system(s) SHOULD NOT immediately reuse  that
   SPI  value  and instead SHOULD let that SPI value become stale before
   reusing it for some other Security Association.

     An IPsec  Security  Association  is  unidirectional.   A  security-
   enhanced  communications  session  between  two  hosts  will need two
   Security  Associations  in  use  (one  in   each   direction).    The
   combination of a particular Security Parameter Index and a particular
   Destination Address uniquely  identifies  the  Security  Association.
   The  Destination  Address may be a unicast address, an IPv4 broadcast
   address, or a multicast group address.

     The receiver-orientation of the Security Association implies  that,
   in  the case of unicast traffic, the destination system will normally
   select the SPI value.  By  having  the  destination  select  the  SPI
   value,  there  is  no  potential  for  manually  configured  Security
   Associations that conflict with automatically configured (e.g. via  a
   key   management  protocol)  Security  Associations.   For  multicast
   traffic,  there  are  multiple  destination  systems  but  a   single
   destination  multicast  group,  so some system or person will need to
   select SPIs on behalf of that multicast group  and  then  communicate



Atkinson                                                        [Page 6]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   the  information  to  all of the legitimate members of that multicast
   group via mechanisms not defined here.

     Multiple senders to a multicast group SHOULD use a single  Security
   Association  (and  hence Security Parameter Index) for all traffic to
   that group when a symmetric cryptographic algorithm is  in  use.   In
   that  case,  the  receiver  only  knows  that the message came from a
   system knowing the  security  association  data  for  that  multicast
   group.   A  receiver  cannot generally authenticate which system sent
   the multicast traffic when symmetric algorithms (e.g. DES, IDEA)  are
   in use.  Multicast traffic SHOULD use a separate Security Association
   for  each  sender  to  the  multicast  group   when   an   asymmetric
   cryptographic  algorithm  is in use.  In this last case, the receiver
   can know the specific system that originated the message.

2. DESIGN OBJECTIVES

     This section describes  some  of  the  design  objectives  of  this
   security  architecture  and  its  component  mechanisms.  The primary
   objective of this work is to ensure that  IPv4  and  IPv6  will  have
   solid cryptographic security mechanisms available to users who desire
   security.

     These mechanisms are designed to avoid adverse impacts on  Internet
   users  who do not employ these security mechanisms for their traffic.
   These mechanisms are intended to be algorithm-independent so that the
   cryptographic  algorithms  can be altered without affecting the other
   parts of the implementation.  These  security  mechanisms  should  be
   useful in enforcing a variety of security policies.

     Standard  default  algorithms (Keyed HMAC MD5, Keyed HMAC SHA, DES-
   CBC) are specified to ensure interoperability in the global Internet.
   The selected default algorithms are widely used in other contexts.


3. IP-LAYER SECURITY MECHANISMS

     There  are two cryptographic security mechanisms for IP.  The first
   is  the  Authentication   Header   which   provides   integrity   and
   authentication  without  confidentiality.  [Atk95a] The second is the
   Encapsulating Security Payload which always provides confidentiality,
   and  usually  provides integrity and authentication. [Atk95b] The two
   IP security mechanisms  are  normally  used  separately.   When  both
   confidentiality   and  authentication  are  needed,  a  combined  ESP
   transform should be used instead of using AH with ESP.

     These IP-layer mechanisms do not provide complete security  against
   all  traffic analysis attacks, though the use of ESP between security



Atkinson                                                        [Page 7]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   gateways can provide partial traffic flow protection.  However, there
   are  several techniques outside the scope of this specification (e.g.
   bulk  link  encryption)  that  might  be   used   to   provide   more
   comprehensive protection against traffic analysis.  [VK83]

3.1 AUTHENTICATION HEADER

     The IP Authentication Header is designed to provide authentication,
   integrity, and replay protection to IP datagrams.  [Atk95a]  It  does
   this by computing a cryptographic authentication function over the IP
   datagram  and  using  one  or  more  authentication   keys   in   the
   computation.  The authentication algorithm may be either symmetric or
   asymmetric.  The sender computes the  authentication  data  prior  to
   sending  the  authenticated  IP  packet and places the authentication
   data inside the Authentication Data.  Fragmentation occurs after  the
   Authentication  Header processing for outbound packets and reassembly
   occurs prior to Authentication Header processing for inbound packets.
   The receiver verifies the correctness of the authentication data upon
   reception.

        Certain fields of the outer IP header that may change in transit
   are  zeroed  for  the  authentication  calculation.   For IPv4, these
   fields are:           Type of Service (TOS)            Time  To  Live
   (TTL)               Checksum                Offset              Flags
        Also,  IPv4  options   are   zeroed   for   the   authentication
   calculation,  except  for the standard IP Security Option BSO and ESO
   (RFC-1038, RFC-1108) and the undocumented non-standard CIPSO  (option
   number 134) option, which are included and are not zeroed.

        For  IPv6, the "Hop Limit" field of the outermost IPv6 header is
   zeroed for the authentication calculation.  IPv6  options  contain  a
   bit  that  indicates  whether the option might change during transit.
   Options  that  might  change  during  transit  are  zeroed  for   the
   authentication  calculation  and  all  others  are  included  in  the
   authentication calculation.  See the  IPv6  specifications  for  more
   information.

        Non-repudiation is not normally provided with the Authentication
   Header.  Confidentiality and  traffic  analysis  protection  are  not
   provided  by the Authentication Header. Replay Protection is normally
   provided by the Authentication Header, though a user might choose not
   to use it.

        Use  of  the Authentication Header will increase the IP protocol
   processing costs in participating systems and will also increase  the
   communications  latency.   The  increased latency is primarily due to
   the calculation of the authentication data  by  the  sender  and  the
   calculation  and  comparison  of  the  authentication  data  by  each



Atkinson                                                        [Page 8]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   receiver for each IP datagram  containing  an  Authentication  Header
   (AH).

        The  Authentication  Header provides much stronger security than
   exists in  most  of  the  current  Internet  and  should  not  affect
   exportability  or  significantly increase implementation cost.  While
   the Authentication Header might be implemented by a security  gateway
   on behalf of hosts on a trusted network behind that security gateway,
   this mode of operation is not encouraged.  Instead, whenever possible
   the  Authentication  Header  should  be  used  from  origin  to final
   destination so that end-to-end protections are provided.

        All  IPv6-capable  nodes  and  all  IPv4  systems  claiming   to
   implement  the  Authentication  Header  MUST implement the standards-
   track mandatory-to- implement AH  transforms.   As  of  this  writing
   these  are  HMAC  MD5  [OG96]  and  HMAC SHA [CG96], but implementers
   should consult the most recent  edition  of  the  "Internet  Official
   Protocol  Standards" [STD-1] for current guidance.  An implementation
   MAY support  other  authentication  algorithms  in  addition  to  the
   mandatory transforms.

3.2 ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD

        The  IP  Encapsulating  Security  Payload  (ESP)  is designed to
   provide  integrity,  authentication,  and   confidentiality   to   IP
   datagrams.  [Atk96b] ESP can also provide replay protection when used
   with certain  transforms.   ESP  encapsulates  either  an  entire  IP
   datagram  or only the upper-layer protocol (e.g. TCP, UDP, ICMP) data
   inside the ESP, applies integrity and authentication protections, and
   encrypts  the  data.   If  tunnel-mode  is in use, a new cleartext IP
   header is prepended  to  the  now  encrypted  Encapsulating  Security
   Payload.   In  tunnel-mode,  the cleartext IP header is used to carry
   the protected data through the internetwork.

3.2.1 Description of the ESP Modes

     There are two modes within ESP.  The first mode, which is known  as
   Tunnel-mode,  encapsulates  an  entire  IP  datagram  within  the ESP
   header.   The  second  mode,  which  is  known   as   Transport-mode,
   encapsulates  an upper-layer protocol (for example UDP or TCP) inside
   ESP and then prepends a cleartext IP header.

3.2.2 Usage of ESP

     ESP works between hosts, between a host and a security gateway,  or
   between security gateways. This support for security gateways permits
   trustworthy networks behind a security gateway to omit encryption and
   thereby avoid the performance and monetary costs of encryption, while



Atkinson                                                        [Page 9]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   still providing confidentiality for traffic transiting  untrustworthy
   network  segments.   When both hosts directly implement ESP and there
   is no intervening security gateway, then they may use the  Transport-
   mode  (where  only the upper layer protocol data (e.g. TCP or UDP) is
   encrypted and there is no encrypted IP header).   This  mode  reduces
   both  the  bandwidth  consumed  and the protocol processing costs for
   users that don't need to keep the entire  IP  datagram  confidential.
   ESP works with both unicast and multicast traffic.

3.2.3 Performance Impacts of ESP

     The  encapsulating  security  approach  used  by ESP can noticeably
   impact network performance in participating systems, but use  of  ESP
   should  not  adversely  impact gateways or other intermediate systems
   that  are  not  participating  in  the  particular  ESP  association.
   Protocol  processing  in  participating  systems will be more complex
   when encapsulating security is used, requiring  both  more  time  and
   more  processing  power.   Use  of  encryption will also increase the
   communications latency.  The increased latency is  primarily  due  to
   the   encryption   and  decryption  required  for  each  IP  datagram
   containing an Encapsulating Security Payload.  The  precise  cost  of
   ESP will vary with the specifics of the implementation, including the
   encryption  algorithm,  key  size,  and  other   factors.    Hardware
   implementations of the encryption algorithm are recommended when high
   throughput is desired.

     For  interoperability  throughout  the  worldwide   Internet,   all
   conforming  implementations  of the IP Encapsulating Security Payload
   MUST also implement the standard mandatory ESP transform.  As of this
   writing,  that  is the Combined ESP transform with DES-CBC, HMAC MD5,
   and Replay Protection. [Hugh96] Implementers should consult the  most
   recent  "IAB  Official  Protocols" RFC for current information on the
   mandatory  to  implement  ESP  transform(s).   Other  confidentiality
   algorithms  and  modes  may  also  be implemented in addition to this
   mandatory algorithm and mode.   Export  and  use  of  encryption  are
   regulated in some countries.  [OTA94]

3.3 COMBINING SECURITY MECHANISMS

     A  node  normally  does  not  apply  both ESP and AH to the same IP
   datagram.  If confidentiality is not  required,  then  AH  should  be
   used.   If  confidentiality is required, then ESP should be used.  In
   some circumstances a security gateway might apply ESP (or  AH)  to  a
   packet before forwarding that packet because a secure tunnel has been
   configured in that security gateway.  Hence,  IP  packets  containing
   both ESP and AH are not strictly prohibited.





Atkinson                                                       [Page 10]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


3.4 OTHER SECURITY MECHANISMS
     Protection  from  traffic  analysis  is  not provided by any of the
   security  mechanisms  described  above.   It   is   unclear   whether
   meaningful   protection   from   traffic  analysis  can  be  provided
   economically at the Internet Layer and it appears that  few  Internet
   users  are  concerned about traffic analysis.  One traditional method
   for protection against traffic analysis  is  the  use  of  bulk  link
   encryption.   Another  technique is to send false traffic in order to
   increase  the  noise  in  the  data  provided  by  traffic  analysis.
   Reference [VK83] discusses traffic analysis issues in more detail.

4. SECURITY ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT

     The  Security  Management  protocol that will be used with IP layer
   security is not specified in this  document.   However,  because  the
   security  management  protocol  is coupled to AH and ESP only via the
   Security Parameters Index (SPI), we can meaningfully  define  AH  and
   ESP  without  having  to  fully  specify  how  security management is
   performed.  We envision that several security management systems will
   be   usable   with   these   specifications,   including  manual  key
   configuration.

     Support for key management methods where the key management data is
   carried  in-line  within  the  IP layer is not a design objective for
   these IP-layer security mechanisms.  Instead these IP-layer  security
   mechanisms  will  primarily  use key management methods where the key
   management data will be carried by an upper layer protocol,  such  as
   UDP  or TCP, on some specific port number or where the key management
   data will be distributed manually.

     This  design  permits  clear  decoupling  of  the  key   management
   mechanism from the other security mechanisms, and thereby permits one
   to substitute new and improved key management methods without  having
   to modify the implementations of the other security mechanisms.  This
   separation of mechanism is clearly wise given  the  long  history  of
   subtle flaws in published key management protocols. [NS78, NS81] What
   follows in this section is a brief discussion of  a  few  alternative
   approaches  to  key  management.   Mutually  consenting  systems  may
   additionally use other key management  approaches  by  private  prior
   agreement.

4.1 Manual Key Distribution

     The simplest form of key management is manual key management, where
   a person manually configures each system with its own  key  and  also
   with  the  keys  of  other  communicating  systems.   This  is  quite
   practical in small, static environments but does not  scale.   It  is
   not  a  viable  medium-term  or  long-term  approach,  but  might  be



Atkinson                                                       [Page 11]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   appropriate and useful in many environments in  the  near-term.   For
   example,  within  a  small  LAN  it is entirely practical to manually
   configure keys for  each  system.   Within  a  single  administrative
   domain  it is practical to configure keys for each router so that the
   routing data can be protected and to reduce the risk of  an  intruder
   breaking into a router.  Another case is where an organisation has an
   encrypting firewall between the internal network and the Internet  at
   each of its sites and it connects two or more sites via the Internet.
   In this case, the security gateway might selectively encrypt  traffic
   for  other  sites within the organisation using a manually configured
   key, while not encrypting traffic for other  destinations.   It  also
   might  be  appropriate  when  only selected communications need to be
   secured.

4.2 Key Management Protocol Requirements

     Widespread deployment and  use  of  IP  security  will  require  an
   Internet-standard  scalable  key  management protocol.  This protocol
   should not be limited  to  supporting  IP  security.   This  protocol
   should  be  compatible  with  the IETF's DNS Security work and should
   include the ability to obtain bootstrapping information  (e.g.  keys,
   addresses)  from  the Secure DNS as a mandatory-to-implement feature.
   signed host keys to the Domain Name System [EK96] The DNS keys enable
   the  originating  party  to authenticate key management messages with
   the other key management party  using  an  asymmetric  algorithm.   A
   standards-track key management protocol for use with IP Security MUST
   provide the property of "Perfect Forward Secrecy" as a  mandatory-to-
   implement  feature.   Further,  any  standards-track  key  management
   protocol MUST permit the secure negotiation or secure  identification
   of  the  Security  Association  attributes  to  all  parties  of that
   Security Association.

4.4 Keying Approaches for IP
     There are several keying approaches for IP.   The  first  approach,
   called  host-oriented  keying, has all users on host 1 share the same
   key for use on traffic destined for all users on host 2.  The  second
   approach, called user-oriented keying, lets user A on host 1 have one
   or more unique session keys for its traffic destined for host 2; such
   session  keys are not shared with other users on host1.  For example,
   user A's ftp session might use a different key than user  A's  telnet
   session.  In systems claiming to provide multi-level security, user A
   will typically have at least one key per  sensitivity  level  in  use
   (e.g.  one  key  for  UNCLASSIFIED  traffic,  a second key for SECRET
   traffic, and a third key for TOP SECRET  traffic).   Similarly,  with
   user-oriented keying one might use separate keys for information sent
   to a multicast group and control messages sent to the same  multicast
   group.   A third approach, called session-unique keying, has a single
   key being assigned to a given IP address, upper-layer  protocol,  and



Atkinson                                                       [Page 12]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   port number triple.

     In  many  cases,  a  single  computer system will have at least two
   mutually suspicious users A and B that do not trust each other.  When
   host-oriented  keying is used and mutually suspicious users exist, it
   is sometimes possible for user A to determine the  host-oriented  key
   via well known methods, such as a Chosen Plaintext attack.  Once user
   A has improperly obtained the key in use, user A can then either read
   user  B's encrypted traffic or forge traffic from user B.  When user-
   oriented keying is used, certain kinds of attack from one  user  onto
   another user's traffic are not possible.

     IP  Security  is  intended  to  be  able to provide Authentication,
   Integrity,  and  Confidentiality  for   applications   operating   on
   connected  end  systems  when  appropriate  algorithms  are  in  use.
   Integrity and Confidentiality can be provided by host-oriented keying
   when  appropriate  dynamic  key management techniques and appropriate
   algorithms are in use.  However, authentication of  principals  using
   applications   on   end-systems   requires   that  processes  running
   applications  be  able  to  request  and  use  their   own   Security
   Associations.   In  this  manner,  applications  can  make use of key
   distribution facilities that provide authentication.

     Hence, support for session-unique keying MUST be present in all  IP
   implementations,   as   is   described  in  the  "IP  Key  Management
   Requirements" section below.  Support for other styles  may  also  be
   implemented.

4.5 Multicast Key Distribution

     Multicast  key  distribution  is  an  active  research  area in the
   published literature as of this writing.  For multicast groups having
   relatively  few  members,  manual key distribution or multiple use of
   existing unicast key distribution algorithms such as modified Diffie-
   Hellman  appears  feasible.   For  very  large  groups,  new scalable
   techniques will be needed.  In-line key management systems that  rely
   on  pre-distributed  master keys and then have serious scaling issues
   that make them questionable for multicast traffic.

4.6 ESP/AH Key Management Requirements
     This section defines  key  management  requirements  for  all  IPv6
   implementations and for those IPv4 implementations that implement the
   IP Authentication Header, the IP Encapsulating Security  Payload,  or
   both.   It applies equally to the IP Authentication Header and the IP
   Encapsulating Security Payload.

     All such  implementations  MUST  support  manual  configuration  of
   Security  Associations  having  variable  SPI  values within the non-



Atkinson                                                       [Page 13]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   reserved range.  An implementation that only  supports  a  fixed  SPI
   value is NOT conforming or compliant.

     All  such  implementations  SHOULD  support  an  Internet  standard
   Security Association establishment protocol (e.g. IKMP) once  such  a
   protocol is published as an Internet standards-track RFC.

     Implementations  MAY  also  support  other  methods  of configuring
   Security Associations.

     Given two endpoints, it MUST be possible  to  have  more  than  one
   concurrent  Security  Association  for  communications  between them.
   Implementations on multi-user hosts  having  at  least  discretionary
   access  controls  MUST  support  either user granularity (i.e. "user-
   oriented")   Security   Associations   or   session-unique   Security
   Associations.

     All  such  implementations  MUST  permit the configuration of host-
   oriented keying.

     A device that encrypts or authenticates IP  packets  originated  by
   other  systems,  for  example a dedicated IP encryptor or an security
   gateway, cannot generally provide user-oriented  keying  for  traffic
   originating  on  other  systems.   Such systems MUST support session-
   unique key selection based on source  address,  destination  address,
   upper-layer  protocol, source port (if any), and destination port (if
   any). Such systems  MAY  additionally  implement  support  for  user-
   oriented keying for traffic originating on other systems.

     The  method  by which keys are configured on a particular system is
   implementation-defined.  A flat file containing security  association
   identifiers  and the security parameters, including the key(s), is an
   example of one possible method for manual key  distribution.   An  IP
   system  MUST  take  reasonable  steps  to  protect the keys and other
   security association information  from  unauthorised  examination  or
   modification because all of the security lies in the keys.

5. USAGE
     This  section describes the possible use of the security mechanisms
   provided by IP in several different environments and applications  in
   order  to  give  the  implementer and user a better idea of how these
   mechanisms can be used to reduce security risks.

5.1 USE WITH FIREWALLS
     Firewalls are not uncommon in the current  Internet.  [CB94]  While
   many  dislike their presence because they restrict connectivity, they
   are unlikely to disappear in the  near  future.   Both  of  these  IP
   mechanisms   can  be  used  to  increase  the  security  provided  by



Atkinson                                                       [Page 14]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   firewalls.

     Firewalls used with IP often need to be able to parse  the  headers
   and  options to determine the transport protocol (e.g. UDP or TCP) in
   use and the port number for that protocol.   Firewalls  can  be  used
   with the Authentication Header regardless of whether that firewall is
   party to the appropriate Security Assocation.   However,  a  firewall
   that  is  not  party  to the applicable Security Association will not
   normally be able to decrypt an encrypted upper-layer protocol to view
   the protocol or port number needed to perform per-packet filtering.

     Further,  firewalls  need  to  verify  that the data (e.g.  source,
   destination, transport protocol, port number) being used  for  access
   control  decisions  is  correct and authentic.  Hence, authentication
   might be performed not only within an organisation or campus but also
   end  to end with remote systems across the Internet.  This use of the
   Authentication Header with IP provides much more assurance  that  the
   data being used for access control decisions is authentic.

     Organisations  with two or more sites that are interconnected using
   commercial IP service might wish  to  use  a  selectively  encrypting
   firewall.  If an encrypting firewall were placed between each site of
   a company and the commercial IP service provider, the firewall  could
   provide  an  encrypted  IP  tunnel among all the company's sites.  It
   could also encrypt traffic between the  company  and  its  suppliers,
   customers,   and   other   affiliates.    Traffic  with  the  Network
   Information Center, with public  Internet  archives,  or  some  other
   organisations might not be encrypted because of the unavailability of
   a standard key management protocol  or  as  a  deliberate  choice  to
   facilitate  better  communications, improved network performance, and
   increased connectivity.  Such a practice  could  easily  protect  the
   company's sensitive traffic from eavesdropping and modification.

     Some  organisations  (e.g.  governments)  might wish to use a fully
   encrypting firewall to provide a Virtual Private Network  (VPN)  over
   commercial  IP  service.   The  difference between that and a bulk IP
   encryption device is that a fully encrypting firewall  would  provide
   filtering of the decrypted traffic as well as providing encryption of
   IP packets.  A related scenario is to use encryption between a mobile
   computer  and the security gateway or encrypting firewall of its home
   campus.

5.2 USE WITH IP MULTICAST
     In the past several years, the Multicast Backbone (MBONE) has grown
   rapidly.   IETF  meetings  and  other  conferences  are now regularly
   multicast with real-time audio, video, and whiteboards.  Many  people
   are  now using teleconferencing applications based on IP Multicast in
   the Internet or in private internal networks.  Others  are  using  IP



Atkinson                                                       [Page 15]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   multicasting to support distributed simulation or other applications.
   Hence it is important that the security mechanisms in IP be  suitable
   for use in an environment where multicast is the general case.

     The  Security  Parameters  Indexes  (SPIs)  used in the IP security
   mechanisms are receiver-oriented, making them well suited for use  in
   IP   multicast.   [Atk95a,   Atk95b]  Unfortunately,  most  currently
   published multicast key distribution protocols  do  not  scale  well.
   However,  there is active research in this area.  As an interim step,
   a  multicast  group  could  repeatedly  use  a  secure  unicast   key
   distribution  protocol  to  distribute  the key to all members or the
   group could pre-arrange keys using manual key distribution.

5.3 USE TO PROVIDE QOS PROTECTION
     The recent IAB Security  Workshop  identified  Quality  of  Service
   protection  as  an  area  of  significant interest. [BCCH] The two IP
   security mechanisms are intended to provide good  support  for  real-
   time  services  as  well as multicasting.  This section describes one
   possible approach to providing such protection.

     The Authentication Header  might  be  used,  with  appropriate  key
   management,    to    provide   authentication   of   packets.    This
   authentication is  potentially  important  in  packet  classification
   within  routers.   The  IPv6 Flow Identifier might act as a Low-Level
   Identifier  (LLID).   Used  together,  packet  classification  within
   routers  becomes  straightforward  if the router is provided with the
   appropriate keying material.  For  performance  reasons  the  routers
   might  authenticate  only  every Nth packet rather than every packet,
   but this is still a significant improvement over capabilities in  the
   current  Internet.  Quality of service provisioning is likely to also
   use the Flow ID in conjunction with a resource reservation  protocol,
   such as RSVP. [ZDESZ93] Thus, the authenticated packet classification
   can be used to help ensure  that  each  packet  receives  appropriate
   handling inside routers.

5.4 USE IN COMPARTMENTED OR MULTI-LEVEL NETWORKS
     A multi-level secure (MLS) network is one where a single network is
   used to  communicate  data  at  different  sensitivity  levels  (e.g.
   Unclassified  and  Secret).   [DoD85]  [DoD87]  Many governments have
   significant  interest  in  MLS  networking.  [DIA]  The  IP  security
   mechanisms  have  been  designed  to  support  MLS  networking.   MLS
   networking requires the  use  of  strong  Mandatory  Access  Controls
   (MAC),   which   ordinary  users  are  incapable  of  controlling  or
   violating. [BL73] This section pertains only to the use of  these  IP
   security mechanisms in MLS environments.

     The   Authentication   Header   can   be  used  to  provide  strong
   authentication  among  hosts  in   a   single-level   network.    The



Atkinson                                                       [Page 16]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   Authentication  Header  can  also be used to provide strong assurance
   for both mandatory access control decisions in  multi-level  networks
   and  discretionary access control decisions in all kinds of networks.
   If explicit IP sensitivity labels (e.g. IPSO) [Ken91]  are  used  and
   confidentiality  is  not  considered  necessary within the particular
   operational environment, the Authentication Header is used to provide
   authentication for the entire packet, including cryptographic binding
   of the sensitivity level to the IP header and user data.  This  is  a
   significant improvement over labeled IPv4 networks where the label is
   trusted even though  it  is  not  trustworthy  because  there  is  no
   authentication or cryptographic binding of the label to the IP header
   and user data.  IPv6 will normally use  implicit  sensitivity  labels
   that  are  part  of the Security Association but not transmitted with
   each packet  instead  of  using  explicit  sensitivity  labels.   All
   explicit  IP  sensitivity  labels  MUST be authenticated using either
   ESP, AH, or both.

     The Encapsulating Security Payload can be combined with appropriate
   key  policies to provide full multi-level secure networking.  In this
   case each key must be used only at a  single  sensitivity  level  and
   compartment.   For  example, Key "A" might be used only for sensitive
   Unclassified packets, while Key  "B"  is  used  only  for  Secret/No-
   compartments    traffic,    and    Key   "C"   is   used   only   for
   Secret/Compartment-X traffic.  The sensitivity level of the protected
   traffic  MUST  NOT  dominate  the  sensitivity  level of the Security
   Association used with that traffic.  The  sensitivity  level  of  the
   Security  Association  MUST NOT dominate the sensitivity level of the
   key that belongs to that Security Association.  The sensitivity level
   of  the  key  SHOULD  be  the  same  as  the sensitivity level of the
   Security  Association.   The  Authentication  Header  can  also  have
   different keys for the same reasons, with the choice of key depending
   in part on the sensitivity level of the packet.

     Encryption is very useful and desirable even when all of the  hosts
   are within a protected environment.  The Internet-standard encryption
   algorithm  could  be  used,  in  conjunction  with  appropriate   key
   management,  to provide strong Discretionary Access Controls (DAC) in
   conjunction with  either  implicit  sensitivity  labels  or  explicit
   sensitivity  labels  (such  as  IPSO provides for IPv4 [Ken91]). Some
   environments  might   consider   the   Internet-standard   encryption
   algorithm  sufficiently  strong  to provide Mandatory Access Controls
   (MAC).  Full encryption should be used for all communications between
   multi-level  computers  or  compartmented mode workstations even when
   the computing environment is considered to be protected.







Atkinson                                                       [Page 17]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


6. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

     This entire draft  discusses  the  Security  Architecture  for  the
   Internet Protocol.  It is not a general security architecture for the
   Internet, but is instead focused on the IP layer.

     Cryptographic  transforms  for  ESP  which  use  a   block-chaining
   algorithm  and  lack a strong integrity mechanism are vulnerable to a
   cut-and-paste attack described by Bellovin and  should  not  be  used
   unless the Authentication Header is always present with packets using
   that ESP transform. [Bel95]

     If more than one  sender  shares  a  Security  Association  with  a
   destination, then the receiving system can only authenticate that the
   packet was sent from one of those  systems  and  cannot  authenticate
   which  of  those systems sent it.  Similarly, if the receiving system
   does not check that the Security Association used  for  a  packet  is
   valid  for  the  claimed  Source  Address  of  the  packet,  then the
   receiving system cannot authenticate  whether  the  packet's  claimed
   Source  Address  is  valid.  For example, if senders "A" and "B" each
   have their own unique Security Association with destination  "D"  and
   "B"  uses  its  valid Security Association with D but forges a Source
   Address of "A", then "D" will be fooled  into  believing  the  packet
   came  from "A" unless "D" verifies that the claimed Source Address is
   party to the Security Association that was used.

     Users need to understand that the quality of the security  provided
   by  the  mechanisms  provided  by  these  two  IP security mechanisms
   depends completely on the strength of the  implemented  cryptographic
   algorithms,   the  strength  of  the  key  being  used,  the  correct
   implementation of the cryptographic algorithms, the security  of  the
   key management protocol, and the correct implementation of IP and the
   several security mechanisms in all of the participating systems.  The
   security  of the implementation is in part related to the security of
   the operating system which  embodies  the  security  implementations.
   For  example,  if  the  operating  system  does  not keep the private
   cryptologic keys  (that  is,  all  symmetric  keys  and  the  private
   asymmetric keys) confidential, then traffic using those keys will not
   be secure.  If any of these is incorrect  or  insufficiently  secure,
   little  or  no  real  security will be provided to the user.  Because
   different users on the same system might not trust each  other,  each
   user  or  each session should usually be keyed separately.  This will
   also tend to increase the work required to cryptanalyse  the  traffic
   since not all traffic will use the same key.

     Certain  security properties (e.g. traffic analysis protection) are
   not provided by any of these mechanisms.  One  possible  approach  to
   traffic  analysis  protection  is appropriate use of link encryption.



Atkinson                                                       [Page 18]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   [VK83] Users must carefully consider which security  properties  they
   require  and  take active steps to ensure that their needs are met by
   these or other mechanisms.

     Certain applications (e.g. electronic mail) probably need  to  have
   application-specific   security   mechanisms.    Application-specific
   security mechanisms are out of the scope  of  this  document.   Users
   interested  in  electronic  mail  security  should  consult  the RFCs
   describing  the  Internet's  Privacy-Enhanced  Mail  system.    Users
   concerned  about other application-specific mechanisms should consult
   the online RFCs to  see  if  suitable  Internet  Standard  mechanisms
   exist.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     Many  of  the  concepts here are derived from or were influenced by
   the  US  Government's  SDNS  security  protocol  specifications,  the
   ISO/IEC's  NLSP  specification,  or  from the proposed swIPe security
   protocol. [SDNS, ISO, IB93, IBK93] The work done  for  SNMP  Security
   and  SNMPv2  Security  influenced the choice of default cryptological
   algorithms and modes. [GM93]  Steve  Bellovin,  Steve  Deering,  Phil
   Karn,  Frank  Kastenholz,  Steve  Kent, Perry Metzger, Dave Mihelcic,
   Hilarie Orman and Bill Simpson provided careful critiques of  earlier
   versions of this draft.

REFERENCES
   [Atk96a] Randall Atkinson, IP Authentication Header, RFC-xxxx
         4 June 1996.

   [Atk96b] Randall Atkinson, IP Encapsulating Security Payload, RFC-xxxx,
            4 June 1996.

   [BCCH94] R. Braden, D. Clark, S. Crocker, & C. Huitema, "Report of IAB
            Workshop on Security in the Internet Architecture", RFC-1636,
            DDN Network Information Center, June 1994.

   [Bel89]  Steven M. Bellovin, "Security Problems in the TCP/IP Protocol
            Suite", ACM Computer Communications Review, Vol. 19, No. 2,
            March 1989.

   [Bel95]  Steven M. Bellovin, Presentation at IP Security Working Group
            Meeting, Proceedings of the 32nd Internet Engineering Task
            Force, March 1995, Internet Engineering Task Force, Danvers, MA.

   [BL73]   Bell, D.E. & LaPadula, L.J., "Secure Computer Systems: Mathematical
            Foundations and Model", Technical Report M74-244, The MITRE
            Corporation, Bedford, MA, May 1973.

   [CERT95] CA-95:01



Atkinson                                                       [Page 19]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   [CB94]   William R. Cheswick & Steven M. Bellovin, Firewalls & Internet
            Security, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1994.

   [CG96]   Shu-jen Chang & Rob Glenn, "HMAC-SHA IP Authentication with Replay
         Prevention", Internet Draft, 1 May 1996.

   [DIA]    US Defense Intelligence Agency, "Compartmented Mode Workstation
            Specification", Technical Report DDS-2600-6243-87.

   [DoD85]  US National Computer Security Center, "Department of Defense
            Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria", DoD 5200.28-STD,
            US Department of Defense, Ft. Meade, MD., December 1985.

   [DoD87]  US National Computer Security Center, "Trusted Network
            Interpretation of the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria",
            NCSC-TG-005, Version 1, US Department of Defense, Ft. Meade, MD.,
            31 July 1987.

   [DH76]   W. Diffie & M. Hellman, "New Directions in Cryptography", IEEE
            Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. IT-22,  No. 6, November
            1976, pp. 644-654.

   [DH95]     Steve Deering & Bob Hinden, Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6)
            Specification, RFC-1883, December 1995.

   [EK96]   D. Eastlake III & C. Kaufman, "Domain Name System Protocol
            Security Extensions", Internet Draft, 30 January 1996.

   [GM93]   J. Galvin & K. McCloghrie, Security Protocols for version 2
            of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2), RFC-1446,
            DDN Network Information Center, April 1993.

   [HA94]   N. Haller & R. Atkinson, "On Internet Authentication", RFC-1704,
            DDN Network Information Center, October 1994.

   [Hugh96] J. Hughes (Editor), "Combined DES-CBC, HMAC, and Replay Prevention
         Security Transform", Internet Draft, June 1996.

   [ISO]   ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6, Network Layer Security Protocol, ISO-IEC
           DIS 11577, International Standards Organisation, Geneva,
        Switzerland, 29 November 1992.

   [IB93]  John Ioannidis and Matt Blaze, "Architecture and Implementation of
           Network-layer Security Under Unix", Proceedings of USENIX Security
           Symposium, Santa Clara, CA, October 1993.

   [IBK93] John Ioannidis, Matt Blaze, & Phil Karn, "swIPe: Network-Layer
           Security for IP", presentation at the Spring 1993 IETF Meeting,



Atkinson                                                       [Page 20]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


           Columbus, Ohio.

   [Ken91] Steve Kent, US DoD Security Options for the Internet Protocol,
           RFC-1108, DDN Network Information Center, November 1991.

   [Ken93] Steve Kent, Privacy Enhancement for Internet Electronic Mail:
           Part II: Certificate-Based Key Management, RFC-1422, DDN Network
           Information Center, 10 February 1993.

   [KB93]  J. Kohl & B. Neuman, The Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5),
           RFC-1510, DDN Network Information Center, 10 September 1993.

   [NS78]  R.M. Needham & M.D. Schroeder, "Using Encryption for Authentication
           in Large Networks of Computers", Communications of the ACM,
           Vol. 21, No. 12, December 1978, pp. 993-999.

   [NS81]  R.M. Needham & M.D. Schroeder, "Authentication Revisited",
           ACM Operating Systems Review, Vol. 21, No. 1., 1981.

   [OG96]  Mike Oehler & Rob Glenn, "HMAC-MD5 IP Authentication with Replay
           Prevention", Internet Draft, 1 May 1996.

   [OTA94]   US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, "Information Security
        & Privacy in Network Environments", OTA-TCT-606, Government Printing
        Office, Washington, DC, September 1994.

   [Sch94] Bruce Schneier, Applied Cryptography, Section 8.6,
        John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1994.

   [SDNS]  SDNS Secure Data Network System, Security Protocol 3, SP3,
           Document SDN.301, Revision 1.5, 15 May 1989, published
           in NIST Publication NIST-IR-90-4250, February 1990.

   [STD-1] J. Postel, "Internet Official Protocol Standards", STD-1,
        March 1996.

   [VK83]  V.L. Voydock & S.T. Kent, "Security Mechanisms in High-level
           Networks", ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 15, No. 2, June 1983.

   [ZDESZ93] Zhang, L., Deering, S., Estrin, D., Shenker, S., and Zappala, D.,
           "RSVP: A New Resource ReSerVation Protocol", IEEE Network magazine,
        September 1993.

DISCLAIMER

     The views expressed in this note are those of the author and are not
   necessarily those of his employer.  The author and his employer
   specifically disclaim responsibility for any problems arising from correct



Atkinson                                                       [Page 21]

Internet Draft        Security Architecture for IP           4 June 1996


   or incorrect implementation or use of this design.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

   Randall Atkinson <rja@cisco.com>
   cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134-1706
   USA

   Telephone: +1 (408) 526-4000








































Atkinson                                                       [Page 22]

