
IPTEL Working Group                                               J. Yu 
Internet Draft                                                  NeuStar 
Document: draft-yu-tel-dai-01.txt                            D. Hancock 
Category: Standards Track                                     CableLabs 
                                                           F. Andreasen 
                                                                  Cisco 
                                                          March 3, 2007 
 
 
                    DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI 
 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2007. 
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).  
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines a "dai" parameter for the "tel" Uniform 
   Resource Identifier (URI) to support the Dial Around Indicator 
   (DAI).  The "dai" parameter is associated with the "cic" parameter, 
   defined in [RFC 4964], and indicates how the carrier identified in 
   the "cic" parameter is chosen to handle the call.  This document 
   expands the use of the "cic" parameter so that implementations that 
   support pre-subscribed and dial carrier requirements. 
 
    
  
Yu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2007            [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2 
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2 
   3.  Abbreviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 
   4.  Formal Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 
   5.  Normative Rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4 
     5.1. Adding the "dai" Parameter to the "tel" URI . . . . . . .   6 
     5.2. Handling the "tel" URI with the "cic", or "cic" and "dai"  11 
   6.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12 
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12 
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13 
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13 
     9.1. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13 
     9.2. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13 
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14 
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14 
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . .  14 
 
1. Conventions 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119]. 
    
2. Introduction 
    
   Before equal access was supported in the United States, only AT&T's 
   subscribers could dial "1" to reach AT&T when they made long 
   distance calls.  Other long distance carriers' subscribers needed to 
   dial extra digits to reach their long distance carriers.  For the 
   fair competition, the Federal Communication Commission in the U.S. 
   mandated the support for equal access that allowed any long distance 
   carrier's subscriber to follow the same dialing plan to reach 
   his/her pre-subscribed long distance carrier.  The regulatory bodies 
   in many other countries also have mandated equal access. 
    
   To allow a telephony subscriber to use a non-pre-subscribed long 
   distance carrier for some of their long distance calls, the U.S. has 
   implemented the dialing prefix "10XXX" that was later expanded to 
   "101XXXX" in the dialing plan.  The prefix allows the caller to use 
   "XXX" or "XXXX" to specify the long distance carrier to handle that 
   particular call.  This dialing prefix was also used to identify the 
   local toll carrier in the United States when equal access also 
   applied to the local toll calls. 
    
   One of the purposes of the DAI is to indicate to the long distance 
   carrier that receives a call from the local exchange carrier whether 
   the call came from a pre-subscribed customer or not.   Due to 
   operator-assisted calls, where the called party or a third party may 
   be charged for the call in some cases, the DAI is also used to 
   indicate to the receiving long distance carrier if it is the primary 
   or alternate preferred long distance carrier of the charged party.   
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
    
   The long distance carrier information, the Carrier Identification 
   Code (CIC), can be carried in the "cic" parameter [RFC 4694], a 
   parameter of the "tel" Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) [RFC3761].  
   The "cic" parameter defined in [RFC 4694] identifies the freephone 
   service provider that serves the freephone number.  As described in 
   [RFC 4694], it can also be used to carry the CIC associated with the 
   carrier who is to handle a call to a geographic telephone number; 
   such usage is leveraged in this document.  When the carrier that is 
   assigned the CIC receives the call, the "dai" parameter defined in 
   this document indicates to that carrier how it was chosen to handle 
   the call. 
    
3. Abbreviations 
    
   ANSI   American National Standards Institute 
   BNF    Backus-Naur Form 
   CIC    Carrier Identification Code (also cic) 
   DAI    Dial Around Indicator (also dai) 
   FCC    Federal Communications Commission 
   ENUM   Telephone Number Mapping 
   GSTN   Global Switched Telephone Network 
   GW     Gateway 
   IETF   Internet Engineering Task Force 
   IP     Internet Protocol 
   ISUP   Integrated Services Digital Network User Part 
   SS7    Signaling System number 7 
   SW     Switch 
   URI    Uniform Resource Identifier 
 
4. Formal Syntax 
    
   The following syntax specification uses the Augmented Backus-Naur 
   Form (ABNF) as described in RFC 4234 [RFC4234] and defines the "dai" 
   parameter by extending the "parameter" production rule of the "tel" 
   URI defined in [RFC3966]. 
    
   Parameter               =/ dai  
   dai                     = ";dai="  
                                     "no-ind"           / 
                                     "presub"           /  
                                     "presub-da"        /  
                                     "presub-daUnkwn"   /  
                                     "no-presub"        /  
                                     "CIC-chrgPty"      / 
                                     "altCIC-chrgPty"   / 
                                     "verbal-clgPty"    / 
                                     "verbal-chrgPty"   / 
                                     "emergency"        / 
                                     "presubUnkwn-da"   /     
                                     "operator" 
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
                                
   The "dai" parameter can appear in the "tel" URI at most once.  The 
   "dai" parameter MUST NOT be present if the "cic" parameter is not 
   present.  When the "cic" parameter is present due to carrier 
   selection, the "dai" parameter MUST be present so that its presence 
   in the tel URI can differentiate the carrier selection case from the 
   freephone case.  Please see [RFC 4694] for the syntax specification 
   of the "cic" parameter. 
    
   Below are the descriptions of the values of the "dai" parameter. 
    
   "no-ind" indicates that it is not known how the carrier is selected. 
   "presub" indicates that the selected carrier is the caller's 
     presubscribed carrier and is not dialed by the caller. 
   "presub-da" indicates that the selected carrier is the caller's 
     presubscribed carrier and is dialed by the caller. 
   "presub-daUnkwn" indicates that the selected carrier is the caller's 
     presubscribed carrier and it is not known if it is dialed by the 
     caller. 
   "no-presub" indicates that the selected carrier is not the caller's 
     presubscribed carrier and is dialed by the caller. 
   "CIC-chrgPty" indicates that the selected carrier is the primary 
     preferred carrier of the charged party. 
   "altCIC-chrgPty" indicates that the selected carrier is the 
     alternate preferred carrier of the charged party. 
   "verbal-clgPty" indicates that it is not known if the selected 
     carrier is the caller's presubscribed carrier and is selected 
     based on the caller's verbal instructions. 
   "verbal-chrgPty" indicates that it is not known if the selected 
     carrier is the charged party's presubscribed carrier and is 
     selected based on the charged party's verbal instructions. 
   "emergency" indicates that the carrier is selected for emergency 
     call handling. 
   "presubUnkwn-da" indicates that the selected carrier is dialed by 
     the caller and it is not known if the selected carrier is the 
     caller's presubscribed carrier.  
   "operator" indicates that the carrier is selected by a network 
     operator. 
    
5. Normative Rules 
    
   This section discusses how a network node adds the "dai" parameter 
   to the "tel" URI or handles a received "tel" URI that contains the 
   "dai" parameter.  Since the "dai" parameter goes with the "cic" 
   parameter, the latter is included in some of the discussions below.  
   The phone numbers of the caller and called party are geographic 
   numbers in the discussions. 
    
   When the call signaling message contains a "tel" URI that carries 
   the "cic" parameter, ENUM [RFC3761] could map the phone number in 
   the "tel" URI to other URI(s) such as sip [RFC3261] URI.  In that 
   case, the mapped URI instead of the parameters in the "tel" URI MAY 

  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
   be used to route the call.  In this document it is assumed that ENUM 
   is not involved. 
    
   Figure 1 is used to help describing the rules.  The discussion below 
   focuses on the handling of the "tel" URI in the signaling messages.  
   It is assumed that the signaling message will contain the "cic" and 
   "dai" parameters after it leaves "Network Node A" for a call 
   originated by the user or after it leaves "GSTN GW" when the call 
   comes from the PSTN. 
    
   "User Device" generates the signaling message requesting a call 
   setup.   
    
   "Network Node A" represents those network nodes that receive the 
   call request and can analyze the type of call (e.g., local toll, 
   long distance or international based on the calling party 
   number/address and called party number) and determine or identify 
   the carrier that is to handle the call.  The latter can be based on 
   the information from the caller (e.g., "101XXXX"), the presubscribed 
   carrier information in the service profile of the caller, or via the 
   involvement of an operator that interacts with the calling party, 
   called party (e.g., for collect call) or a third party (e.g., when 
   the call is charged to a third party) for an operator-assisted call.  
   If configured by the network operator, Node A can apply a preferred 
   CIC for all calls where carrier selection is needed.   Note that 
   although Figure 1 shows Node A as a single entity, its 
   responsibilities can be shared amongst multiple Node As such that 
   the Node A that is connected to or communicates with the user device 
   is separate from the Node A that determines or identifies the 
   carrier to handle the call. 
    
             +-------------------------------+ 
             |                               | 
        +---------+     +---------+     +---------+      +---------+ 
        | Network |     | Network |     | Network |      |  User   | 
        | Node C  |-----| Node B  |-----| Node A  |------| Device  |    
        +---------+     +---------+     +---------+      +---------+ 
             |               |               |       
             |               |               |                  
             |               |          +---------+      +---------+ 
             |               +----------|  GSTN   |      |  GSTN   | 
             +--------------------------|   GW    |------|   SW    | 
                                        +---------+      +---------+ 
    
                       Figure 1.  Network Model. 
    
   "Network Node B" represents those network nodes that are not 
   associated with the carrier identified in the "cic" parameter and 
   need to route the signaling message that contains the "cic" and 
   "dai" parameters towards the carrier identified in the "cic" 
   parameter. 
    

  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
   "Network Node C" represents those network nodes that receive the 
   signaling message from "Network Node B" and belongs to the carrier 
   identified in the "cic" parameter. 
    
   "GSTN GW" stands for "Global Switched Telephone Network (GSTN) 
   Gateway (GW)".  It interfaces between the Internet Protocol (IP) 
   domain and the GSTN domain for signaling protocols and the user 
   traffic.  The GSTN includes the wireline network, wireless network 
   and other circuit-switched network.  Signaling traffic and user 
   traffic could be handled by separate network nodes.   In this 
   document, both types of traffic are handled by "GSTN GW" to simplify 
   the discussion. 
    
   "GSTN Switch (SW)" is a circuit switch in the GSTN that is connected 
   with the GSTN GW.   
     
   "User Device", "Network Node A", "Network Node B" and "Network Node 
   C" are in the IP domain.  "Network Node A", "Network Node B" and 
   "Network Node C" can route the calls to the GSTN via the GSTN GW. 
    
   The rules for various scenarios are described below. 
    
5.1  Adding the "dai" Parameter to the "tel" URI 
    
   This section discusses the cases when "Network Node A" receives a 
   call request from "User Device" and may need to add the "dai" 
   parameter to the "tel" URI.  If the "cic" Parameter is included and 
   "Network Node A" does not know how the carrier is selected or does 
   not want to reveal how the carrier is selected (if it is allowed to 
   do it), "Network Node A" MUST include the "dai" Parameter and set it 
   to "no-ind". 
    
   A. CIC Information provided in call signaling from "User Device" 
    
     "User Device" can provide the CIC information via call signaling 
     in two ways.   
      
     a. 
        Include the "cic" parameter in the "tel" URI to carry the 
       selected CIC.  It is outside the scope of this document as to 
       how "User Device" adds the "cic" parameter to the "tel" URI.  
       "User Device" SHOULD NOT include the "dai" parameter in the 
       "tel" URI.  When included by the "User Device", "Network Node A" 
       SHALL ignore the "dai" parameter.   
      
     b. 
        Include the selected CIC information in the dialed string 
       (e.g., "101XXXX" followed by a national number).  [String] 
       specifies one way to deliver the dialed string in the SIP 
       protocol [RFC3261].  It is outside the scope of this document as 
       to how the dialed string is carried in the signaling message and 
       how "Network Node A" knows how to identify the caller selected 
       CIC information when applicable and the called phone number from 
       the received dialed string. 
      
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
     When receiving a call request containing the "cic" parameter or 
     the CIC information in the signaling message from "User Device" 
     and an operator is not involved in call handling, "Network Node A" 
     MUST follow the rules described below.  The cases when an operator 
     is involved in determining/selecting a carrier to handle the call 
     is addressed in C and D below. 
      
     - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
       associated with (that is, the carrier network is the network 
       within which Node A resides), "Network Node A" MUST remove the 
       "cic" parameter, if present in the "tel" URI, and MUST NOT 
       include the "dai" parameter if it needs to forward the signaling 
       message to another network node. 
      
     - If "Network Node A" selects a carrier other than the caller's 
       pre-subscribed carrier or the one specified by "User Device" to 
       handle the call (e.g., does not allow the caller to specify the 
       carrier to handle the call), "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
       parameter to contain the CIC it selects and include the "cic" 
       parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node 
       A" MUST include the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI and set it 
       to "operator". 
      
     - If the "User Device" specified carrier is the same as the 
       caller's pre-subscribed carrier and "Network Node A" knows that 
       the CIC information is provided by "User Device", "Network Node 
       A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain the caller's pre-
       subscribed carrier's CIC and include the parameter, if not yet 
       present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" 
       parameter to "presub-da" and include the parameter in the "tel" 
       URI. 
    
       But if "Network Node A" is not sure whether the CIC information 
       is provided by "User Device" (e.g., a proxy server between "User 
       Device" and "Network Node A" is involved), it MUST set the "dai" 
       parameter to "presub-daUnkwn" in the process described above. 
      
     - If the "User Device" specified carrier is different from the 
       caller's pre-subscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the 
       "cic" parameter to contain the "User Device" specified carrier 
       and include the parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  
       "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "no-presub" and 
       include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
      
     - If the "User Device" specifies a carrier and "Network Node A" 
        cannot determine if the selected carrier is the caller's 
        presubscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
        parameter to contain the "User Device" specified carrier and 
        include the parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  
        "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "presubUnkwn-
        da" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
 
      
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
   B. CIC Information not provided in call signaling 
    
     In this scenario, "User Device" did not provide any CIC 
     information in call signaling and an operator is not involved in 
     call handling.  "Network Node A" MUST follow the rules described 
     below.  The cases when an operator is involved in determining/ 
     selecting a carrier to handle the call is addressed in C and D 
     below. 
      
     - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
       associated with, "Network Node A" MUST NOT include the "cic" and 
       "dai" parameters in the "tel" URI if it needs to forward the 
       signaling message to another network node. 
      
     - If "Network Node A" selects a carrier that is different from the 
       caller's pre-subscribed carrier to handle the call, it MUST set 
       the "cic" parameter to contain the CIC it selects and include 
       the parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST include 
       the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI and set it to "operator". 
       
     - If the caller has a pre-subscribed carrier that can handle the 
       call, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain 
       the caller's pre-subscribed carrier's CIC and include the 
       parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" 
       parameter to "presub" and include the parameter in the "tel" 
       URI. 
 
   C. Operator-assisted call handling, caller pays for the call 
    
     When an operator is involved in handling the call request from the 
     caller, "Network Node A" may or may not have the CIC information 
     available from the signaling message.   If the caller is to pay 
     for the call, the operator may interact with the caller to 
     determine the carrier to handle the call when applicable.  If the 
     CIC information is available from call signaling and the operator 
     also interacts with the caller to get the CIC information, the CIC 
     provided by the operator MUST be used.  How the caller indicates 
     an operator-assisted call and passes the CIC information in call 
     signaling is outside the scope of this document. 
      
     "Network Node A" through the assistance of an operator MUST follow 
     the rules described below.   
      
     - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
       associated with, "Network Node A" MUST remove the "cic" 
       parameter, if present in the "tel" URI, and MUST NOT include the 
       "dai" parameter if it needs to forward the signaling message to 
       another network node. 
      
     - If "Network Node A" selects a carrier other than the caller's 
       pre-subscribed carrier or the one specified by "User Device" or 
       indicated by the caller during the interaction with the operator 
       to handle the call, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
       parameter to contain the CIC it selects and include the 
       parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node 
       A" MUST include the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI and set it 
       to "operator". 
      
     - If the carrier specified by "User Device" in call signaling or 
       by the caller via the interaction with the operator or selected 
       by "Network Node A" is the same as the caller's pre-subscribed 
       carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to 
       contain the caller's pre-subscribed carrier's CIC and include 
       the parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  "Network 
       Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "presub-da" and include 
       the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
       But if "Network Node A" is not sure whether the CIC information 
       is provided by "User Device" or the operator did not indicate if 
       the CIC information came from the caller, it MUST set the "dai" 
       parameter to "presub-daUnkwn" in the process described above. 
      
     - If the carrier specified by "User Device" in call signaling or 
       by caller via the interaction with the operator is different 
       from the caller's pre-subscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST 
       set the "cic" parameter to contain the CIC of the selected 
       carrier and include the parameter, if not yet present, in the 
       "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to 
       "no-presub" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
      
     - If the operator receives verbal instructions from the caller to 
       use a specific carrier and it is not unknown if that carrier is 
       the caller's presubscribed carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set 
       the "cic" parameter to contain the CIC of the specified carrier 
       and include the parameter, if not yet present, in the "tel" URI.  
       "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter to "verbal-clgPty" 
       and include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
    
   D. Operator-assisted call handling, caller does not pay for the call 
      
     There are cases where the call is charged to the called party or a 
     third party.   How the caller indicates an operator-assisted call 
     and passes the CIC information in call signaling is outside the 
     scope of this document. The caller will indicate to the operator 
     that either the called party or a third party is to pay for the 
     call.   The operator then checks with the charged party if he/she 
     agrees to pay for the call and may verbally get the CIC 
     information from the charged party or retrieve the primary and 
     alternate preferred carrier information from some databases.  It 
     is assumed that the "tel" URI in the call signaling from "User 
     Device" does not contain the "cic" parameter and/or "dai" 
     parameter.  They are ignored if they are present. 
      
     "Network Node A" through the assistance of an operator MUST follow 
     the rules described below.   
      
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
     - If the call is to be handled by the carrier "Network Node A" is 
       associated with, "Network Node A" MUST remove the "cic" 
       parameter, if present, and MUST NOT include the "dai" parameter 
       in the "tel" URI. 
      
     - If "Network Node A" selects the carrier to handle the call, it 
       MUST set the "cic" parameter to contain the CIC it selects and 
       include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST 
       include the "dai" parameter in the "tel" URI and set it to 
       "operator". 
      
     - If the charged party's primary preferred carrier is used for the 
       call handling, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to 
       contain that carrier's CIC and include the parameter in the 
       "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MSUT set the "dai" parameter to 
       "CIC-chrgPty" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  How 
       "Network Node A" knows that the selected carrier is the charged 
       party's primary preferred carrier is outside the scope of this 
       document. 
      
     - If the charged party's alternate preferred carrier is used for 
       the call handling, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter 
       to contain that carrier's CIC and include the parameter in the 
       "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MSUT set the "dai" parameter to 
       "altCIC-chrgPty" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI.  
       How "Network Node A" knows that the selected carrier is the 
       charged party's alternate preferred carrier is outside the scope 
       of this document. 
      
     - If the operator receives verbal instructions from the charged 
       party to use a specific carrier and it is not unknown if that 
       carrier is the charged party's primary or alternate preferred 
       carrier, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" parameter to 
       contain the CIC of the specified carrier and include the 
       parameter in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" 
       parameter to "verbal-chrgPty" and include the parameter in the 
       "tel" URI. 
      
     - If the caller contacts an operator for an emergency situation 
       and a carrier that "Network Node A" is not associated with needs 
       to handle the call, "Network Node A" MUST set the "cic" 
       parameter to the CIC of that carrier and include the parameter 
       in the "tel" URI.  "Network Node A" MUST set the "dai" parameter 
       to "emergency" and include the parameter in the "tel" URI. 
 
   E. Call signaling received from the GSTN SW by GSTN GW 
      
     The GSTN GW may receive the Signaling System number 7 (SS7) 
     Integrated Services Digital Network User Part (ISUP) signaling 
     message from the GSTN SW that contains the CIC information.  For 
     example, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) ISUP has the 
     "Carrier Selection Information" parameter that carries the CIC 
     information.  There is a one-to-one mapping between the ANSI ISUP 
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
     "Carrier Selection Information" parameter and the "dai" parameter 
     with one exception - the "dai" parameter is not included in the 
     "tel" URI when the ISUP "Carrier Selection Information" parameter 
     is set to "0" (no indication).  
 
5.2  Handling the "tel" URI with the "cic", or "cic" and "dai" 
    
   This section discusses how "Network Node A", "Network Node B", 
   "Network Node C" or "GSTN GW" handles the signaling messages that 
   contain the "cic" parameter, or "dai" and "cic" parameters in the 
   "tel" URI.   
    
   A. Network Node A 
    
     After "Network Node A" has added the "dai" parameter and/or "cic" 
     parameter to the "tel" URI and is ready to route the call, it MUST 
     route the call based on the rules described in [TELNP] to "Network 
     Node B", "Network Node C" or "GSTN GW".  "Network Node A" MAY 
     record the "dai" value in the call detail record.   Absence of the 
     "dai" parameter indicates that no DAI is available.    
    
   B. Network Node B 
    
     Since "Network Node B" is not associated with the carrier 
     identified by the CIC in the "cic" parameter, it MUST route the 
     call based on the "cic" parameter as stated in [RFC 4694] to 
     another "Network Node B", "Network Node C" or "GSTN GW".  "Network 
     Node B" MAY record the "dai" value in the call detail record.   
     Absence of the "dai" parameter indicates that no DAI is available.    
      
   C. Network Node C 
    
     Since "Network Node C" is associated with the carrier identified 
     by the CIC in the "cic" parameter, it removes the "cic" parameter 
     and the "dai" parameter, if present, before it determines how to 
     handle the call.   "Network Node C" MAY record the "dai" value in 
     the call detail record.   Absence of the "dai" parameter indicates 
     that no DAI is available.   How "Network Node C" continues the 
     call routing/handling is outside the scope of this document. 
      
   D. GSTN GW 
    
     When "GSTN GW" determines that the call is to be routed to "GSTN 
     SW" and SS7 ISUP is used in the GSTN, it MUST map the "dai" 
     parameter to the corresponding ISUP parameter.   In ANSI ISUP, the 
     "Carrier Selection Information" parameter is the one for mapping.  
     There is a one-to-one mapping between the ANSI ISUP "Carrier 
     Selection Information" parameter and the "dai" parameter with one 
     exception - the "dai" parameter is not included in the "tel" URI  
     when the ANSI ISUP "Carrier Selection Information" parameter is 
     set to "0" (no indication).  "GSTN GW" MAY record the "dai" value 
     in the call detail record.   Absence of the "dai" parameter 
     indicates that no DAI is available.    
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
      
   E. User Device 
    
     "User Device" is not expected to receive signaling messages that 
     contain the "dai" and/or "cic" parameters.  If the received 
     signaling messages contain the "tel" URI with the "dai" and/or 
     "cic" parameters, "User device" SHALL ignore the parameter(s). 
    
6. Examples 
    
   A. A caller whose pre-subscribed carrier has a CIC of "+1-6789" makes 
     an outbound call with the following "tel" URI: 
    
        tel:+1-202-533-1234 
      
     "Network Node A" adds the "dai" and "cic" parameters to the "tel" 
     URI as shown below.    
    
        tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-6789;dai=presub 
         
   B. A caller whose pre-subscribed carrier has a CIC of "+1-6789" makes 
     an outbound call to +1-202-533-1234 and specifies to use the CIC 
     of "+1-2345" in call signaling. 
    
     "Network Node A" recognizes that the caller has selected a non-
     presubscribed carrier to handle the call.  It includes the "dai" 
     and "cic" parameters to the "tel" URI as shown below.    
    
        tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-2345;dai=no-presub 
         
   C. A caller makes a collect call to +1-202-533-1234 through an 
     operator.  The operator at "Network Node A" interacts with the 
     called party and gets a verbal approval to use the CIC of "+1-
     3456".  "Network Node A" adds the "dai" and "cic" parameters to 
     the "tel" URI as shown below.  
      
        tel:+1-202-533-1234;cic=+1-3456;dai=verbal-chrgPty 
 
7. Security Considerations 
 
   In addition to those security implications discussed in [RFC3966], 
   there may be new security implications associated with the "dai" 
   parameter depending on the carrier who uses the information. 
    
   Changing the content of the "dai" parameter may cause a call to be 
   rejected by or cause some problems (e.g., collecting call charge) to 
   the carrier who handles the call.  For example, changing from 
   "presub" to "no-presub" may cause the call to be rejected if the 
   carrier that is to handle the call only handles calls from its pre-
   subscribed subscribers.  Changing "no-presub" to "presub" may cause 
   a call that would be rejected to be processed by a carrier who later 
   finds out it cannot collect the call charge from the caller or has 

  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
   to pay more than the call charge to collect the call charge from the 
   caller via a third party (e.g., local exchange carrier). 
    
   It is RECOMMENDED that protocols carrying the "tel" URI provide hop 
   by hop integrity for the URI including the parameters.  This allows 
   detection of any unauthorized changes to the contents of the "tel" 
   URI. 
    
   Please note that the information in the "dai" parameter may not be 
   authenticated; therefore, the use of the information by the 
   recipient of the "tel" URI is done at its own risk. 
    
8. IANA Considerations 
    
   The "dai" parameter defined in this document needs to be registered 
   with IANA as a new parameter for the "tel" URI [RFC3966]. 
    
   1. Parameter name: dai 
      Applicability:  used to indicate how a carrier was chosen for 
      handling a call 
      Mandatory or optional: optional 
      Restrictions on syntax:  see Section 5 
      Reference to a specification:  defined in this document 
 
9. References 
    
9.1 Normative References 
    
   [RFC2026] S. Bradner, RFC 2026, "The Internet Standards Process -- 
             Revision 3", October 1996.  
    
   [RFC2119] S. Bradner, RFC 2119, "Key words for use in RFCs to 
             Indicate Requirement Levels", March 1997. 
    
    
   [RFC3966] H. Schulzrinne, RFC 3966, "The tel URI for Telephone 
             Numbers", December 2004. 
    
   [RDC4234] D. Crocker and P. Overell, RFC 4234, "Augmented BNF for 
             Syntax Specifications: ABNF", October 2005. 
    
   [RFC4694] J. Yu, RFC 4694, "NP Parameters for the "tel" URI", 
             October 2006. 
    
9.2 Informative References 
    
   [RFC3261] J. Rosenberg, et al., RFC 3261, "SIP: Session Initiation 
             Protocol," June 2002. 
    

  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
   [RFC3761] P. Faltstrom and M. Mealling, RFC 3761, "The E.164 to 
             Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) - Dynamic Delegation 
             Discovery System (DDDS) Application (ENUM)", April 2004. 
    
   [String]  B. Rosen, draft-rosen-iptel-dialstring-05.txt, "Dialstring 
             parameter for the Session Initiation Protocol Uniform 
             Resource Identifier", June 2006 (Work in Progress). 
    
10. Acknowledgments 
    
   The author would like to thank Martin Dolly and Penn Pfautz for 
   their assistances in providing the relevant information on the DAI. 
 
Authors' Addresses 
    
   James Yu 
   NeuStar, Inc. 
   46000 Center Oak Plaza 
   Sterling, VA 20166 
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: +1-571-434-5572 
   Email: james.yu@neustar.biz 
 
   David Hancock 
   CableLabs 
   858 Coal Creek Circle 
   Louisville, CO 80027-9750 
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: +1-303-661-3381 
   Email: d.hancock@cablelabs.com 
    
   Flemming Andreasen 
   Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   499 Thornall Street, 8th Floor 
   Edison, NJ 08837 
   U.S.A. 
   Email: fandreas@cisco.com 
 
Intellectual Property 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
 







































  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft        DAI Parameter for the "tel" URI        March 2007   
                      
 
Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
 
Acknowledgment 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
 





























  
Yu, et al.             Expires  September 2, 2007             [Page 16] 

