

Network Working Group                                       Naiming Shen
Internet Draft                                          Redback Networks
                                                                Ping Pan
Expiration Date: June 2004                                    Ciena Corp
                                                           December 2003



               Nexthop Fast ReRoute for IP and MPLS

               <draft-shen-nhop-fastreroute-00.txt>



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract
   
   This document describes a mechanism called NFRR (Nexthop
   Fast ReRoute) to perform fast re-route for any type of traffic
   in the event of a link/node failure or a nexthop unreachable.
   The protected traffic can be IP, MPLS, unicast or multicast.
   The re-routed traffic can either be destined to the nexthop
   router or to the next-nexthop router. RSVP explicitly routed LSPs
   are used as a tool to perform the local patch for minimizing
   the packet loss.


1. Introduction

   This document describes a simple mechanism to quickly re-direct IP
   and/or MPLS traffic away from a local link or a nexthop failure.
   The mechanism presented is mainly to facilitate the needs


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 1]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   of real-time IP applications over native IP unicast/multicast
   networks or LDP based MPLS networks. The goal is to limit the IP
   packet loss duration in the network to 10s of milliseconds in the
   event of link/node failures. RSVP [1] signaled LSP is used with
   explicitly routed path as the re-direct tunnel, while the protected
   traffic can be either MPLS traffic engineered LSPs, LDP based LSPs,
   IP unicast, IP multicast traffic or the mix of them. This mechanism
   can be applied to both point-to-point links and multi-access links
   in the cases of the link protection and node protection.

   An optional RSVP Bypass Nexthop object is defined to allow a
   modified RPF checks for re-directed IP multicast data traffic. It
   can also be used to detect  misconfigured re-direct LSPs.

   The node failure fast protection of native IP traffic is also
   described in this document. Link State IGP can be used to make
   the IP prefixes association with Next-NextHop nodes and the
   re-direct LSPs configured towards them. For node protection of
   LDP and multicast IP traffic, extension for both protocols are
   needed and is beyond the scope of this document.

   The re-direct LSP is no different from any other RSVP explicitly
   routed LSPs, except that it does not carry data traffic under
   normal condition. It is pre-built to reach the nexthop or the
   next-nexthop router in the case of the protected link/node fails
   or the nexthop over that protected link is unreachable. Any type
   of data traffic intended to use this nexthop may be switched onto
   this re-direct LSP. Since the LSP is built to protect local links
   or adjacent nodes, the explicit path can be easily calculated
   either statically or dynamically.


2. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [5].

      LSP - An MPLS Label Switched Path.  In this document, an LSP
            will always refer to an explicitly routed LSP.

      LDP LSP - LSP signaled by LDP protocol.

      RSVP LSP - LSP signaled by RSVP protocol.

      NFRR - Nexthop Fast ReRoute Scheme

      NFRR LSP - Nexthop Fast ReRoute LSP, which is same as bypass
                 LSP or re-direct LSP in this document.

      PLR - Point of Local Repair. The head-end LSR of a bypass LSP.


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 2]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


      MP - Merge Point. The tail-end LSR of a bypass LSP.

      Nexthop Node - The router is directly connected to the PLR node.

      Next-Nexthop Node - The router is the Nexthop node of PLR's
                          Nexthop node.

   
3. Motivations

   IP applications such as VoIP and PWE3 are highly desirable to
   have the packet loss with less than 10s of milliseconds during
   network elements failure. Currently there are three approaches
   in practice or proposed to speed up the recovery from such
   failures as discussed below.

   First, MPLS LSP Fast ReRoute mechanism [2] is used to quickly
   re-route the RSVP LSP traffic onto a detour or bypass LSP when
   a local link failure is detected. Since the detour or bypass LSPs
   are pre-built before the local link failure, this re-route
   operation can be accomplished within 10s of milliseconds. If the
   IP backbone deploys network-wide MPLS TE, this MPLS Fast ReRoute
   approach is the best solution. The Fast ReRoute is just
   another application using the existing MPLS infrastructure.
   This mechanism does not offer protection of IP, LDP or multicast
   data traffic.

   Second, IGP fast convergence is another mechanism in reducing the
   packet loss time in network element failure. This mechanism also
   includes the improvement of LDP convergence. Comparing with the
   first solution, the recovery time is usually an order of magnitude
   higher, which is in the 100s of milliseconds range. For certain
   real-time applications, that duration is still acceptable and
   this is a big improvement over "normal" IGP convergence time of
   seconds or even 10s of seconds. Since this mechanism is purely
   based on the control plane convergence in the network, there is
   no guarantee for the convergence to be limited under 100s of
   milliseconds.

   Third, pre-calculated alternative nexthops are downloaded into
   forwarding engines. As in the first mechanism, when a local
   link failure is detected, those alternative nexthops are used to
   continue forwarding the data traffic. If an alternative nexthop
   does exist, then the re-route time can be accomplished within
   10s of milliseconds. There are a couple of shortcoming of this
   approach. There may not exist such an alternative nexthop for
   the IP destinations along with the links it intends to protect.
   When such alternative nexthops do exist, if there are many IGP
   interfaces and adjacencies on the node, this requires to run
   many instances of SPF in order to find a loop-free alternative.
   This scheme can not be used to protect MPLS TE LSPs since they


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 3]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   are not constructed from the native IP routing. Last, if the
   local link failure is shortly after some network events and
   the IGP on the node is busy calculating those SPFs, then the
   alternative nexthop picture is incomplete at that time and the
   re-route action may not be reliable.

   There is obviously a need for providers to protect not only the
   RSVP based LSP traffic, but also any data traffic in general;
   there is a need for providers not only to protect traffic in
   the case of link failure, but also with node failure for any
   type of traffic;  there is a need for providers not only to protect
   native IP unicast traffic, but also the IP multicast data traffic.
   The Nexthop Fast ReRoute mechanism does not make any assumption of
   the protected traffic is MPLS tunneled or not. If a network-wide
   MPLS traffic engineering is not the goal of the network design,
   the network can either stay with native IP or LDP LSPs but
   still get the reliable Fast ReRoute benefits for link/node
   protection. In this scheme, RSVP signaled LSP will be used as
   the re-direct tunnel for protected links/nodes. Those LSPs are
   explicitly routed to get around the intended failure points. In
   this scheme, the LSP is used in the network as a tool to fast
   re-direct data traffic. If a network has an external Frame Relay
   circuit in replacement for the RSVP based LSP, this Nexthop Fast
   ReRoute will also work as specified in this document.


4. Nexthop Fast ReRoute(NFRR) Operation Scheme

   Over a point-to-point there will be only one nexthop in general.
   There are multiple nexthops over a LAN interface. The NFRR
   is used to re-route traffic around the IP nexthop over the
   protected interface. Assume there is an alternative path to
   reach that nexthop node other than the protected link, we can
   always pre-build an explicitly routed LSP to the node which owns
   this nexthop address. If the local link is down, or the nexthop
   is unreachable, the PLR router can quickly re-direct the data
   traffic intended for this nexthop onto the NFRR LSP for that
   nexthop node. Thus any traffic can be fast re-routed
   in a loop-free fashion using NFRR. Over a LAN, the nexthop
   unreachable status can possibly be quickly detected using some
   link level aliveness protocols, and this is beyond the scope of
   this document. When using NFRR protecting MPLS traffic, global
   label space scheme is assume on the MP node. The NFRR for link
   protection is assumed in this section. Node protection is
   described in section 5.

   The below network diagram will be used in this document as an
   example topology for discussion purpose:





Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 4]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


                  lsp1
                 +-----[R6]---+
                 |            |
                 |            V
                 |    ||==>b[R3]          X
       [R1]====>[R2]a=||                 /
                 | |  ||==>c[R4]===>d[R5]-- Y
                 | |          ^        ^
                 | |          |        |
                 | +--[R7]----+        |
                 |       lsp2          |lsp3
                 +---------------------+

           R2 is the PLR router.
           R2, R3 and R4 share a LAN connection with "a", "b" and
           "c" belong to the same prefix.
           R5 is a Next-Nexthop node from the PLR through R4.

           lsp1 is sourced from R2 and explicitly route through R6
           to reach R3. lsp1 is configured to protect "b" over
           interface "a".

           lsp2 is sourced from R2 to reach R4. lsp2 is configured
           to protect "c" over interface "a".

           lsp3 is sourced from R2 to reach R5. lsp3 is configured
           to protect "c" or node R4 over interface "a".

           Figure 1: An example of NFRR


4.1 NFRR to protect LDP LSPs

   When the protected traffic is LDP LSPs, LDP process can
   pre-build the association of the NFRR tunnel and the LDP LSPs
   which use this particular nexthop. When the link is down or
   the nexthop is unreachable, the forwarding engine can quickly
   switch the traffic onto that NFRR tunnel by pushing an outbound
   label and send it out. This is no different from re-directing
   MPLS TE LSPs as described section 4.5 only without any RSVP
   signaling involved in the LDP case.

4.2 NFRR to protect IP unicast traffic

   The PLR node can pre-build the association of the NFRR tunnel
   and the IP prefixes which use that same nexthop in the route
   lookup. When the nexthop failure is detected, the forwarding
   engine will be able to re-route the IP traffic to those
   affected destinations onto the NFRR tunnel. The only difference
   from the LDP case is that, it only has one label on the label
   stack of the packet when being switch out to the NFRR LSP.


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 5]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


4.3 NFRR to protect IP multicast traffic

   Similar to the IP unicast case, the PLR node can pre-build the
   association of the NFRR tunnel and the (S, G) entries on the
   protected interface. In the point-to-point case, there needs
   to be only one NFRR tunnel to be referenced in the (S, G)
   entries of the protected interface. In the LAN case, multiple
   NFRR tunnel references can exist in the (S, G) entries.
   When the protected interface is down, or one of the multicast
   forwarding downstream neighbor is unreachable, all or part of
   the NFRR tunnels can be applied to re-route multicast traffic
   to the downstream nodes. In the example in Figure 1, assume
   R2 has both R3 and R4 as downstream for some (S, G)s, when
   the link "a" is down, the references in those (S, G)s should
   point to both lsp1 and lsp2 as its "new" downstream interfaces.
   R2 needs to forward the multicast traffic through both LSPs.

   This document defines a new RSVP Bypass Nexthop object
   which can be optionally inserted into the PATH message by the
   head-end of the NFRR LSP and the RESV message by the tail-end
   of the NFRR LSP. The bypassed link nexthop IP address of the
   NFRR tunnel can be conveyed to the tail-end node using this
   new RSVP object. Multicast RPF check algorithm can be modified
   to accept the multicast traffic for the (S, G)s on the
   alternative inbound interface even though the RPF check may
   currently point to the protected link which has that nexthop
   IP address.

4.4 NFRR to protect IPv6 traffic

   The same NFRR LSP can protect native IPv6 traffic going to
   the same neighbor node over the protected interface. In
   this case, an IPv6 nexthop address can be configured along
   with the NFRR LSP. The same operation for unicast and multicast
   of IPv4 traffic mentioned above applies here.

4.5 NFRR to protect MPLS TE LSPs

   When some of the protected traffic to the nexthop belongs to
   MPLS TE LSPs, the mechanism is the same as described in [2]
   as facility based link-protection bypass tunnel scheme. All
   the RSVP signaling extension described in that document
   applies here. NFRR only explicitly extends this into the
   protection of a nexthop to deal with multi-access case
   instead of protection of local link only, but The technique
   used is identical.

4.6 Protocol packets over the protected link

   There are two types of protocol packets with regard to this scheme.
   One requires an IP route lookup such as BGP, OSPF VL or RSVP packets;


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 6]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   The other is sent directly over a local interface to neighbors
   such as ISIS, OSPF, PIM or LDP adjacency packets. When the
   protected link is down or the protected nexthop is unreachable,
   the affected routable protocol packets MUST be re-routed over the
   NFRR tunnel while the directly transported protocol packets SHOULD
   be dropped in order to time out the protocol adjacency (even if
   those protocol packets are re-directed over the NFRR LSPs, they
   will be dropped by the neighbors due to inbound interface does
   not match the protocol packets). The link/node down event will
   be eventually propagated across the network and the entire network
   can converge into a new topology.


5. Node Protection

   The NFRR scheme described in section 4 is for link and nexthop
   failure protection. This section describe the technique to use
   NFRR for node protection.

5.1 Node Protection for IP Unicast Traffic

   As described in section 4, we make the association from the route
   nexthop to the NFRR LSP. When the link or nexthop fails, the
   forwarding engine switches the traffic using this route nexthop
   onto the NFRR LSP. In the node protection case, as long as we
   have the knowledge of which routes using this nexthop also going
   to the Next-Nexthop node, we are able to make the same association
   to re-direct the traffic onto the NFRR LSP which has the
   Next-Nexthop node as the tail-end.

   For IP unicast traffic, this knowledge of routes association with
   nexthop and Next-Nexthop nodes can be easily obtained from link
   state IGPs. IGP Shortcut [4] is a technique to dynamically direct
   IP traffic through TE LSPs. In the NFRR node protection case,
   the PLR can use those shortcuts not for normal IP traffic, it will
   only be used when the nexthop element fails. In other words, this
   shortcut to the Next-Nexthop node is suddenly enabled by forwarding
   engine when it detects the link, nexthop or nexthop node failure.
   Those IGP shortcut LSPs can also be called conditional IGP
   shortcuts with the conditions being the nexthop link or node failure.

   In the example of Figure 1, lsp3 is a NFRR LSP source from PLR R2
   with destination of R5 to protect node R4 as well as link "a" and
   nexthop "c". IGP uses modified shortcut technique to associated
   prefixes X and Y with nexthop "c1" over interface "a". The IGP
   also installs a modified shortcut lsp3 to be associated with
   nexthop "c1". The nexthop "c1" is just like "c", but it contains
   the NFRR LSP lsp3 reference information. Basically if R4 has N
   nexthop nodes, R2 will have "c1" through "cn" nexthops, each
   references a NFRR LSP to it's Next-Nexthop node. The IP traffic
   to X and Y normally is forwarded to R4, in the event of "a", "c"
   or R4 node failure, the traffic is re-directed to lsp3 into R5.


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 7]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   The algorithm for IGP Shortcut described in section 4 of [4]
   has three possible ways to determine the first-hop information.
   The first way can be modified for NFRR conditional shortcut as
   follows:

      - Examine the list of tail-end routers directly reachable via a
        NFRR-tunnel. If there is a NFRR-tunnel to this node, we will
        copy the first-hop information from the parent node(s) to
        the this node. We also attach the NFRR-tunnel information to
        the first-hop information on this node.

   This first-hop information of the node can be used to construct
   the nexthop and its association with the NFRR LSP destined to
   that node. The rest of the NFRR operation is the same as in
   link protection case as described in section 4.2.

5.2 Node Protection for Other Traffic

   NFRR Node Protection for MPLS TE LSP is the same as described
   in [2] as facility based node-protection bypass tunnel scheme.
   NFRR only explicitly extends this capability into the multi-access
   case. The technique used is the same.

   NFRR Node Protection for LDP LSP and IP multicast traffic will
   be covered by two separate documents using the NFRR technique and
   is out side the scope of this document.


6. RSVP Bypass Nexthop Object

   A NFRR LSP is just like any explicitly routed LSP defined in [1]
   and it is used by the PLR to fast re-route traffic to the same
   neighbor over alternative interfaces. As mentioned in section 4.3,
   re-routed multicast traffic will be dropped if the neighbor
   does not aware certain multicast traffic can come in an alternative
   interface. This Bypass Nexthop object is used to dynamically pass
   this information from the head-end NFRR node to the tail-end node
   so that the RPF check on that protected interface can be modified
   to accept with an alternative interface. The tail-end node can
   send back the same object to indicate whether the requested
   operation is supported.

   If NFRR LSP is used to protect the link failure, it is useful to
   know if the NFRR tail-end owns this bypassed nexthop address;
   When in node protection case, it is also useful to know the NFRR
   tail-end does not own this bypassed nexthop address; For IP
   multicast re-route application, the bypassed nexthop address needs
   to be local to the tail-end node in both link and node protections.
   This object can be inserted by the tail-end node in RESV message
   to confirm the acknowledged address is local or not to  prevent
   NFRR LSP mis-configuration.


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 8]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   The Bypass Nexthop object has the following format:

      Class = TBD  (use form 11bbbbbb for compatibility)
      C-Type = 1 or 2
   
               0             1              2             3
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |       Length (bytes)      |  Class-Num  |   C-Type    |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |  Reserved   |         Service Option Bits             |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        //                  (Subobjects)                        //
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

    Subobject 1: Nexthop IPv4 address

               0             1              2             3
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |    Type     |    Length   |  IPv4 address (4 bytes)   |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | IPv4 address (continued)  |Prefix Length|   Pad       |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

    Subobject 2: Nexthop IPv6 address

        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        |    Type     |    Length   |  IPv6 address (16 bytes)  |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | IPv6 address (continued)                              |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | IPv6 address (continued)                              |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | IPv6 address (continued)                              |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
        | IPv6 address (continued)  |Prefix Length|   Pad       |
        +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   This object with C-type of 1 is used in PATH message and C-type
   of 2 is used in RESV message. They are called Request and
   Acknowledgement Objects. The Request Bypass Nexthop object
   MUST only be inserted into PATH message by the head-end of
   the NFRR LSP node , and MUST not be changed by downstream LSRs.
   The Ack Bypass Nexthop object MUST only be inserted into RESV
   message by the tail-end of the NFRR LSP node, and MUST not be
   changed by the upstream LSRs.

   Only two bits are currently defined for Service Option Bits field
   in this document as following (position from the right most to
   left most):




Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                      [Page 9]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


      Bits     Description

        1      Request/Ack this bypass nexthop address to be
               local to the NFRR LSP tail-end node. The head-end LSR
               sets this bit in PATH message requesting the information;
               the tail-end LSR responds with RESV message by setting
               or clearing this bit depends on the bypass nexthop
               address is local to the LSR or not.

        2      Request/Ack this bypass nexthop address to be
               used to support modified multicast RPF checks as
               defined in section 4.3. If the tail-end LSR does not
               support this extension, then the multicast data
               traffic SHOULD NOT be switched over to the NFRR LSP
               in the event of link/node failure.


7. Forwarding Entry Update and NFRR LSP Reversion

   The link down or nexthop unreachable event will eventually reach
   the protocols such as OSPF or LDP. Regardless of IGP fast
   convergence is used or not, the new forwarding entry downloading
   should be hold for a little longer than the expected network
   convergence time. This is to guarantee all the nodes in the
   routing area have converged onto the new topology to avoid the
   possibility of forwarding loops. It is safe to send traffic over
   the NFRR LSP even after the network is converged. Since before the
   link failure, the PLR was using the nexthop node to reach some
   IP destination; it will be highly unlikely that the nexthop node
   sends the traffic back to the PLR after the adjacent link/node
   fails in network steady state.

   Since the NFRR scheme is nexthop entry based, when those entries
   are updated after the NFRR re-route takes place, the re-route
   action for those entries will be reverted to normal operation.
   In the example in Figure 1, R2 used to reach prefix X and Y through
   nexthop "c" of R4. When "a" or "c" is down, the traffic towards
   X and Y will be tunneled in lsp2 to use the same R4 for further
   forwarding. After the holdown time expires and R2 decides to
   use R7 as the new IP nexthop for X and Y. When R2 downloads the
   X and Y into the forwarding engine, this update will revert the
   re-route operation for traffic to X and Y. If the link "a" comes
   up before the holdown time expires, R2 will use "c" as the nexthop
   for X and Y again. The reversion time and operation is the same
   in both cases.

   Fast convergence of IGP will improve the network performance
   even with the NFRR presents. It can help to quickly reach the more
   optimal forwarding state in the routing domain with topology
   changes.



Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                     [Page 10]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


8. Operational Considerations

8.1 ECMP Cases

   The NFRR scheme is independent of ECMP case and the loadsharing
   algorithm should be the same. THe NFRR LSP is used to protect
   one particular nexthop, only the portion of traffic used to
   use this nexthop will be re-routed in the failure event.

8.2 Bandwidth Reservation

   Even in the case the network does not use MPLS TE for normal
   traffic, bandwidth reservation for NFRR LSPs can still be
   applied. The RSVP interface bandwidth will reflect the amount
   of link bandwidth reserved for re-routed traffic purpose.

8.3 Type of Traffic To Be Re-routed.

   Since NFRR can be applied to any traffic in link protection
   case, it is an implementation or configuration issue to decide
   which type of traffic will be applied, others will be dropped.
   Even within the same type of traffic, filters can be designed to
   select only the traffic using certain destination, service or
   labels will be re-routed if the bandwidth is an issue.

8.4 MPLS and IP In The Network

   The NFRR scheme uses RSVP explicitly routed LSP to protect data
   traffic while data traffic itself may not use MPLS TE LSPs in
   the network. In this case, MPLS TE is not the goal of the network
   design, the NFRR LSPs are used as a tool to accomplish the
   fast re-route goal. In order for the re-routed traffic to be
   reliable and loop-free for any network topology, the traffic
   has to be either source routed or tunneled independent of
   IP routing. RSVP signaled LSP is widely supported technology
   and can be easily fit into NFRR application. If the network
   only needs to protect a few local links or nodes, the RSVP
   LSPs can be restricted to a limited scope in the network using
   NFRR. It is also useful for the network which has MPLS TE in the
   core and IP or LDP LSPs at the edge.

   Even in the case the provider has outband circuits to protect
   the link or node, NFRR can also be used without RSVP signaled
   LSP involved. The multicast RPF extension for RSVP functionality
   can be statically applied on the MP node in this case.

8.5 Link Protection and Node Protection

   Node protection in fast re-route is not without issues.  Not all
   the LSRs have the node-protection option. For example, the PHP
   nodes can only perform link-protection for the last hop of LSPs.


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                     [Page 11]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   The node-protection scheme also takes more network resource
   since the MP is further away from the nexthop and it requires
   more signaling work to identify the flow going through the
   next-nexthop node in IP, LDP and multicast cases.

   With Non-stop forwarding, protocol graceful restart and software
   modular design make good inroad into provider's networks, a
   complete node failure will gradually become rare events and a
   node down often can be scheduled.


9. IANA Considerations

   The NFRR proposal requires that IANA allocate a C-class number
   for Bypass Nexthop object.


10. Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce new security issues. The security
   considerations pertaining to the original RSVP protocol [3] remain
   relevant.


11. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank George Apostolopoulos, Enke Chen,
   Albert Tian, Liming Wei and Jun Zhang for their contributions and
   comments to this document.


12. Intellectual Property Considerations
   
   Redback Networks may have intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some of the specification contained in this document.


13. Full Copyright Statement
   
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.
   
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of  
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for


Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                     [Page 12]

Internet Draft             Nexthop FRR                     December 2003


   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English. 
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


14. References

   [1]  D. Awduche, et al, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP    
        tunnels", RFC3029, December 2001.

   [2]  Pan, P., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Vasseur, J.Ph., Copper, D.,
        Atlas, A., Jork, M., "Fast Reroute Technique in RSVP-TE",
        Interne draft, draft-pan-rsvp-fastreroute-03.txt, work in
        progress.                 

   [3]  R. Braden, Ed., et al, "Resource ReSerVation protocol (RSVP)
        -- version 1 functional specification," RFC2205,
        September 1997.

   [4]  Smit, H., Shen, N., "Calculating IGP Routes Over Traffic
        Engineering Tunnels", draft-hsmit-shen-mpls-igp-spf-01.txt,
        Work In Progress.

   [5]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
        Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.


15. Author Information

   Naiming Shen
   Redback Networks, Inc.
   300 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA 95134
   Email: naiming@redback.com

   Ping Pan
   CIENA Corp.
   5965 Silver Creek Valley Road
   San Jose, CA 95138
   Email: ppan@ciena.com



Shen, Pan                Expires June 2004                     [Page 13]


