 
 
   CCAMP Working Group                                     R. Rabbat (Ed.) 
   Internet Draft                                  Fujitsu Labs of America 
   Expires: December 2003                             Toshio Soumiya (Ed.) 
                                                  Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd 
                                                                 June 2003 
 
 
               Optical Network Failure Recovery Requirements 
 
                 draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
 
Abstract 
    
   This draft presents requirements for control plane-based recovery in 
   optical networks.  We focus on data-plane failure recovery in optical 
   networks that use a GMPLS-based control plane, but use different 
   transport plane technologies.  Our goal is to gather and 
   systematically lay out these requirements in one document to serve as 
   a coherent basis for work on protocol and solution development. We 
   begin with a brief overview and consideration of the requirements, 
   and then list the requirements. 
    
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 1] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Glossary of Terms Used.........................................3 
   3. Failure Recovery Requirements..................................3 
   3.1 Overview of Recovery Requirements.............................3 
   3.2 Shared Mesh-based Recovery....................................4 
   3.3 Failure Notification Mechanisms...............................5 
   3.4 Optical Network Failure Recovery Requirements.................6 
   4. Security Considerations........................................7 
   5. Conclusions....................................................8 
   6. Intellectual Property Considerations...........................8 
   7. References.....................................................8 
   8. Acknowledgments................................................9 
   9. Editors∆ Address...............................................9 
   10. Authors∆ Addresses...........................................10 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................10 
    
    
1.   Introduction 
    
   This draft describes requirements for control plane-based recovery 
   from data plane failures in optical networks.  We focus on optical 
   networks that use a Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS)-based [3] control plane and various transport plane 
   technologies.  Service recovery from failures, using either a 
   protection or restoration scheme, is an important feature of these 
   networks to ensure high reliability and uninterrupted service.  
   Protection and restoration algorithms may be used for local repair 
   (around failed spans or nodes) or edge-to-edge recovery of an LSP.  
   Shared mesh-based recovery is desirable to reduce spare capacity 
   requirements and enable flexible service recovery scenarios. 
          
   While edge-to-edge based recovery has the potential to be more 
   efficient, it also entails the potentially lengthy delay incurred in 
   notifying all nodes along the recovery path of the failure of a 
   remote resource on the working path.  For some applications, recovery 
   paths must be chosen carefully to meet strict recovery time 
   requirement (e.g., in the range of few 10s to few hundred ms).  
        
   Several Internet Drafts in the Sub-IP Area currently relate to 
   recovery in GMPLS networks. They cover terminology [4], functional 
   specifications [5] and analysis [6] for recovery in GMPLS-based 
   networks, and survivability requirements and considerations for 
   traffic engineered or hierarchical networks [7,8].  As a set, these 
   documents provide their readers with detailed descriptions of the 
   concepts and mechanisms used in network recovery.  The list of 
   requirements for control plane-based recovery has not, however, been 
 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 2] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
   specifically detailed in any one document, which is the objective of 
   this draft. 
 
 
2.   Glossary of Terms Used 
    
   The following acronyms are used in this document: 
    
      o  LSP:     Label Switched Path  
      o  RSVP-TE: Resource Reservation Protocol-Traffic Eng. [9] 
 
   The terminology for GMPLS-based recovery is documented in [4]. We use 
   the following terms from that document: 
 
      o  Detecting Entity (Failure Detection). 
      o  Reporting Entity (Failure Correlation and Notification). 
      o  Deciding Entity (part of the failure recovery decision 
         process). 
      o  Recovery Entity (part of the failure recovery activation 
         process). 
     o   Bridge, which could be Permanent Bridge, Broadcast Bridge, or 
         Selector Bridge). 
      o  Selector, which could be a ÙSelective selectorˆ or a ÙMerging 
         Selectorˆ. 
      o  Recovery phases: 1. Failure Detection, 2. Failure Localization 
         and Isolation, 3. Failure Notification, 4. Recovery (Protection 
         or Restoration), 5. Reversion (Normalization) 
 
 
3.   Failure Recovery Requirements 
    
   Even though some requirements for fault recovery have been discussed 
   in working groups of the Sub-IP area, several additional aspects 
   should be examined and mentioned regarding recovery in optical 
   networks.  In this section, we describe the fault recovery 
   requirements that we see.  For purposes of completeness, we have 
   attempted to gather together requirements that have appeared in an 
   isolated way in other drafts. 
    
3.1    Overview of Recovery Requirements 
    
   This subsection summarizes the survivability requirements for optical 
   networks.  Greater details on the requirements are provided in the 
   subsequent subsections. 
    
   The following classes (types) of recovery are required for span, LSP 
   segment, and LSP recovery: 
    
      o  Protection 
 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 3] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
         - pre-computed route and pre-established (i.e., cross- 
           connected) resources 
      o  Restoration 
         - pre-computed route and on-demand establishment of resources 
         - on-demand route and on-demand establishment of resources 
    
   A recovery scheme uses either protection or restoration (or both), 
   together with failure detection and notification mechanisms.  
   Depending on the service specification, the timing bounds for the 
   recovery schemes may range from 50 ms (for e.g., to repair services 
   carrying video or voice data) to other less strict bounds of say 
   several hundred ms (for low priority data). 
    
   For multi-layered networks, hold-off timers are required to allow 
   recovery at lower layers. Escalation to higher layers should be 
   possible when necessary.  Support for horizontal hierarchy must also 
   be included, because large networks are usually segmented [7]. 
    
   In general, recovery schemes must operate in a stable and cooperative 
   manner to maximize the network's reliability and availability.  
   Recovery schemes should also be resource efficient and flexible with 
   respect to types of failures, service classes, and the network 
   operators∆ policies that they work with. 
 
   As has been identified by the P&R Design Team [4], a critical 
   component in guaranteeing the time constraints for service recovery 
   is the Failure Notification phase.  
 
3.2    Shared Mesh-based Recovery 
    
   Today∆s Synchronous Optical Network / Synchronous Digital Hierarchy 
   (SONET/SDH) networks use recovery techniques based on linear and ring 
   topologies.  Linear protection may include 1+1 and 1:N protection, 
   while  ring protection usually involves uni-directional path switched 
   ring (UPSR) and bi-directional line switched ring (BLSR) protection. 
    
   Linear 1+1 protection and ring-based protection both require 100% 
   redundancy in spare resources for every working path.  Even with 1:N 
   based link protection, it may be difficult to select different routes 
   flexibly.  Therefore, shared mesh-based recovery appears to be a 
   flexible and efficient option for optical network recovery. 
    
   Shared mesh recovery allows for the possibility of sharing recovery 
   capacity among multiple working paths.  This increases flexibility by 
   allowing for more options when routing both working and recovery 
   paths.  Furthermore, this flexibility facilitates fast recovery 
   because the shared mesh provides for a greater number of 
   suitable/feasible intermediate nodes for routing the recovery paths. 
 
 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 4] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
3.3    Failure Notification Mechanisms 
    
   In general, there are two alternatives for control plane based 
   failure notification: 
    
      o Failure notification messages dispatched using GMPLS signaling 
      o  Controlled flooding of failure notification messages 
    
   The GMPLS signaling protocol, RSVP-TE [9], supports notification 
   using a Notify message.  Under this scheme, the deciding entity pre-
   arranges to receive the notifications by sending a Notify Request 
   object in the Path or Resv messages. 
    
   The recovery process requires 2 or 3-phases. The reporting entity 
   first sends notification of the failure to the deciding entity. The 
   deciding entity then begins a 1 or 2-phase signaling process on the 
   recovery LSP (which requires either signaling down the recovery LSP 
   or signaling down and back). 
    
   The controlled flooding of failure notification messages on the 
   control plane is another alternative for failure notification.  
   Flooding the notifications in one shot to an appropriate portion of 
   the network ensures their timely delivery.  This supports recovery 
   schemes that require policy or priority-based decisions to be made at 
   multiple decision entities distributed within the network, off the 
   working path. 
    
    
                              +---+  
                         .....| E |.............. 
                         :    +---+             : 
                         :                      : 
              +---+    +---+   \ /   +---+    +---+ 
           ===| A |====| B |====X====| C |====| D |=== 
              +---+    +---+   / \   +---+    +---+ 
                :                               : 
                :      +---+         +---+      : 
                :......| F |.........| G |......: 
                       +---+         +---+ 
    
   Figure 2. Multiple (partial) recovery paths protecting against the 
             failure of link BC. 
    
    
   To meet the time constraints for recovery, both the failure 
   correlation/ aggregation time (that is, the time spent on the 
   computations performed at the reporting entity) and failure 
   notification time (the time that elapses prior to all entities 
   involved in the recovery receiving a failure notification signal) 
 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 5] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
   must also be minimized.  Flooding allows messages to take the 
   shortest available paths to these entities. 
    
   Figure 2 above shows a network when a failure occurs on link BC.  The 
   working LSPs follow the route ABCD, and two (dotted) recovery paths 
   have been reserved, but not activated.  Recovery paths BED and AFGD 
   are each responsible for recovering a portion of the working capacity 
   on link BC.  In this case, nodes A, B, D, E, F, and G must all 
   receive a notification of the failure and perform reconfiguration 
   actions. 
    
3.4    Optical Network Failure Recovery Requirements 
    
   o  Requirements on the efficiency of working and recovery bandwidth 
    
      (1) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow efficient use of working LSP 
   bandwidth using such measures as route optimization, taking into 
   account route dependencies between a working path and its recovery 
   path. 
    
      (2) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow efficient use of recovery LSP 
   bandwidth using such measures as route optimization, taking into 
   account route dependencies between a working path and its recovery 
   path. 
    
      (3) A recovery scheme SHOULD, when possible, allow sharing of 
   recovery bandwidth among multiple recovery paths to enable efficient 
   use of recovery bandwidth. 
 
   o  Requirements on recovery actions 
    
      (4) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow suppression of fault 
   notification messages, so that spurious fault notification messages 
   and recovery action messages are not broadcast within the network, 
   ensuring scalability of the fault recovery mechanism. 
    
      (5) A recovery scheme SHOULD ensure reliable transmission of fault 
   recovery messages, provided the control plane is connected. 
    
      (6) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow fallback operations of its 
   recovery actions. For example, when the system encounters a fault 
   class (eg., multiple simultaneous failures) that was not anticipated, 
   the system should execute a best-effort recovery, such that as many 
   working paths as possible are restored under the circumstances. 
    
      (7) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow the network operator to choose 
   whether or not the reversion actions are to be performed. 
 

 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 6] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
      (8) A recovery scheme SHOULD support recovery within bounded time 
   constraints and MAY be compliant with generally used recovery times 
   like 50ms for SONET/SDH protection. 
    
      (9) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow testing and verification of the 
   availability of the recovery path before its actual use.  This 
   testing may occur when the recovery path is provisioned, or after it 
   is provisioned but before actual recovery action occurs. 
    
      (10) A recovery scheme SHOULD guarantee that recovery actions 
   correctly deliver traffic from working paths to the respective 
   recovery paths, such that the recovery actions do not result in any 
   unintended connections or unintended diversion of traffic. 
 
   o  Requirements on recovery schemes 
    
      (11) A recovery scheme SHOULD provide mechanisms that can be used 
   to support generally used recovery schemes such as 1+1, 1:1, 1:N, 
   M:N, and unprotected. 
    
      (12) A recovery scheme SHOULD support priority-based recovery of 
   failed LSPs.  This means that recovery should be ordered according to 
   each LSP's recovery priority.  
    
   o  Requirements on recovery priority of service classes 
    
      (13) A recovery scheme SHOULD take into consideration the recovery 
   priority of LSPs. 
    
      (14) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow support of service classes 
   with different recovery time guarantee. 
    
   o  Requirements on recovery granularity 
    
      (15) A recovery scheme SHOULD allow recovery of traffic on an 
      aggregated basis, for scalability. 
    
   o  Requirements on failure notification delivery 
    
      (16) A recovery scheme SHOULD have a failure notification 
   mechanism that guarantees prompt and reliable delivery of 
   notification of data plane faults to a deciding entity in charge of 
   recovering the fault. 
    
    
4.   Security Considerations 
    
   This draft does not introduce any new security issues. 
    
 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 7] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
5.   Conclusions 
    
   This draft described requirements for control plane-based recovery 
   from data plane failures in optical networks.  We identified that 
   some important requirements are enabling flexible recovery schemes, 
   facilitating the efficient use of resources, and meeting the 
   potentially strict recovery times. 
    
    
6.   Intellectual Property Considerations 
    
   This section is taken from Section 10.4 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
    
7.   References
                     
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [3]  Mannie, E. (Ed.), "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
        (GMPLS) Architecture", Internet Draft, work in progress, draft-
        ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-03.txt, August 2002. 
    
   [4]  Mannie, E. and D. Papadimitriou (Eds.), "Recovery (Protection 
        and Restoration) Terminology for GMPLS", Internet Draft, work in 

 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 8] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
        progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-terminology-02.txt, 
        May 2003. 
    
   [5]  Lang, J.P. and B. Rajagopalan (Eds.), "Generalized MPLS Recovery 
        Functional Specification", Internet Draft, work in progress, 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-recovery-functional-00.txt, January 2003. 
    
   [6]  Papadimitriou, D. and E. Mannie (Eds.), "Analysis of Generalized 
        MPLS-based Recovery Mechanisms (including Protection and 
        Restoration)", Internet Draft, work in progress, draft-ietf-
        ccamp-gmpls-recovery-analysis-01.txt, May 2003. 
    
   [7]  Lai, W.S., and D. McDysan (Eds.), "Network Hierarchy and 
        Multilayer Survivability", RFC 3386, November 2002. 
    
   [8]  Owens, K., et al., "Network Survivability Considerations for 
        Traffic Engineered IP Networks", Internet Draft, work in 
        progress, draft-owens-te-network-survivability-03.txt, May 2002. 
    
   [9]  Berger, L. (Ed.), "Generalized MPLS Signaling - RSVP-TE 
        Extensions", Internet Draft, work in progress, draft-ietf-mpls-
        generalized-rsvp-te-09.txt", September 2002. 
    
 
8.   Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Peter Czezowski and Takafumi Chujo of 
   Fujitsu Labs of America, Inc., Norihiko Shinomiya and Akira Chugo of 
   Fujitsu Laboratories, Ltd for various inputs, and Vishal Sharma of 
   Metanoia and Jonathan Lang of Rincon Networks for review and feedback. 
    
    
9.   Editors∆ Address 
    
   Richard Rabbat 
   Fujitsu Labs of America, Inc. 
   1240 E. Arques Ave., MS 345 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94085 
   United States of America 
   Phone: +1-408-530-4537 
   Email: rabbat@fla.fujitsu.com 
    
   Toshio Soumiya 
   Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd. 
   1-1, Kamikodanaka 4-Chome 
   Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki 
   211-8588, Japan 

 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003               [Page 9] 
 
              draft-rabbat-optical-recovery-reqs-00.txt     June 2003 
 
 
   Phone: +81-44-754-2765 
   Email: soumiya.toshio@jp.fujitsu.com 
    
    
10.    Authors∆ Addresses 
    
   Kohei Shiomoto                          
   NTT Network Innovation Laboratories                 
   Midori-machi 3-9-11, Musashino-shi 
   Tokyo, Japan 180-8585 
   Phone: +81-422-59-4402 
   Email: Shiomoto.Kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Shoichiro Seno 
   Mitsubishi Electric Corporation 
   5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura 
   Kanagawa, Japan 247-8501 
   Phone: +81-467-41-2430 
   Email: senos@isl.melco.co.jp 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to  
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    

 
Rabbat & Soumiya (Eds.) Expires - December 2003              [Page 10] 
