


Network Working Group                                          M-K. Shin
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Intended status: Informational                                   E. Paik
Expires: January 8, 2009                                              KT
                                                                JH. Choi
                                                       INRIA/Samsung AIT
                                                            July 7, 2008


Meta-Architecture :  A Common Means to Accommodate Heterogeneous Network
                             Architectures
                 draft-shin-virtualization-meta-arch-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2009.

Abstract

   The today's Internet architecture is under serious reconsideration
   and people started thinking about alternatives.  Redefining Internet
   architecture requires many challenged works and a lot of new
   heterogeneous architectures suited to the future of the Internet
   would be considered.  It is necessary to support a variety of the new
   different architectures to accommodate the heterogeneity of Future
   Internet.  So, a common means should be provided to accommodate the
   new heterogeneous architectures.  This document presents Meta-



Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


   Architecture to accommodate heterogeneous and diverse multiple
   network architecture and user services, for example, heterogeneous
   wireless, mobile, sensor, vehicular and/or ad-hoc architectures and
   services.


Table of Contents

   1.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Meta-Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Network virtualization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Cross-layer communications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Diverse end-to-end arguments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Benefiting from Meta-Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  Building up a single shared infrastructure for future
           networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Deploying unconventional network architectures  . . . . . . 6
     3.3.  Deploying new emerging technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.4.  The advent of new generation service provider . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Conclusion and Further Works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8
























Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


1.  Motivation

   Future Internet researches revolve around the notion "Architecture".
   Architecture can be defined as the set of principles and basic
   mechanisms that guide network engineering.  It's bounded from above
   by requirements and from below by engineering but sometimes
   boundaries are fuzzy, especially the boundary between architecture
   and mechanism.  Historically, informal architectural ideas guided
   design of the Internet protocols, but the architecture was formalized
   later [1].  The today's Internet architecture is under serious
   reconsideration and people started thinking about alternatives.
   Further, the concerns are drastically increasing now that
   shortcomings would not be resolved by the conventional incremental
   and backward-compatible style of current research efforts.  That is
   the reason why "Clean-Slate Design for the New Internet's
   Architecture" [2, 3] is required for the Future Internet research.
   Redefining Internet architecture requires many challenged works and a
   lot of new heterogeneous architectures suited to the future of the
   Internet would be considered.  It is necessary to support a variety
   of the new different architectures to accommodate the heterogeneity
   of Future Internet.  So, a common means should be provided to
   accommodate the new heterogeneous architectures.


2.  Meta-Architecture

   In this position paper, we present Meta-Architecture to accommodate
   heterogeneous and diverse multiple network architecture and user
   services, for example, heterogeneous wireless, mobile, sensor,
   vehicular and/or ad-hoc architectures and services.  Meta-
   Architecture is an engineering reflection and knowledge about
   architecture similar to metaphysics or metamathematics.  It
   investigates the meaning, usage and desirability of architecture.
   Traditional concept of architecture may change because of
   virtualization.  Network virtualization refers to the abstraction of
   network resources.  With programmable network elements, we can
   realize virtual link, switch and servers to form virtual network over
   shared physical infrastructure.  Network virtualization plays the key
   role in Future Internet research facility.  It allows multiple
   architectures to share the same resources to realize different
   networks.

   Network virtualization brings forth a debate on the importance of
   traditional architecture and there appear several different opinions
   [4].  First there are purists who believe in a single universal
   architecture.  There needs to be a common architecture around which
   network world interoperates.  Currently that universal architecture
   is IP and Future Internet research would replace it with a new and



Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


   better one.  Second there are pluralists who believe in multiple
   architectures.  Instead of single architecture which fits all, it
   would be better to have different architecture for different
   occasions and virtualization would enable multiple architectures to
   coexist over the same physical resources.  Third there are even
   anarchists who don't believe in architecture at all.  Architecture in
   traditional sense is no longer needed.  Conceptually network
   applications or services deal with physical resources sliced as low a
   level of abstraction as possible.

   The Meta-Architecture is designed to provide narrowly defined
   following three design principles: a) network virtualization, b)
   cross-layer communications, and c) diverse end-to-end arguments that
   enable co-existence of multiple, diverse heterogeneous networks
   within the common shared infra-structure.  It defines the "new narrow
   waist" for Future Internet hourglass.  It can be also called as a new
   common layer for Future Internet.

2.1.  Network virtualization

   The purpose of network virtualization is to de-ossify the Today's
   Internet.  It could realize virtual network with programmable network
   elements and support the architecture of multiple architectures.
   Different virtual networks can provide alternate end-to-end packet
   delivery systems and may use different protocols and packet formats.
   The requirements of network virtualization implementation are a)
   multiple network architecture support, b) common control and
   distributed management, c) resource federation, d) programmability
   support, and e) domain federation.  In this principle, for example, a
   new future service provider who doesn't have its own physical
   infrastructure just chooses a new particular architecture and to
   construct an overlay supporting the architecture that the new service
   provider needs to do.  The new future service provider then
   distributes softwares or codes that let anyone, anywhere, access its
   overlay [4].  Also, all the resources within the infrastructure could
   be uniquely defined and shared.  The example for wireless sensor
   network using network virtualization is illustrated in Figure 3.  For
   the first steps of network virtualization experiments, a) bandwidth
   virtualization with optical networks, b) security virtualization, and
   c) wireless/mobility virtualization are being designed for our Meta-
   Architecture.

2.2.  Cross-layer communications

   Basically, layering was one of important characteristics of Today's
   Internet technologies, but recently, it is also reported that it has
   sometimes inevitable inefficiencies.  Therefore, we choose cross-
   layer communication as the second design principle for the Meta-



Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


   Architecture.  To achieve this, first thing is to exploit the
   dependency between protocol layers to obtain performance gains and
   then create new interfaces between layers, redefine the layer
   boundaries, design protocol at a layer based on the details of how
   another layer is designed, joint tuning of parameters across layers,
   or create complete new abstraction.  The purpose of cross-layer
   communications is to provide a way direct communication between
   protocols at nonadjacent layers or sharing variables between layers.
   We adopt this principle only within mobile, wireless, sensor sub-
   networks, since there is a tradeoff between optimization and
   complexity (abstraction).  Thus, measurement and monitoring should be
   given in advanced.  Also, it is designed to support at any layer
   (e.g., physical layer to application layer) and implemented through
   network virtualization to support flexibility and programmability.
   Our first (vertical) target areas for performance enhancement using
   cross-layer communications would be a) mobility handover, b) QoS, c)
   security, and d) sensor routing.

2.3.  Diverse end-to-end arguments

   Finally, we adopt diverse end-to-end argument principle.  The
   original model of Internet's end-to-end principle has been
   progressively eroded.  While still end-to-end in many ways,
   connection establishment in the Internet today involves state and
   functionality in the middle as the form of NATs, firewalls, proxies
   and so on.  The current Internet architecture does not reflect this
   resulting in a mismatch between design and practice.  Therefore,
   diverse end-to-end argument (e.g., end-middle-end (EME) argument,
   intermittent connectivity, and so on) principle is provided within
   our Meta-Architecture.  The diverse end-to-end argument principle is
   also implemented through network virtualization, since different
   virtual networks can easily provide alternate end-to-end delivery
   systems and use different type of connection (e.g., IP or non-IP).


3.  Benefiting from Meta-Architecture

   Meta-Architecture provides a common means to accommodate the new
   heterogeneous architectures and facilitate architecture revolution.
   Benefits from Meta-Architecture are listed below : the conceptual
   benefits from Meta-Architecture are illustrated in Figure 3.

3.1.  Building up a single shared infrastructure for future networks

   Meta-Architecture can play a central role to build up a shared common
   infrastructure for Future Internet.  The functionalities to support
   the Meta-Architecture (network virtualization, cross-layer
   communication, and diverse end-to-end arguments) could become the



Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


   architecture's core functionalities, its narrow waist.  So, in this
   assumption, a lot of different networks can be built on a single
   shared infrastructure for future experiments.

3.2.  Deploying unconventional network architectures

   New heterogeneous architectures as well as today's Internet
   architecture can co-exist on top of a shared infrastructure.  Also,
   different virtual networks (e.g., DTN (Delay-tolerant network), I3
   (Internet Indirection Infrastructure) may provide alternate end-to-
   end packet delivery systems and may use different protocols and
   packet formats.  Meta-Architecture has the flexibility to support a
   broad range of experiments, services and users.  It can support
   various clean slate-based and disruptive technologies experiments.

3.3.  Deploying new emerging technologies

   To deploy new emerging technologies and services such as IPv6, mobile
   IPTV, wireless mesh (e.g., IEEE 802.11s), etc. each networks should
   be isolated and distinct path for new services.  Meta-Architecture
   can easily support these kinds of new technologies and services.

3.4.  The advent of new generation service provider

   In this Meta-architecture scenario, a new generation service provider
   will appear for Future Internet services.  A new generation service
   provider chooses a particular new architecture, then constructs a
   virtual network supporting architecture [4].  The new generation
   service provider could easily support new architecture natively.


4.  Conclusion and Further Works

   In this documenrt, we introduce Meta-Architecture for Future
   Internet, which are provided through network virtualization, cross-
   layer communications, and diverse end-to-end arguments.  For the
   further works, details on how to build up Meta-Architecture and how
   to integrate new research works and experiments with regard to
   heterogeneous networks and architectures through our Meta-
   Architecture will be discussed.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD






Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


6.   Acknowledgements

   TBD


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

7.2.  Informative References

   [1]  Clark, D., "The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet
        Protocols, ACM SIGCOMM", 1998.

   [2]  Standford Univ, "Clean Slate Designs for the Internet,
        http://cleanslate.stanford.edu".

   [3]  Feldmann, A., "Internet Clean-Slate Design : What and Why ?, ACM
        SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review", 2007.

   [4]  Anderson, T., "Overcoming the Internet Impasse through
        Virtualization, IEEE Computer", 2005.

   [5]  IRTF, "http://www.irtf.org".


Authors' Addresses

   Myung-Ki Shin
   ETRI

   Email: myungki.shin@gmail.com


   Eun Kyoung Paik
   KT

   Email: euna@kt.com


   JinHyeock Choi
   INRIA/Samsung AIT

   Email: jinchoe@gmail.com







Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Meta-Architecture                  July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Shin, et al.             Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 8]


