

SIMPLE WG                                                   H. Khartabil
Internet-Draft                                                  A. Niemi
Expires: August 5, 2004                                            Nokia
                                                        February 5, 2004


  Conveying a Session Policy Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) in the
                   Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
          draft-khartabil-sip-policy-uri-call-info-purpose-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) defines the Call-Info header.
   This header field provides additional information about the
   originator or recipient of the request. Information in the Call-Info
   is generally a URI, and the exact purpose of the URI is described by
   the "purpose" parameter. This document introduces a new purpose
   parameter value of "policy-uri" that can be used by a request
   originator or recipient to convey a URI where a certain policy
   pertaining to a session can be accessed. For example, "policy-uri"
   can be used by a conference server to indicate the URI of the
   conference policy to a UA participating in that conference.




Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 policy-uri                  February 2004


   This document also sets up an IANA registry for the "purpose"
   parameter in the Call-info header of the Session Initiation Protocol.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. policy-uri Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3. IANA Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 6







































Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 policy-uri                  February 2004


1. Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [1] defines the Call-Info
   header. The purpose of the Call-Info header field is to provide
   additional information about the caller or callee, depending on
   whether the header is used in a request or a response. This
   information consists of a URI, and the purpose of the URI is
   described by the "purpose" parameter. Some of the already defined
   purposes include:

   o  icon; for providing an image suitable for an iconic representation
      of the caller or callee

   o  info; for providing ageneral description of the caller or callee,
      e.g., in the form of a web page

   o  card; for providing contact information, e.g., in the form of a
      business card

   In addition to these purpose values, additional purpose values can be
   registered with IANA.

   This document introduces a new purpose  parameter value of
   "policy-uri" that is used by a caller or a callee to convey a URI
   where a certain policy pertaining to the session can be accessed. The
   main use case for the "policy-uri" involves a a conference server
   indicating the URI of the conference policy [2] to a participant UA.
   This UA can then use the Call-Info URI to see and modify the
   conference policy.

   It was also discovered that there was no IANA registry set up for the
   "purpose" parameter in the Call-info header of the Session Initiation
   Protocol [1]. This document sets up the IANA registry.

2. policy-uri Description

   In a conferencing scenario, it was identified that some participants
   may not want to subscribe to the conference state event package [3],
   but would still like to learn the conference policy URI [2]. In this
   case, it is suggested that the Call-info header carries such
   information.

   In order to do that, a new Call-info purpose needs to be created
   that indicates that the call-info header carries a policy URI
   pointing to an address where the policy can be fetched. This policy
   URI is not restricted to conference policy URI, but any policy
   related to a session.




Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 policy-uri                  February 2004


3. IANA Registration

   This specification establishes the call-info "purpose" parameter
   "call-info-purpose" sub-registry under http://www.iana.org/
   assignments/sip-parameters and initiates its population with the
   values listed in Section 20.9 of [1].  Additional call-info-purpose
   are registered by RFC publication.

   This document also registers one new "call-info-purpose" value:
   policy-uri.

   "policy-uri" is described in Section 2.

   Short descriptions suitable for the IANA registry is: a URI that
   informs the recipient of the location of a policy related to the
   session being initiated.

4. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Jonathan Rosengerg for pointing out
   that the IANA registry is missing and for suggesting that in can be
   included in this document.

References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Shulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "The
        Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., "A Framework for Conferencing with the Session
        Initiation Protocol",
        draft-ietf-sipping-conferencing-framework-01.txt, October 2003.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J., Shulzrinne, H. and O. Levin, "A Session
        Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event Package for Conference State",
        draft-ietf-sipping-conference-package-02, October 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Hisham Khartabil
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 321
   Helsinki
   Finland

   Phone: +358 7180 76161
   EMail: hisham.khartabil@nokia.com



Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 policy-uri                  February 2004


   Aki Niemi
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 321
   Helsinki
   Finland

   Phone: +358 50 389 1644
   EMail: aki.niemi@nokia.com











































Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 policy-uri                  February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 policy-uri                  February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Khartabil & Niemi        Expires August 5, 2004                 [Page 7]


