
Proto Team                                                  H. Levkowetz
Internet-Draft                                               ipUnplugged
Expires: August 30, 2004                                      March 2004


   Protocol Pilot: Workgroup Chair Followup of AD Evaluation Comments
              <draft-ietf-proto-ad-comments-pilot-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt .

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html .

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a pilot implementation of a protocol change
   within the IETF.  The essence of the change is to have workgroup
   chairs handle the feedback of AD (Area Director) Evaluation comments
   on a draft to the authors (and workgroup if necessary) and make sure
   that needed draft changes are made, and the AD notified when a new
   draft which resolves the comments is available.

1.  Introduction

   As part of the currently ongoing effort to improve the work flow



Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


   (particularly speed of approval) of documents, the  PROTO team
   [PROTO] is defining pilot projects to test possible protocol changes.
   This document describes such a pilot.

   The purpose of the pilot described here is to test offloading
   follow-up work which an Area Director (AD) traditionally has done
   after he has read through and evaluated a document submitted to the
   IESG for publication.  It is hoped that offloading this onto the
   chair (or one of the chairs) of the workgroup which submitted the
   draft will increase the speed of follow-up and the transparency of
   the process, and reduce the workload of the AD to boot.  The pilot
   does not include offloading of follow-up for drafts which do not
   originate in a workgroup.

   For a discussion of the reasoning underlying piloting of process
   changes, see [JULY14].

2.  Pilot description

2.1  Participants

   This pilot involves Area Directors of selected areas, and some or all
   of the chairs for which the Area Director is Area Advisor.

2.2  Running time and pilot size

   This pilot is to be run not less than 4 months, and not more than 8
   months, unless early experience shows it to be clearly detrimental.
   It is expected that it will be started shortly after the IETF 59
   meeting, and completed in time for the results to be reported at the
   IETF 60 meeting.  The pilot should be run with no less than 2 and not
   more than 6 ADs, and between 5 and 20 workgroups.

   The running time should be chosen such that the participating ADs and
   WG chairs have opportunity to get past the initial learning and
   first-time execution barrier, and get some familiarity with the
   process before the pilot is closed and evaluated.

2.3  Assumptions

   The pilot assumes that the steps an Area Director currently (before
   this pilot goes into effect) go through for an AD Evaluation are as
   follows:

   1.  Read and evaluate the document, taking notes of issues found.  It
       is expected that each AD has his own style and method of
       evaluating documents, but roughly the elements given in Section
       3.3 of [SIRS] are probably present in the review.



Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


   2.  Depending on the magnitude of the issues found (and other
       considerations?), either

       2.a) return the document to the chairs with the review,
        requesting further workgroup work, and post the review to the
        workgroup mailing list

       2.b) send the full review to the authors, with copy to the
        chairs, and ask for issues to be resolved; post a summary of the
        review to the workgroup mailing list

       2.c) send the full review to the authors, possibly with copy to
        the chairs, and ask for nits to be fixed.

   3.  Follow-up, nudge and iterate until the authors (and workgroup if
       required) has fixed the issues found, and submitted an updated
       draft.  At this point, the draft is ready for IETF last call if
       it is a standards-track document (or BCP), or for placement on
       telechat agenda otherwise.


2.4  Pilot Process Description

   The pilot process is changed compared with the process described
   above in that the responsibility for step 3 above is put squarely on
   the Workgroup Chair, rather than on the Area Director.  Step 2 should
   preferably be modified so that the Area Director sends the AD
   Evaluation review comments to the chair(s), who in turn forward them
   to the authors and workgroup as appropriate.  The steps are then as
   follows:

   1.  The AD reads, evaluates and writes comments pretty much as
       before.  However, note that since the communication between AD
       and authors is not direct, the need for clear and
       well-articulated review comments is somewhat larger.

   2.  Depending on the magnitude of the issues found (and other
       considerations?), the AD returns the full review to the chairs,
       and requests either:

       2.a) that further workgroup work be undertaken to put the
        document into shape to be published

       2.b) that authors and workgroup are informed of the issues found
        and resolve them in a revised draft






Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


       2.c) that the authors fix nits as needed.

       As covered below, the comments will be posted to the workgroup
       mailing list.  The comments will normally also be posted by the
       AD in the ID Tracker [IDTRACKER].  Working groups that use issue
       tracking should also record the issues (and eventually their
       resolution) in the issue tracker.

   3.  If there is more than one chair, the chairs decide on which one
       should be responsible for ensuring that the needed fixes are
       done.

   4.  The chair responsible reads through the AD Evaluation comments,
       making very certain that all comments are understood, so that it
       is possible to follow up on them with the authors and workgroup.
       If there is some uncertainty as to what is requested, this must
       be resolved with the Area Director.

   5.  The responsible chair sends the comments to the author(s) and to
       the workgroup mailing list, in order to have a permanent record
       of the comments.  It is recommended that the chair solicit from
       the author(s) an estimate on when the fixes will be done - i.e.,
       when the submission of a revised draft can be expected.

   6.  When incorporating the fixes in the new version of the draft, it
       is strongly recommended that the revising editor keep a summary
       list showing how the issues were addressed issue by issue, and
       showing what the revised text is.  If such a list is forwarded to
       the AD with the revised draft, it will make it possible for the
       AD to verify the fixes very quickly.

   7.  The responsible chair follows-up, nudges and iterates until the
       authors (and workgroup if required) has fixed the issues found,
       and submitted an updated draft.  At this point, the AD is
       notified of the revised draft, and provided with the summary list
       of issues and resulting text changes.

   8.  The Area Director verifies that the issues he found during AD
       Evaluation are resolved by the new version of the draft.

   9.  (Hopefully, that's it, but in the worst case this starts over at
       1 again...)


2.5  Wrap-up

   At the end of the pilot lifetime, it is expected that an evaluation
   of the experienced benefits is made, using input solicited from the



Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


   participating Area Directors and Workgroup Chairs by means of an
   email questionnaire, web-page form or something similar.  The
   questions are given below, in Section 2.5.2. A per-review
   questionnaire is also provided in Section 2.5.1.

2.5.1  Questionnaire to be done after each individual AD Review

   To be done by both WG Chair and AD.

   R1.   I'm submitting this questionnaire as
         1.    Area Director
         2.    Workgroup Chair

   R2.   Document name:

   R3.   WG Chair shepherding of the AD evaluation comments for this
         draft speeded up the procedure:
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

   R4.   WG Chair shepherding of the AD evaluation comments for this
         draft resulted in the comments being resolved in a satisfactory
         manner:
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

   R5.   WG Chair shepherding of the AD evaluation comments for this
         draft resulted in a more transparent process:
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree












Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


   R6.   WG Chair shepherding of the AD evaluation comments for this
         draft resulted in a more well-documented process:
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

   R7.   The interaction with the document editors in resolving the
         comments worked out well:
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

   R8.   - Public Comments?

   R9.   - Comments to IESG and PROTO-Team only?

   R10.  WG Chair shepherding of the AD evaluation comments for this
         draft worked out well, overall:
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

   R11.  - Public Comments?

   R12.  - Comments to IESG and PROTO-Team only?


2.5.2  Questionnaire for the Pilot as a Whole

   To be done by both WG Chair and AD.

   X1.   Document name:

   X2.   I clearly understood what was expected of me in this pilot.
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

         Comments?




Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


   X3.   What is your evaluation of the benefit of the procedure you've
         tried out in this pilot?
         1.    Definitely harmful
         2.    Somewhat harmful
         3.    Mixed feelings
         4.    Somewhat beneficial
         5.    Definitely beneficial

         Comments?

   X4.   What is your evaluation of the added effort required for the
         procedure you've tried out in this pilot?
         1.    Major increased effort
         2.    Somewhat increased
         3.    No change
         4.    Somewhat decreased effort
         5.    Major decreased effort

         Comments?

   X5.   Considering all factors, this procedure should be made the
         normal way of handling AD evaluation comments.
         1.    Strongly disagree
         2.    Disagree
         3.    Undecided
         4.    Agree
         5.    Strongly agree

         Comments?

   X6.   What do you consider to be the major advantages of this
         procedure change?

   X7.   What do you consider to be the major disadvantages of this
         procedure change?

   X8.   How would you change the procedure to minimise the
         disadvantages?

   X9.   Comments to the IESG and PROTO-Team only:


3.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies a pilot implementation of a change in IETF
   procedures.  It does not raise or consider any protocol-specific
   security issues.  When evaluating the result of the pilot, the IESG
   should check if the changes has reduced the quality of security



Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


   review and consideration for protocols, and take this into
   consideration when deciding whether the changes should be made
   permanent.

4  Informative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2028]  Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in
              the IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October
              1996.

   [JULY14]   Klensin, J. and S. Dawkins, "A model for IETF Process
              Experiments", draft-klensin-process-july14-02 (work in
              progress), April 2004.

   [SIRS]     Carpenter, B. and D. Crocker, "Careful Additional Review
              of Documents (CARD)by Senior IETF Reviewers  (SIRS)",
              draft-carpenter-solution-sirs-01 (work in progress), June
              2003.

   [IDTRACKER]
              "The IETF Draft Tracker", Web Application: https://
              datatracker.ietf.org/.

   [PROTO]    "The IESG Process and Tools (PROTO) Team", Web Page:
              http://psg.com/~mrw/PROTO-Team.


Author's Address

   Henrik Levkowetz
   ipUnplugged AB
   Arenavagen 23
   Stockholm  S-121 28
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 708 32 16 08
   EMail: henrik@levkowetz.com











Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      WG Chair followup of AD-Comments          March 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Levkowetz               Expires August 30, 2004                 [Page 9]


