Network Working Group                                       Juha Hakala
Internet-Draft                              Helsinki University Library
Category: Informational                               Hartmut Walravens
draft-hakala-isbn-00.txt             The International ISBN Agency
Expires: 28 February 2001                                30 August 2000




                Using International Standard Book Numbers as
                         Uniform Resource Names

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups 
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 February, 2001.

Abstract

This document discusses how International Standard Book Numbers (ISBN) 
can be supported within the URN framework and the syntax for URNs 
defined in RFC 2141 [Moats].Much of the discussion below is based on the 
ideas expressed in RFC 2288 [Lynch]. Chapter 5 contains a URN namespace 
registration request modelled according to the template in RFC 2611 
[Daigle et al.].


1. Introduction 

As part of the validation process for the development of URNs the IETF 
URN working group agreed that it is important to demonstrate that the 
current URN syntax proposal can accommodate existing identifiers from 
well established namespaces.  One such infrastructure for assigning and 
managing names comes from the bibliographic community.  Bibliographic 
identifiers function as names for objects that exist both in print and, 
increasingly, in electronic formats.  RFC 2288 [Lynch et. al.] 
investigated the feasibility of using three identifiers (ISBN, ISSN and 
SICI) as URNs. This document will analyse the usage of ISBNs as URNs in 
more details than RFC 2288. 

A registration request for acquiring Namespace Identifier (NID) "ISBN" 
for ISBNs is included in chapter 5. 

The document at hand is part of a global co-operation of the national 
libraries to foster identification of electronic documents in general 
and utilisation of URNs in particular. The document was written as a co-
operative project between the Helsinki University Library and The 
International ISBN Agency. 

We have used the URN Namespace Identifier "ISBN" for ISBNs in examples 
below. 


2. Identification vs. Resolution

As a rule the ISBNs identify finite, manageably-sized objects, but these 
objects may still be large enough that resolution to a hierarchical 
system is appropriate.

The materials identified by an ISBN may exist only in printed or other 
physical form, not electronically. The best that a resolver will be able 
to offer in this case is bibliographic data from a national bibliography 
database, including information about where the physical resource is 
stored in the national library's holdings. 


3. International Standard Book Numbers

3.1 Overview

RFC 2288 [Lynch] describes the ISBN system in the following way:

   An International Standard Book Number (ISBN) identifies an edition of
   a monographic work.  The ISBN is defined by the standard
   NISO/ANSI/ISO 2108:1992 [ISO1]

   Basically, an ISBN is a ten-digit number (actually, the last digit
   can be the letter "X" as well, as described below) which is divided
   into four variable length parts usually separated by hyphens when
   printed.  The parts are as follows (in this order):

   * a group identifier which specifies a group of publishers, based on
   national, geographic or some other criteria,

   * the publisher identifier,

   * the title identifier,

   * and a modulus 11 check digit, using X instead of 10.

   The group and publisher number assignments are managed in such a way
   that the hyphens are not needed to parse the ISBN unambiguously into
   its constituent parts.  However, the ISBN is normally transmitted and
   displayed with hyphens to make it easy for human beings to recognize
   these parts without having to make reference to or have knowledge of
   the number assignments for group and publisher identifiers.

There are plans to extend the ISBN into 13 digits in order to make the 
system more suitable for identification of electronic monographs. So 
called Bookland ISBN will consist of a traditional ISBN preceded by the 
978 or 979 EAN flag.


3.2 Encoding Considerations and Lexical Equivalence

RFC 2288 [Lynch] says that:

   Embedding ISBNs within the URN framework presents no particular
   encoding problems, since all of the characters that can appear in an
   ISBN are valid in the identifier segment of the URN.  %-encoding, as
   described in [MOATS] is never needed.

   Example: URN:ISBN:0-395-36341-1

   For the ISBN namespace, some additional equivalence rules are
   appropriate.  Prior to comparing two ISBN URNs for equivalence, it is
   appropriate to remove all hyphens, and to convert any occurrences of
   the letter X to upper case.


3.3 Resolution of ISBN-based URNs

The existing ISBN structure is very suitable for URN resolution 
purposes. The group identifier can assist in the resolver discovery 
process. For instance, group identifier "951" means Finland. In this 
case, the Finnish national bibliography database will be able to resolve 
the URN either into bibliographic data or - if the resource is available 
in the Internet - to the document itself.

In some cases group identifier does not identify a single country but a 
language area. For instance group identifier "3" is used by German, 
German Swiss and Austrian publishers. It may also be that there is more 
than one national bibliography database that may contain the needed 
resource. In these cases, it is necessary to define a cascade of URN 
resolution services - for instance, German national bibliography, 
Austrian national bibliography and Swiss national bibliography, in this 
order - into the DNS records describing the resolution service for ISBNs 
starting with "3". 

In ISBN, group identifier or even the publisher identifier can be used 
as a "hint". Technically it is possible to incorporate also URN 
resolution services maintained by publishers into the common structure. 
For instance, "951-0" is the unique ISBN identifier of the largest 
publisher in Finland, Sanoma-WSOY. If they launch their own URN 
resolution services, resolution requests for ISBNs starting with "951-0" 
will be directed to the publisher's server, and all other requests to 
the national bibliography 


3.4 Additional considerations

The basic guidelines for assigning ISBNs to electronic resources are the 
following:

* Format/means of delivery are irrelevant as to the decision whether a 
product needs an ISBN. If the content meets the requirement, it gets an 
ISBN, no matter what the format of the delivery system.

* Each format of a digital publication should have a separate ISBN. 

The definition of new edition is normally based on one of the two 
criteria:

* A change in the kind of packaging involved: the hard cover edition, 
the paper cover edition and the library-binding edition would each get a 
separate ISBN. The same applies to different formats of digital files.

* A change in the text, not including packaging art or minor changes 
such as correcting a spelling error. Again, this criterion applies 
whether the publication is print on paper or digital.  

Although these rules seem very clear, their interpretation may vary. As 
[Lynch] points out,

   The choice of whether to assign a new ISBN or to
   reuse an existing one when publishing a revised printing of an
   existing edition of a work or even a revised edition of a work is
   somewhat subjective.  Practice varies from publisher to publisher
   (indeed, the distinction between a revised printing and a new edition
   is itself somewhat subjective).  The use of ISBNs within the URN
   framework simply reflects these existing practices.  Note that it is
   likely that an ISBN URN will often resolve to many instances of the
   work (many URLs).

Further details on the process of assigning ISBNs can be found in 
section 5  (Namespace registration) below.


4. Security Considerations

This document proposes means of encoding ISBNs within the URN framework. 
This document describes ISBN-based URN resolution only in a generic 
level; thus questions of secure or authenticated resolution mechanisms 
are out of scope.  It does not address means of validating the integrity 
or authenticating the source or provenance of URNs that contain ISBNs.  
Issues regarding intellectual property rights associated with objects 
identified by the ISBNs are also beyond the scope of this document, as 
are questions about rights to the databases that might be used to 
construct resolvers.


5. Namespace registration


URN Namespace ID Registration for the International Standard Book Number 
(ISBN)

Namespace ID:

ISBN

This Namespace ID is the same as the internationally used acronym for 
International Standard Book Number. Giving this NID to any other 
identifier system would cause a lot of confusion.

Registration Information:

Version: 1
Date: 2000-08-30

Declared registrant of the namespace:

Name: Hartmut Walravens
E-mail: hartmut.walravens@sbb.spk-berlin.de
Affiliation: Director, The International ISBN Agency
Address: Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin - Preuﬂischer Kulturbesitz - D-10772 
Berlin, Germany


Declaration of syntactic structure:

An ISBN is a ten-digit number (actually, the last digit can be the 
letter "X" as well, as described below) which is divided into four 
variable length parts usually separated by hyphens when printed.  The 
parts are as follows (in this order):

* a group identifier which specifies a group of publishers, based on 
national, geographic or some other criteria,

* the publisher identifier,

* the title identifier,

* and a modulus 11 check digit, using X instead of 10.

Example:

URN:ISBN:0-395-36341-1

Relevant ancillary documentation:

The ISBN (International Standard Book Number) is a unique machine-
readable identification number, which marks any edition of a book 
unmistakably. This number is defined in ISO Standard 2108. The number 
has been in use now for 30 years and has revolutionised the 
international book-trade. 154 countries are officially ISBN members, and 
more countries are joining the system. 

The administration of the ISBN system is carried out on three levels: 

   International agency
   Group agencies
   Publisher levels


The International ISBN agency is located within the State Library 
Berlin. The main functions of the International ISBN Agency are: 

* To promote, co-ordinate and supervise the world-wide use of the ISBN 
system.
* To approve the definition and structure of group agencies.
* To allocate group identifiers to group agencies.
* To advise on the establishment and functioning of group agencies.
* To advise group agencies on the allocation of international publisher 
identifiers.
* To publish the assigned group numbers and publishers prefixes in up-
to-date form. 

More information about ISBN usage can be found from the ISBN Users' 
Manual. 4th edition of this document is available at http://www.isbn.spk-
berlin.de/html/userman.htm.

Identifier uniqueness considerations:

ISBN that has been assigned once will never be re-used. 

Identifier persistence considerations:

The ISBN accompanies a publication from its production onwards. It is 
persistent; ISBN once given will never leave the publication.

Identifier assignment process:

Assignment of ISBNs is always controlled by ISBN group agencies, which 
are often national and quite frequently located in the national 
libraries. Publishers are usually given blocks of ISBNs, from which they 
pick identifiers for newly published items. 

As pointed out earlier, there is some variation between different 
publishers in ISBN assignment. In practice these differences are so 
small that they do not pose a threat to the usability of the ISBN system 
as a whole.


Identifier resolution process:

URNs based on ISBNs will be primarily resolved via the national 
bibliography databases. Since ISBN group agencies are as a rule located 
in national libraries, the national bibliography databases cover almost 
every publication which does have an ISBN. 

If group identifier does not define a country but a language area there 
may be many countries using the same group identifier. For instance, "3" 
is used in Austria, Germany and Switzerland. In this case, a cascade of 
national bibliographies needs to be defined. 

The International ISBN Agency also maintains a list of publishers who 
have been assigned a publisher identifier within the ISBN system. The 
publisher identifier may be used allow participation of resolution 
services maintained by publishers into the URN resolution system for 
ISBN.


Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

For the ISBN namespace, some additional equivalence rules are 
appropriate.  Prior to comparing two ISBN URNs for equivalence, it is 
appropriate to remove all hyphens, and to convert any occurrences of the 
letter X to upper case.


Conformance with URN Syntax:

Embedding ISBNs within the URN framework presents no particular encoding 
problems, since all of the characters that can appear in an ISBN are 
valid in the identifier segment of the URN %-encoding, as described in 
[MOATS] is never needed.

   Example: URN:ISBN:0-395-36341-1


Validation mechanism:

Validity of an ISBN string can be checked by modulus 11 check digit, 
included into the ISBN. X is used instead of 10.

Validity of ISBN assignments can be checked from the group agencies or 
directly from the publisher. 

Scope:

Global.


6. References

[Daigle et al.]: Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R. & Faltstrom, 
P.: URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms, RFC2611, June 1999.
[Lynch] Lynch, C., Using Existing Bibliographic Identifiers as Uniform 
Resource Names, RFC 2288, February 1998
[Moats] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.


7. Authors' Addresses

   Juha Hakala
   Helsinki University Library - The National Library of Finland
   P.O. Box 26
   FIN-00014 Helsinki University
   FINLAND
   E-mail: juha.hakala@helsinki.fi

...Hartmut Walravens
   The International ISBN agency
   Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin - Preuﬂischer Kulturbesitz -
   D-10772 Berlin,
   GERMANY
   E-mail: hartmut.walravens@sbb.spk-berlin.de


8.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



