





INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Thomas Narten
                                                                     IBM
<draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt>               Geoff Huston
                                                                   APNIC
                                                             Lea Roberts
                                                     Stanford University
                                                           July 11, 2005

                   IPv6 Address Allocation to End Sites

               <draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft expires on January 11, 2006.


Abstract

   This document revisits the IAB/IESG recommendations on the assignment
   of IPv6 address space to end sites. Specifically, it indicates that
   changing the default end-site assignment for typical home and SOHO
   sites from /48 to /56 is consistent with the goals of IPv6 and RFC
   3177. Although it is for the RIR community to make adjustments to the
   IPv6 address space allocation and end site assignment policies, the
   IETF community would be comfortable with RIRs changing the default



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


   assignment size to /56 for smaller end sites. This document obsoletes
   RFC 3177 and reclassifies it as historic.

   Contents

   Status of this Memo..........................................    1

   1.  Introduction.............................................    2

   2.  On /48 Assignments to End Sites..........................    3

   3.  Other RFC 3177 considerations............................    5

   4.  Security Considerations..................................    5

   5.  IANA Considerations......................................    6

   6.  Acknowledgments..........................................    6

   7.  Normative References.....................................    6

   8.  Informative References...................................    6

   9.  Author's Address.......................................    6


1.  Introduction

   RFC 3177 [RFC3177] called for the default IPv6 assignment size to end
   sites being a /48. Subsequently, the RIRs developed and adopted IPv6
   address assignment and allocation policies consistent with the RFC
   3177 recommendations [RIR-IPV6]. In addition to the /48
   recommendation, an HD-Ratio metric [RFC 3194] of .8 was adopted to
   determine how much space an LIR can obtain from an RIR, and when an
   LIR may go back to an RIR for an additional allocation. Additional
   history and discussion of IPv6 address policy and its long-term
   implications can be found in [IPV6-HISTORY].

   By late 2004, informal discussions began raising the question of
   whether the current IPv6 address allocation policies were achieving a
   proper balance between conservation and ease of access. In
   particular, projections of address space usage over the next 50-100
   years under the existing RIR assignment and allocation policies
   indicate that one cannot argue that IPv6 has an "infinite supply" of
   addresses. Furthermore, there are plausible scenarios where a
   significant fraction of the total IPv6 address space could be
   consumed in 60 years. For example, projections show a consumption
   range of /7 [IPV6-HISTORY] all the way to a /1 (or 1/2 of the entire



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


   IPv6 address space) [HUSTON-RIPE].

   Due to the inherent uncertainties in long-term address consumption
   rates, and the difficulties that arise when operating in an
   environment where address depletion becomes a real concern (i.e., the
   current IPv4 experience) it would be prudent for the RIRs to update
   and revise the current IPv6 address allocation and assignment
   policies to ensure that IPv6 address space remains plentiful across
   the next 50-100 years.

   This document performs three functions:

     1) It revisits the RFC 3177 recommendations and makes the case that
        the default IPv6 assignment size for smaller end sites could be
        changed from /48 to /56 with essentially no impact on end users.
        In addition, there are no impacts on existing IPv6 standards or
        implementations.

     2) It is a message to the RIR community that the IETF community
        would be comfortable with the RIR community revising and
        updating its IPv6 assignment policy to change the default end
        assignment for small end sites to a /56.

     3) It obsoletes RFC 3177 and reclassifies it historic.


2.  On /48 Assignments to End Sites

   [note: this section was taken mostly verbatim from Section 5.2 of
   [IPV6-HISTORY]; future versions will decide how to better split the
   text between the two documents, since it is generally not ideal to
   have the identical text in multiple documents.]

   Per existing policy, the RIRs assume that end site assignments are
   /48s, and thus utilization measurements are based on an HD-ratio that
   counts numbers of /48 assignments. Granting a /48 to an end site,
   allows a site to have up to 65,536 subnets. While that number may
   make sense for larger sites, it is hard to imagine a typical home
   user requiring so much space. Indeed, the default end site assignment
   today is in practice the same for home users and larger businesses.

   Looking back at some of the original motivations behind the /48
   recommendation [RFC 3177], one overriding concern was to ensure that
   end sites could easily obtain sufficient address space without having
   to "jump through hoops" to do so. For example, if someone felt they
   needed more space, just the act of asking would at some level be
   sufficient justification.  As a comparison point, in IPv4, typical
   home users are given a single public IP address (even this is not



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


   always assured), but getting even a small number more is typically
   more expensive either in terms of the effort needed to obtain
   additional addresses, or in the actual monthly cost. (It should be
   noted that the "cost" of additional addresses cannot be justified by
   the actual cost of those addresses as charged by the RIRs, but the
   need for additional addresses is sometimes used to imply a different
   type or "higher grade" of service, for which some ISPs charge extra.)
   Thus, an important goal in IPv6 was to significantly change the
   default and minimal end site assignment, from "a single address" to
   "multiple networks".

   Another concern was that if a site changes ISPs and subsequently
   renumbers, renumbering from a larger set of "subnet bits" into a
   smaller set is particularly painful, as it it can require making
   changes to the network itself (e.g., collapsing links). In contrast,
   renumbering a site into a prefix that has the same number (or more)
   of subnet bits is easier, because only the top-level bits of the
   address need to change. Thus, another goal of the RFC 3177
   recommendation is to ensure that upon renumbering, one does not have
   to deal with renumbering into a smaller subnet size.

   The above concerns were met by the /48 recommendation, but could also
   be realized through a more conservative approach. For example, one
   can imagine "classes" of network types, with default sizes for each
   class. For example:

      - a PDA-type device with a low bandwidth WAN connection and one
        additional PAN connection - a single network or /64 assignment.
        A /64 assignment allows for the addressing of a number of hosts,
        each connected to the same PAN (personal area network, e.g.,
        Bluetooth) link as the device. This would be appropriate in
        deployments where the end device is not expected to provide
        connectivity for a larger site, but is intended to provide
        connectivity for the device and a small number of additional
        devices directly connected to the same PAN as the device.

      - home user - expected to have a small number of subnets, e.g.,
        less than 10 - a /56 assignment

      - small business/organization  - one having a small number of
        networks, e.g., less than 100  - a /56 assignment

      - large business/organization - an organization having more than
        100 subnets - a /48.

   A change in policy (such as above) would have a significant impact on
   address consumption projections and the expected longevity for IPv6.
   For example, changing the default assignment from a /48 to /56 (for



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


   the vast majority of end sites) would result in a savings of up to 8
   bits, reducing the "total projected address consumption" by (up to) 8
   bits or two orders of magnitude. (The exact amount of savings depends
   on the relative number of home users compared with the number of
   larger sites.)

   One can, of course, imagine a policy supporting the entire range of
   assignments between /48 and /64, depending on the size or type of end
   site. However, there are a number of arguments in favor of having a
   small number of classes of sizes:

      - It becomes easier for end users to identify an assignment size
        that is appropriate for them

      - It increases the likelihood that there will be agreement among
        ISPs on the appropriate assignment sizes for the various
        customer classes.

      - Having excess flexibility in selecting an appropriate assignment
        size for a given customer type can lead to different ISPs
        offering different assignment sizes to the same customer. This
        is undesirable because it may result in

           - an end site needing to renumber into a smaller subnet space
             when switching ISPs, or

           - it may lead to ISPs attempting to differentiate their
             service offerings by offering the most liberal address
             assignment policies (to attract customers), defeating the
             purpose of having multiple class assignment sizes.

      - The operational management of the reverse DNS tree is simplified
        if delegations are on nibble boundaries (e.g., /48, /52, /56,
        and /64).


3.  Other RFC 3177 considerations

   RFC3177 suggested that some multihoming approaches (e.g., GSE) might
   benefit from having a fixed /48 boundary. This no longer appears to
   be a significant issue. There is no such requirement coming out of
   the current IETF multi6 or shim6 efforts.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document has no known security implications.




draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.


6.  Acknowledgments

   This document was motivated by and benefited from numerous
   conversations held during the ARIN XV and RIPE 50 meetings in April-
   May, 2005.


7.  Normative References



8.  Informative References

   [HUSTON-RIPE] "Report from the ARIN XV IPv6 Roundtable"
                    http://www.ripe.net/ripe/meetings/ripe-50/presentations/ripe50-plenary-
                    wed-itu-ipv6-proposal.pdf

   [IPV6-HISTORY] Issues Related to the Management of IPv6 Address
                    Space, draft-narten-iana-rir-
                    ipv6-considerations-00.txt

   [RIR-IPV6] ARIN: http://www.arin.net/policy/index.html#six; RIPE
                    Document ID: ripe-267, Date: 22 January 2003
                    http://www.ripe.net/ripe/docs/ipv6policy.html;
                    APNIC:
                    http://www.apnic.net/docs/policy/ipv6-address-
                    policy.html

   [RFC 3177] IAB/IESG Recommendations on IPv6 Address Allocations to
                    Sites.  IAB, IESG. September 2001.

   [RFC 3194] The H-Density Ratio for Address Assignment Efficiency An
                    Update
                         on the H ratio. A. Durand, C. Huitema. November
                    2001.



9.  Author's Address

   Thomas Narten
   IBM Corporation
   3039 Cornwallis Ave.



draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


   PO Box 12195 - BRQA/502
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2195

   Phone: 919-254-7798
   EMail: narten@us.ibm.com

   Geoff Huston
   APNIC

   EMail: gih@apnic.net

   Rosalea G Roberts
   Stanford University, Networking Systems
   241 Panama Street
   Pine Hall, room 175B
   Stanford, CA  94305-4102

   Email: lea.roberts@stanford.edu
   Phone: +1-650-723-3352


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.







draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             July 11, 2005


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

























draft-narten-ipv6-3177bis-48boundary-00.txt                     [Page 8]

