
Internet Engineering Task Force                               M. Nilsson
INTERNET DRAFT                                         6th November 1998
Document: draft-nilsson-audio-mpeg-01.txt
Expires 6th May 1999


                      The audio/mpeg Media Type

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
   (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
   Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   This memo provides information for the Internet community. This
   memo does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Abstract

   The audio layers of the MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 standards are in frequent
   use on the internet, but there is no uniform MIME type for these
   files. The intention of this draft is to standardize the use of
   audio/mpeg as its media type.


1.  MPEG audio

   The audio compression defined as layer I, layer II and layer III in
   the MPEG-1 [MPEG-1] and MPEG-2 [MPEG-2] standards is a popular method
   of compressing audio with a low quality loss. The compressed audio is
   split into several small data frames, each containing a frame header
   and compressed audio data.

   The mime type audio/mpeg defines a elementary byte stream containing
   MPEG frames according to [MPEG-1] and [MPEG-2], possibly interspersed
   with non MPEG data. Non MPEG data is data without MPEG
   synchronisation or is not possible to decompress without error.




Nilsson                                                         [Page 1]
x
Internet DRAFT        The audio/mpeg Media Type            November 1998

2.  Registration Information

   To: ietf-types@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of MIME media type audio/mpeg

   MIME media type name: audio

   MIME subtype name: mpeg

   Required parameters: none

   Optional parameters: none

   Encoding considerations:

       For use over internet it is assumed that lower layers take care
       of transmission errors, so audio/mpeg data MAY include MPEG
       frames generated without the optional cyclic redundancy checks
       (CRC) for improved audio quality. Transmisson must be 8-bit
       clean.

   Security considerations:

       Data concatenated with the MPEG stream might contain executable
       code. This executable code can only be executed by a program that
       looks for it and is not executed by an MPEG audio decoder when it
       attempts to play the file. It's simply ignored.

   Interoperability considerations:

       MPEG audio has proven to be widely interoperable across computer
       platforms.

   Published specification: see [MPEG-1] and [MPEG-2]

   Applications which use this media type:

       MPEG audio is device-, platform- and vendor-neutral and is
       supported by a wide range of encoders and decoders (players).

   Additional information:

       Magic number(s): none
       File extension(s): .mp1, .mp2, .mp3
       Macintosh File Type Code(s): MPEG
       Object Identifier(s) or OID(s): none

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

       The author of this draft.





Nilsson                                                         [Page 2]
x
Internet DRAFT        The audio/mpeg Media Type            November 1998

   Intended usage: COMMON

     Author/Change controller:


3.  References

   [MPEG-1]
     ISO/IEC 11172-3:1993.
     Coding of moving pictures and associated audio for digital storage
     media at up to about 1,5 Mbit/s, Part 3: Audio.
     Technical committee / subcommittee: JTC 1 / SC 29

   [MPEG-2]
     ISO/IEC 13818-3:1995
     Generic coding of moving pictures and associated audio information,
     Part 3: Audio.
     Technical committee / subcommittee: JTC 1 / SC 29

     and

     ISO/IEC DIS 13818-3
     Generic coding of moving pictures and associated audio information,
     Part 3: Audio (Revision of ISO/IEC 13818-3:1995)


4.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


Nilsson                                                         [Page 3]
x
Internet DRAFT        The audio/mpeg Media Type            November 1998

5.  Authors' Addresses

   Martin Nilsson
   Rydsvägen 246 C. 30
   S-584 34 Linköping
   Sweden

   Email: nilsson@id3.org















































Nilsson                                                         [Page 4]
x