INTERNET-DRAFT                                  V.Balaji Venkat
Category : EXPERIMENTAL                         HCL-CISCO ODC,
Title : draft-bvenkat-chips-on-avians-01.txt    Chennai, 
Date  : 17 December 1999                        India.
Avian calendar date : 1st April (year unknown)  Robert G. Ferrell
                                                National Business Center
                                                US Dept. of the Interior
                                                        
       A Method for the Transmission of IP Datagrams 
               on Chip-ridden Avian Carriers


Status of this Memo


   This document is an individual contribution for consideration by the
   Network Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force.  


   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:


      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:


      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   Copyright   (C) The Internet Society 1999.  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   This memo describes an experimental method for the funneling IP 
   datagrams using tweets and chirps, through avian carriers
   which are embedded with a processor/chip that is biomedically

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   engineered to fit in their tiny brains.  This specification is 
   primarily useful in Metropolitan Area Networks where agile predatory
   domestic or feral species are not widespread.  This is an 
   experimental, not recommended method.  


Table of Contents 


1.0 Overview and Rational. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2.0 Addressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
3.0 Mobile ROUTING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
4.0 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
5.0 Chirpy Chirpy Chip Chip. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
6.0 Frame Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
7.0 Interoperation with existing network devices . . . . . . . . 7
8.0 Loss of a carrier in an arena. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
9.0 Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
10.0 References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
11.0 Author's Address. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
12.0 Full Copyright Statement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


1.0 Overview and Rational


   Biomedically engineered chips provide low delay, high throughput
   and low altitude service when fitted into avians. Mobility is the
   key word in this respect. Avians fitted with such chips can fly
   anywhere in a given metropolitan area. It is assumed that such an
   area is equipped with what one might call low altitude IP towers
   that look around for avians flying in their area.


   The connection topology can be non point-to-point for each carrier
   and as specified in RFC 1149 [1] each can be used without significant
   interference with another, so long appropriate species and seasonal 
   parameters are chosen. For example, while members of the 
   columbiformes traditionally employed in RFC 1149-type ASCII message 
   vectoring might experience little if any routing variation throughout 
   the year, an unfortunate selection of, say, _Sterna paradisaea_  in 
   either late winter or early fall might result in an unacceptable 
   latency period due to suboptimal routing.  A standard avian carrier 
   needs to be developed, perhaps by genetic engineering, which will 
   have minimal reactions to seasonal variations in the local diurnal 
   cycle.  The development of such a carrier is outside the scope of 
   this document and will not be addressed.
   
   The carriers as specified have an intrinsic collision avoidance 
   system which is supplemented by a method that is described in this 
   document. However, extensive experience in the field has led the 
   authors to the conclusion that this collison avoidance mechanism 
   is highly unreliable during periods of inclement weather, most 
   notably thunderstorms.  Avian/fixed structure contact, particularly 

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   when such structures exhibit large expanses of transparent /
   translucent glass, are common and almost invariably result in loss of 
   the carrier and thus of the transported data, since recovery success 
   of out-of-service carriers is miserably low. Any quality of service 
   (QoS) assessments should therefore take into account the weather 
   conditions at the time of transmission and the architectural topology 
   of the anticipated route.
   
   The biomedically engineered chip allows low frequency signals
   to be transmitted by these specially equipped avians that helps
   signals move around large objects such as skyscrapers and reach
   another such avian with whom negotiation has taken place prior
   to such a signal, or a low altitude IP tower in the area with whom
   negotiation has been arranged. In addition the chip also allows 
   for high frequency signals to be transmitted that are inaudible
   to the human ear. Care must be taken that the signals are not 
   inadvertently made audible en route, lest the carrier attract 
   extraneous and detrimental predator attention.
   
   IP traffic funnelled through after such negotiation can be 
   connection oriented as in TCP or unreliable transport as in UDP. 
   Connection oriented traffic is somewhat problematic, however, 
   due to the latency of transmission.  The carrier might wander 
   away or be distracted during the transport process, with an 
   attendant loss of data integrity.    


   The issues to be discussed include addressing for each such 
   avian prior to the negotiation, after the negotiation and for
   each low altitude IP tower, the last of which provides for easy
   address allocation through static means from a central controlling
   authority. The layer 2 address for a avian ridden with a chip
   or more is unique for each such avian chip. Similarly the IP  
   tower has a unique layer 2 address that fits in the piece of the
   puzzle.
   
   It should be noted that these towers must be constructed of a 
   material that is highly resistant to the corrosive effects of uric 
   acid deposits, a significant and unavoidable by-product of carrier 
   physiology.


   The low delay is achieved by the high data content in the fast
   moving tweets and chirps, the variations of which are unheard of
   in the human hearable frequencies. Thus these tweets and chirps
   may be unheard by the normal human ear except for the upper range
   of lower frequency chirps that provide for high delay and low
   throughput for traffic of the kind that requires delivery but not
   instant delivery.   


1.1  Requirements language

   In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "optional",

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   "recommended", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT", are to be interpreted as
   described in [2].


2.0 Addressing
    
   The layer 2 addressing is done by allocating a MAC address to
   every chip that is set on board an avian's brain. Since research 
   has shown that many of the more desirable messaging carrier
   species possess small quantities of magnetite in their cranial 
   cavities, the possible deleterious interactions of this material 
   with the implant must be explored more fully before the reliability 
   of either data integrity or signal routing can reasonably be assured.
   Appropriate surgical techniques may be used to implant the chip with 
   connections to its auditory and vocal mechanisms. The chip is
   tuned to transmit in a particular frequency. If two chips are
   of the same frequency then two avians implanted with the same
   frequency may collide in their transmissions if they are in
   the same Avian Arena. For this reason each avian is tagged to be
   released in an area exclusive of the other's if the two happen to
   share the same send/receive frequency. It is the intention of
   this draft to treat each avian as a mobile router of packets
   that may be sent on the native frequency of the chip on that
   avian. Such collisions would require drastic action such as 
   shooting down the colliding avian that has contravened its 
   Avian Arena boundaries. Alternatively, avian carriers may be 
   fitted with tiny collars that deliver mild electric shocks when
   the avian domain borders are approached, thus actively discouraging
   such transgressions.  It remains to be seen whether or not these
   electrical discharges would in any way interfere with or compromise
   the integrity of the data being carried by that avian.  Maintaining
   these electrically-defined boundaries might present a prohibitively 
   high monetary and personnel investment, as well.


   The IP towers are equipped with sufficient instrumentation to
   pick up the varying frequencies of the various avian chips
   that are implanted. Each is considered a physical channel all
   by itself. IP datagrams may be funnelled on each such physical
   channel. Thus each such physical channel would carry data from
   one IP tower to another via these avians or from one IP tower
   to another avian and then onto another avian operating in a
   different Avian Arena (AA) that is adjacent to that of the first
   avian. Thus a sequence of Avian Arenas adjacent to each
   other would be serviced by one avian each per frequency. 
   Transmission and reciept from one Avian Arena avian to another 
   would be negotiated as well. A draft for recommending the 
   guidelines for such negotiation can be taken up for further enquiry.


   It is an intrinsic advantage of this design that the MAC 
   address (the prefix at least) can be learned from the 
   frequency of the avian chip. The OUI (Ornithologically 
   Unique Identifier) portion of the MAC address can be shorter 

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   than the standard 24 bits. Thus a larger number of Avian Arenas 
   can be arranged adjacent to each other thus providing for more 
   coverage. However it is recommended that IP towers be placed 
   in a manner that have not more than 3 or 4 AA's sequenced or 
   adjacent to each other.


   Thus a collision domain is within an Avian Arena. Outside
   of the Avian Arena the frequencies may be weak and an old
   avian, for that matter, would serve as a weak link in the
   transmission.


   Appropriate guard bands are provided for a given "chirps
   and tweets" on a particular frequency so that collision of
   Z frequency type avian chip with Y frequency type avian
   chip is avoided. 


3.0 Mobile ROUTING 


   Avian arena changes can be negotiated through the mobility
   of an avian into another avian's arena. Thus two avians on
   the same frequency may arrange to swap one another or 
   arrange to rearrange the distribution of same frequency 
   avians through a protocol. This subject too is left for 
   further enquiry.  Among territorial individuals, however,
   uncontrolled avian-to-avian interactions of this type 
   tend to be sufficiently traumatic to one or both of the 
   carriers that data integrity would most likely be compromised.


   Standard routing protocols are run on avians with more than
   one chip. Each chip represents an interface. Each such chip
   would in turn transmit in a different frequency than from 
   the other. This way traffic could be switched across multiple
   frequencies and carried to its end destination. Thus at any
   given time, an avian may be receiving on one frequency and
   transmitting on another interface at a different frequency.
   The IP towers or adjacent Avian Arena avians may capture that
   data and forward them further along the way. Route 
   distribution through the standard protocols are thus sent on
   multiple frequencies through various avians in differing 
   Avian Arenas. 

   A single chipped avian (for example, a Chipping Sparrow, 
   _Spizella passerina_) serves as a repeater (members of the 
   mimidae and psittacidae also excel in this role).
   
4.0 Data 

   A tweet, defined as a broad-spectrum monosyllabic burst of short 
   duration, represents a one. A chirp, defined as a narrow-to-medium 

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   spectrum polysyllabic burst (with a burst being delineated by one  
   attack and release only) represents a zero. The 
   chips implanted on these avians SHALL help the avian thereof
   to chirp and tweet very rapidly. The physical standards 
   are determined by the chip manufacturer, and by the syringeal 
   and neurological anatomy of the chosen avian carrier.



5.0 Chirpy Chirpy Chip Chip


   The chips implanted in such avians have a persistence 
   capability as well, with on-board memory that can be retained
   while an avian flies across several Avian Arenas and into
   another avian domain. An Avian Domain consists of several
   Avian Arenas, and is the equivalent of an autonomous system.
   This persistent data can be exchanged in another domain where
   such data may be found useful. Uses for such trans-avian
   domain data include exchange of such data to the border avian 
   routers of a given avian domain. Thus the topology of the interns 
   of a given avian domain or a part of it can be transported to the 
   border avian routers of another domain.


6.0 Frame Format


   The IP datagram is not printed on a small scroll of paper as
   specified in RFC 1149 [1]. It is available in the form of chirps
   and tweets in a combination of varying pitch/frequency. It is
   only known or recognizable to the chip-ridden avian, in reality
   to the chip alone rather than to the avian itself. So security
   is not a problem as the signals are not traceable except with
   the help of a very powerful mega-microphone. If availability of
   such mega-microphones is found to be a problem, the data can
   be encrypted using standard encryption techniques such as IPsec.


   No scrolls of paper are tied around the avian carrier thus saving
   a lot of payload. One might assume that it is offset by the 
   embedding of a chip into the tiny brain of the avian but then
   again the ratio of the chip to paper is found to be well tilted
   in favour of the former. 


   No duct tape need be used in this case. MTUs are found to be of
   a larger size in case of the chip-ridden avian as the CRC that 
   ties in a frame is of a larger size than conventional protocols.
   Carrier age is a problem; although the chip does not degrade
   with increasing age of the avian, the soft tissue connecting 
   the chip to its auditory and speech system may weaken as time 
   passes. Retransmissions on an older avian may thus be found 
   to be occurring very rapidly. Frame (not to mention carrier)  

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   capture is less reliable as the carrier approaches its TTL value.  
   A frequency of use and reliability of transmission expectation 
   that varies inversely with carrier age is advisable. As the avian 
   ages, degeneration of its chirp and tweet acoustical structures 
   (beak and syrinx) may lead to degradation of the rate and quality 
   of frame transmission, and thus to the terminal end of the avian's 
   service, at which point the chip,  if deemed still in working order, 
   is removed from its brain. Such an operation may free the avian from 
   further traffic forwarding service but may cause loss of auditory 
   and speech functionalities. It MAY return to the normal pattern 
   of chirps and tweets which would beaudible to the human ear.  
   Or, more likely, NOT.
   
   One factor to be considered here is that a great many of the most 
   suitable carrier species produce highly stylized but imperfectly 
   predictable signals that must be filtered or suppressed in order 
   to achieve an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio, given that message 
   transmission is acoustically achieved.  Any relatively rigorous 
   application of Shannon's Theorem to the problem of avian IP transport 
   demonstrates vividly the need for either very loud birds or very 
   quiet surroundings. One might obviate this somewhat by use of 
   carriers with limited spurious signal production in the frequency 
   range in question, such as some members of the pelecaniformes or 
   struthioniformes, but substitution of these species introduces an  
   entirely different set of challenges (in the latter case, 
   for example, lack of aerial locomotion is problematic).


   The layer 2 frame header for a set of data is similar to IEEE 802.3
   with 802.2 LLC. Since the chirps and tweets are audible to a
   receiver in that range, they are picked up by the receiver (in
   a different Avian Arena) when the said receiver is not 
   transmitting. If a collision occurs then ideally both avian carriers 
   back off as per the CSMA/CD mechanism outlined in IEEE 802.3 
   standards.
   
   Experience has shown, however, that when collisions occur among avian 
   carriers, the general rule of thumb is to expect at a minimum a 
   considerable increase in latency and in worse cases a complete loss 
   of data and carrier, since the vast majority of avians are 
   non-compliant with IEEE 802.3.


7.0 Interoperation with existing network devices

   Appropriate devices are available for interoperation with such
   avian carriers that possess an avian chip. Chip manufacturers 
   provide appropriate interfaces to tap into a dead avian or a live
   one to transfer data back and forth from an avian chip to the
   said device which may be a router, that is tangibly visible as one
   to humans. While they do not exhibit favorable transmission 
   characteristics for any messaging other than campus-wide (and even  
   then usually line-of-sight only, with a strong throwing arm), dead 
   avians are quite predictable in their behavior and are less apt

Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

   to be lost due to routing anomalies, although prowling predatory 
   and/or scavenger species can significantly impact data recovery.


8.0 Loss of a carrier in an arena.


   The loss of a carrier in an arena can result in the stoppage of
   traffic in that arena onto the adjacent one. This is taken care by
   providing a backup avian carrier, since avians usually travel in
   pairs. Once a backup avian comes active in an Avian Arena 
   another pair is released in that Avian Arena with the same
   chip configuration but with chirping and tweeting disabled.
   Thus fault tolerance is achieved on that count. Fault tolerance that 
   relies on this principle, however, narrows the field of prospective 
   carrier species to those which form strong pair-bonds, and further 
   restricts reliable signal transmission to the breeding season (which 
   in effect means that this method is most useful in subtropical and
   tropical habitats, where breeding seasons are extended).


9.0 Security Considerations


   As discussed earlier security is not a problem except in the
   cross Avian Arena border transition case, which might take place
   if an avian finds a courtship to be undertaken with another
   avian in a different avian domain. This is sought to be 
   restricted by injecting suitable mitigating agents that 
   suppress the hormones responsible for such courtship in a given
   avian carrier.  However, this mechanism must be employed with care,
   since those same hormones are also responsible for vocalizations. 
   Suppressing them excessively would render the payload inaccessible, 
   at least until the suppressive effect subsided.  This would 
   introduce considerable latency, and repeated or improperly conducted 
   suppressions might reduce the TTL of the carrier significantly.


10.0 References


    [1] Waitzman, D., "A Standard for the Transmission of IP Datagrams 
        on Avian Carriers", RFC 1149, 1 April 1990.
    [2] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.










Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             December 1999 

11.0 Author Addresses


   V.Balaji Venkat
   HCL-CISCO Offshore development center,
   Chennai - 600 084
   India.


   Phone: 91 44 3741939
   EMail: bvenkat@cisco.com
   
   Robert G. Ferrell
   National Business Center-Texas
   435 Isom Rd., Ste. 234
   San Antonio, TX  78216
   USA
   
   Phone: 1 210 321 5204
   Email: Robert_G_Ferrell@nbc.gov


12.0  Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied  and  furnished
   to others,  and  derivative works that comment on or otherwise
   explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
   published  and distributed,  in  whole  or  in part, without
   restriction of any kind, provided that the  above  copyright  notice
   and  this  paragraph  are included on all such copies and derivative
   works.  However, this docu- ment itself may not be modified in any
   way, such as  by  removing  the copyright notice or references to the
   Internet Society or other Inter- net organizations, except as needed
   for  the  purpose  of  developing Internet standards in which case
   the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards
   process must be followed, or as required  to translate it into
   languages other than   English.  The limited permis- sions granted
   above are perpetual and  will  not  be  revoked  by  the Internet
   Society or its successors or assigns.  This document and the
   information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis  and
   THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE
   DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO ANY  WAR- RANTY  THAT  THE  USE  OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS  FOR  A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."






Balaji, Ferrell         expires May 2000                        [Page 9]
