



SIMPLE                                                    J. Ala-Kurikka
Internet-Draft                                             M. Ylianttila
Expires: January 6, 2006                                      E. Harjula
                                                           Univ. of Oulu
                                                            July 5, 2005


Mapping non-URIs to contact element in Presence Information Data Format
                  draft-ala-kurikka-simple-map2pidf-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The Presence Information Data Format (PIDF) defines a basic XML
   format for presence information.  The contact element in PIDF is
   understood as a URI.  However, some existing Internet services do not
   identify users (presentities) natively with a URI.  Mapping non-URIs
   to contact element in Presence Information Data Format (Map2PIDF)
   specifies the mapping of addresses to a URI in the case of such
   currently existing services.



Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


1.  Introduction

   The Presence Information Data Format (PIDF) [1] defines a basic XML
   format for presenting presence information of a presentity.  Presence
   tuples [2] have an optional <contact> element.  The contents of the
   <contact> element are understood to refer to a URI [3].

   There are, however, services and applications in the Internet that do
   not natively use URIs to identify users, and/or the mapping of users
   to URIs is more or less cumbersome.  Examples include Instant
   Messaging, VoIP and peer-to-peer for file sharing.  While PIDF seems
   flexible enough to handle also such communication addresses, it would
   be helpful if users' capability of communicating with such services
   that do not share a common naming convention could also be announced
   with PIDF.  This document specifies how to map user names from a such
   services to a presentity's <contact> element.

   One goal of this specification is to be backwards compatible with
   PIDF.  This would ensure that existing non-Map2PIDF watchers and
   gateways will continue to work properly, without access to the
   functionality specified here.  Old User Agents (later UAs) would not
   know how to act with URIs with these new schemes.  However, if the
   contents of <contact> elements were to be shown in plain text form to
   a user acting as a watcher, he/she could possibly understand the form
   and follow the link manually (e.g. by opening a file sharing client
   program and connecting to a hub that the presentity is connected to).
   At this phase, no action has been taken to filter URIs with formerly
   undefined schemes defined in this document from presence information
   for watchers or gateways that do not conform to this specification.
   It is assumed that URIs with these new schemes in the presence
   information do not hinder UAs or gateways from reading the tuples
   that have well-known schemes according to "Handling of Unrecognized
   Element Names" in PIDF.

1.1  Motivation

   The PIDF specification does not rule out the set of supported
   communication means.  The only requirement set is that the
   communication address has to be expressed with a URI.  However, some
   application level protocols - of which some are proprietary - use
   naming conventions other than URIs to define individual presentities.
   While these are normally ruled out so that their addresses would
   never be added to a presentity tuple, this is an excellent
   opportunity for adding connectivity awareness for PIDF.	Providing
   listing of the ways that a presentity can communicate with would be a
   major advantage for SIP [4] leveraging SIP's status as a necessity
   for all interconnected IP devices, being the unifying factor.




Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


   Of course, details on supported application level protocols could
   also be queried from remote UAs after establishing a session with
   them.  Having that information without a session initiation with the
   remote UA could, however, prove an important feature.  Queries such
   as "who of my friends are using Skype" would probably be more
   efficient with a centrally managed presence information service than
   with having to establish sessions to all friends first.

   Mapping the "non-URIs" to a URI without a standard way could also be
   used.  But this would limit the usefulness of the presence tuple to
   what the user can do, and even this only if the mapped URI would be
   shown to the user in plain text form.  There are many useful
   scenarios where an automata would benefit from being able to
   understand all the different ways of interaction (i.e. communication
   addresses) of a presentity, say, a user's friend.  The UA could then
   provide e.g. a list of different possible operations with the friend
   to the user.  Or it could suggest using less costly Skype URI to
   establish a telephone call instead of using a more expensive tel URI,
   if the friend had one in one of his presence tuples.

   Such feature would probably prove especially useful in mobile devices
   because of their limited resources, including processing
   capabilities, memory and screen.  Also user friendliness could be
   substantially better with one UI to control actions in several
   protocols instead of multiple separate applications, one for each
   protocol.  The need for such multiprotocol communication will be even
   bigger in the future, as there seems to be no consensus on which
   protocol to use for e.g. file sharing.  This leads often to loss of
   interoperability.  A certain type of interoperability would be made
   possible, though, with the proposed specification.

1.2  Terminology and Conventions

   This memo makes use of the vocabulary defined in the IMPP Model
   document [2].  Terms such as COMMUNICATION ADDRESS, COMMUNICATION
   MEANS, CONTACT ADDRESS, and PRESENTITY in the memo are used in the
   same meaning as defined therein.

   The key words MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT,
   RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL in this document are to be interpreted
   as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [5].










Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


2.  Mapping

   Every protocol being mapped to a URI MUST have a well-defined,
   individual URI scheme.  Schemes do not exist for the protocols
   specified in this document.  Schemes for non-existing protocols MUST
   be formulated through the following process (conforms with [5]):

      The official name of the protocol is converted to lowercase,
      removed of any special characters (including white space) other
      than digits, plus ("+"), period (".") or hyphen ("-").

      If the name's first character is a digit, replace the digit with
      the first character of the written English form in lowercase (e.g.
      1->one->o)





































Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


3.  Example

   Using a default XML namespace:

   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   <presence xmlns="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:pidf"
                   entity="pres:Joe@example.com">
           <tuple id="sg89ae">
                   <status>
                           <basic>open</basic>
                   </status>
                   <contact priority="0.8">skype:joe</contact>
           </tuple>
   </presence>

   This would indicate to a WATCHER that the PRESENTITY Joe@example.com
   is registered to Skype with a user name of "joe" and that his Skype
   client is online, so Joe is able to receive VoIP calls.

































Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


4.  Implementing Map2PIDF

   Our specification would benefit from some way of exchanging presence
   information between SIP UAs [4] providing PRESENCE INFORMATION and
   other applications (possibly UAs) communicating with other protocols.
   One way of doing this would be to enable the SIP UA itself to be able
   to communicate with various other protocols as well as SIP.  Another
   possibility would be to have interfaces between applications (or UAs)
   through which presence information for different protocols could be
   exchanged.

   If no such intercommunication of applications can be achieved,
   presence information provided to other protocols might be harder to
   obtain by the SIP UA.  This would, on the other hand, restrict
   functionality.  The SIP UA would not know if the device was online
   with other protocols, therefore suggestions of using other protocols
   might lead to useless attempts.  Operating system level application
   search and start capabilities could still be used to e.g. invoke an
   external application to establish a VoIP session.
































Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


5.  Security Considerations

   Exposing PIDF information to others requires security mechanisms
   itself.  However, they are already specified in the PIDF
   specification.  Map2PIDF reveals some more information, such as 3rd
   party applications installed and/or running on a PRESENTITY's device.
   Care has to be taken, and the developer should pay special attention
   to all notes in the PIDF security considerations.  The 3rd party
   applications might have security vulnerabilities themselves, however,
   addressing them is out of scope of this document.

   If a password to a certain server (or similar) was to be included in
   a PRESENTITY's PRESENCE INFORMATION to enable certain (perhaps
   selected) set of WATCHERs to gain access to the server, S/MIME [6]
   MUST be used for staging security at least for that PRESENCE TUPLE.
   Otherwise the password is exposed almost certainly allowing
   eavesdroppers to also gain access to the server using the WATCHER's
   privileges.

6.  References

   [1]  Sugano, H., Fujimoto, S., Klyne, G., Bateman, A., Carr, W., and
        J. Peterson, "Presence Information Data Format (PIDF)",
        RFC 3863, August 2004.

   [2]  Day, M., Rosenberg, J., and H. Sugano, "A Model for Presence and
        Instant Messaging", RFC 2778, February 2000.

   [3]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396,
        August 1998.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [5]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [6]  Ramsdell, B., "Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
        (S/MIME) Version 3.1 Message Specification", RFC 3851,
        July 2004.









Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Jussi Ala-Kurikka
   MediaTeam / University of Oulu
   Department of Electrical and Information Engineering
   Information Processing Laboratory
   P.O.BOX 4500
   University of Oulu  90014
   FI

   Phone: +358 44 304 0098
   Email: jussi.ala-kurikka@oulu.fi
   URI:   http://www.mediateam.oulu.fi


   Mika Ylianttila
   MediaTeam / University of Oulu
   Department of Electrical and Information Engineering
   Information Processing Laboratory
   P.O.BOX 4500
   University of Oulu  90014
   FI

   Phone: +358 40 535 0505
   Email: mika.ylianttila@oulu.fi
   URI:   http://www.ee.oulu.fi/~over


   Erkki Harjula
   MediaTeam / University of Oulu
   Department of Electrical and Information Engineering
   Information Processing Laboratory
   P.O.BOX 4500
   University of Oulu  90014
   FI

   Phone: +358 50 303 0478
   Email: erkki.harjula@oulu.fi
   URI:   http://www.mediateam.oulu.fi












Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the Application Supernetworking
   (All-IP) project partners: the National Technology Agency (TEKES),
   Nokia, TeliaSonera Finland, Elektrobit Group, IBM and Serv-It for
   their financial support and Henning Schulzrinne for his comments
   during the early phases of sketching the idea.












































Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  Map2PIDF                       July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Ala-Kurikka, et al.      Expires January 6, 2006               [Page 10]


