


SIPPING                                                         M. Dolly
Internet-Draft                                                 AT&T Labs
Expires: January 10, 2006                                        B. Hall
                                                                     SBC
                                                              J. Zebarth
                                                                  Nortel
                                                            July 9, 2005


                         ATIS PTSC Work Program
                  draft-dolly-sipping-atis-ptsc-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   At the 63rd Paris IETF Meeting it is anticipated that a new BoF,
   possibly called VoIP Peering and Interconnect BoF (voipeer), will be
   held to discuss the subject of VoIP peering.

   This Internet Draft has been prepared to share the relevant portions



Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


   of the PTSC current work program, which may be related to this topic,
   with the IETF.  It is hoped that awareness of the Packet Technologies
   Systems Committee (PTSC) work program will allow for more informed
   discussion during this BOF.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  PTSC Work Program  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1   IP Interconnection, and Services & Capabilities  . . . . .  3
     2.2   IP Emergency Telecommunication Services  . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3   Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.3.1   Security at NNIs and UNIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.3.2   Security Mechanisms for Messaging Applications . . . .  6
       2.3.3   End to End User Authentication and Signaling
               Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4   Lawfully Authorized Electronic Surveillance  . . . . . . .  7
     2.5   Program Items related to IP Network Testing  . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Changes from previous  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 10


























Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


1.  Introduction

   At the 63rd Paris IETF Meeting it is anticipated that a new BoF,
   possibly called VoIP Peering and Interconnect BoF (voipeer), will be
   held to discuss the subject of VoIP peering.  It is also anticipated
   that the intention of the BoF will be to focus on the following
   objectives:
      To initiate long term discussion on VoIP Peering and Interconnect
      among the Internet's operational community, with the goal of
      understanding the existing and future requirements for VoIP
      Peering and Interconnect.
      To address the near-term need to document the requirements and
      associated use-cases for VoIP interconnect.  Such requirements can
      be used to inform protocol groups working on relevant protocol
      mechanisms.

   This Internet Draft has been prepared to share the relevant portions
   of the Packet Technologies Systems Committee (PTSC) current work
   program, which may be related to this topic, with the IETF.  It is
   hoped that awareness of the PTSC work program will allow for more
   informed discussion during this BOF.

   The PTSC defines its work program in the context of Issues.  The PTSC
   operates on the principle that one deliverable is typically produced
   under one identified Issue (or project if you wish).  It is important
   to understand that the PTSC is quite prepared to recommend adoption
   of existing standards should they be available and appropriate.

   The PTSC wishes to maintain a good working relationship with the IETF
   and sees the IETF as a rich potential source of IP related protocols.

2.  PTSC Work Program

   The PTSC is an ATIS sponsored technical committee.  The PTSC develops
   and recommends standards and Technical Reports related to packet
   based services, architectures, and signaling, in addition to working
   with related subjects under consideration in other North American and
   international standards bodies.  The PTSC is a major source of
   proposed United States Positions to the ITU.

   While the full PTSC work program is publicly available and can be
   found at: http://www.atis.org/0191/issues.asp, this document will
   identify those items that are related to this topical area and that
   are active.

2.1  IP Interconnection, and Services & Capabilities

   The following issue statements cover the topics related to general



Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


   network interconnection:

   Issue S0009 - Authorizes development of a standard that defines the
      NNI interface to promote IP-IP interconnection between carriers in
      support of multi-media services.

   Issue S0010 - Authorizes development of an update to the interworking
      requirements defined in T1.679 (SIP-I), as new RFCs become
      approved and as ITU-T Recommendations are modified.

   Issue S0014 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report assessing
      which industry groups are developing operator services-related
      standards for next generation equipment and what, if any, common
      functions and architectures are emerging in support of operator
      services in the IP space.

   Issue S0018 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      defines an implementable architecture in support of IP QoS & RACs
      for USA networks.

   Issue S0019 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      defines an implementable architecture in support of IP QoS & RACs
      for USA networks.

   Issue S0020 - Supporting phased migration of existing services and
      CPE to an IP environment.

   Issue S0029  - An Interworking Standard to Support ANSI Extensions to
      NSS.

   Issue S0021 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report describing
      operator services functions and a common nomenclature and in
      support of operator services in the IP space.

   Issue S0023 - Authorizes development of Technical Report that
      specifies a set of requirements for communicating IP traffic
      priority and QoS parameters between applications and the IP
      transport.  Specific aspects of such a work program are the
      following:
         Call/Session Flow Identification
         Vertical Interface Requirements

   Issue S0024 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      defines the Session/Border Control Functions (S/BCF), performed
      within various different network types.  The functions required
      depend on the interface.  The document will include illustrative
      examples of physical realizations of the functions.  The physical
      distribution of the functions will depend on scale, operational



Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


      and application needs.

   Issue S0025 - Authorizes development of a Standard that defines the
      NNI numbering and routing capabilities and procedures to promote
      IP-IP interconnection between carriers in support of multi-media
      services.  This includes the support of carrier based ENUM.

   Issue S0026 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report, in the
      form of a users guide, on how to use SIP History-Info, between
      networks and within a single network domain.

   Issue S0027 - Authorizes development of a standard for a signaling/
      control interface between an End User's SIP UA and an IP Service
      Provider, with the focus on layer 4 and above, application
      signaling and control.  In addition to defining the interface in
      support of the application services, the document will also
      include procedures and call/signaling flows for device bootstrap,
      discovery and data profile configuration.

   Issue S0030 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      documents signaling to support Call Admission Control and Traffic
      Management capabilities and procedures to be used between two IP
      service providers, or within a service provider's domain.

   Issue S0031 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      recommends application of packet priority markings and call
      processing in managed IP networks.

2.2  IP Emergency Telecommunication Services

   Issue S0016 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      defines protocol and procedures for supporting ETS in IP networks.
      This will include:
         Procedures and call flows for authorizing ETS users;
         Origination, termination and routing of ETS traffic in a
         multiple service-provider environment;
         Population of control messages;
         Interworking between IP and other network types (e.g.  PSTN,
         Wireless).

2.3  Security

2.3.1  Security at NNIs and UNIs

   As telecom networks migrate the Network-to Network Interface (NNI)
   from circuit switched to IP, there is a need for network control
   security related specifications/  and standards which define the NNI
   and the User Network Interface (UNI).



Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


   The PTSC is in the process of developing a suite of 5 Security IP
   network interconnection related standards that deal with this
   security area.  These standards complement the security work already
   undertaken by the ATIS TMOC Committee
   (http://www.atis.org/0130/index.asp) and the security work currently
   underway in the ATIS PRQC Committee
   (http://www.atis.org/0010/index.asp).

   The security related standards being produced by the PTSC are as
   described in the issue statements below follows(note that issue
   statements describe the deliverables of the PTSC):

   Issue S0003 - Authorizes development of a standard which provides a
      roadmap view of a subtending suite of standards, technical
      reports, and requirements documents which provide a consistent set
      of baseline security recommendations for the control and signaling
      plane.

   Issue S0004 - Authorizes development of a standard which describes
      generic control and signaling security issues applicable to any
      signaling network.

   Issue S0005- Authorizes development of a standard that describes
      security in the SS7/BICC network and NNI connection between the
      SS7/BICC network and any other network.

   Issue S0006 - Authorizes development of a standard that describes
      security issues specific to a VoP or Multimedia network

   Issue S0007 - Authorizes development of a standard that addresses
      security issues specific to the UNI access.

2.3.2  Security Mechanisms for Messaging Applications

   The following issue statement covers the Security Mechanisms for
   Messaging Applications:

   Issue S0032 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that
      details the minimum security mechanisms that carriers should
      invoke, based on business objectives and policies for VoIP
      messaging applications.  The security mechanisms will address
      aspects related to SPIT and application layer DoS attacks in both
      signaling and data planes.

2.3.3  End to End User Authentication and Signaling Security

   The following issue statement covers the End to End User
   Authentication and Signaling Security:



Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


   Issue S0033 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report to
      address:
         >End-to-end security transiting multiple domains
         >A mechanism(s) for a user to validate end-to-end security in
         the presence of a "man in the middle network".

2.4  Lawfully Authorized Electronic Surveillance

   The following issue statements cover the topics related to Lawfully
   Authorized Electronic Surveillance (LAES):

   Issue S0001 - Authorizes development of preparation of version 2 of
      American National Standard T1.678 Lawfully Authorized Electronic
      Surveillance (LAES) for Voice over Packet Technologies in Wireline
      Telecommunications Networks, which can serve as a safe harbor
      document for LAES in support of Voice services over Packet-mode
      technologies in a wireline environment.

   Issue S0002 - Authorizes development of a new standard to specify
      LAES support for Public IP Network Access Service (PIPNAS)
      provider.

   Issue S0022 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report to
      describe the evolution of the LAES capabilities and solutions
      specified in existing American National Standards to support NGN

2.5  Program Items related to IP Network Testing

   S0008 - Authorizes development of a Technical Report that provides a
      testing framework in order to ensure interoperability for IP-IP
      interconnection between networks.

3.  Summary

   This Internet Draft has been prepared to share the relevant portions
   of the ATIS PTSC current work program, which may be related to this
   topic and other topics, with the IETF.  It is hoped that awareness of
   the Packet Technologies Systems Committee work program will allow for
   a more informed discussion during this BOF.

   The PTSC wishes to maintain a good working relationship with the IETF
   and sees the IETF as a rich potential source of IP related protocols.

4.  Security Considerations

   See Security section.





Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


5.  Changes from previous

   Not Applicable.

6.  References

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-config-framework]
              Petrie, D., "A Framework for Session Initiation Protocol
              User Agent Profile Delivery",
              draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-06 (work in progress),
              February 2005.

   [I-D.petrie-sipping-profile-datasets]
              Petrie, D., "A Schema for Session Initiation Protocol User
              Agent Profile Data Sets",
              draft-petrie-sipping-profile-datasets-00 (work in
              progress), July 2004.

   [I-D.sinnreich-sipdev-req]
              Sinnreich, H., "SIP Telephony Device Requirements and
              Configuration", draft-sinnreich-sipdev-req-07 (work in
              progress), June 2005.

   [RFC0822]  Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet
              text messages", STD 11, RFC 822, August 1982.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3265]  Roach, A., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific
              Event Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002.

   [RFC3470]  Hollenbeck, S., Rose, M., and L. Masinter, "Guidelines for
              the Use of Extensible Markup Language (XML) within IETF
              Protocols", BCP 70, RFC 3470, January 2003.











Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Martin Dolly
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue
   Middletowm, NJ  07748
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: mdolly AT att DOT com
   URI:


   Bob Hall
   SBC
   Austin, TX
   USA

   Phone:
   Email:
   URI:


   Joe Zebarth
   Nortel
   Austin, TX
   US

   Phone:
   Email:
   URI:

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments


















Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.





Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           ATIS PTSC Work Program                July 2005


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Dolly, et al.           Expires January 10, 2006               [Page 11]


