
Networking Working Group                                        P. Levis
Internet-Draft                                       Stanford University
Intended status: Informational                               JP. Vasseur
Expires: January 8, 2008                              Cisco Systems, Inc
                                                               D. Culler
                                                               Arch Rock
                                                            July 7, 2007


 Overview of Existing Wireless Mesh Routing Protocols for Low Power and
                             Lossy Networks
                 draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   Networks of low power wireless devices introduce novel IP routing
   issues.  Nodes (such as sensor, actuator or various forms of objects)
   are constrained in several ways: limited memory and processing power
   and so on.  Furthermore, most of them are battery-powered thus making



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   the use of energy efficient routing protocol of high importance.
   Wireless links can vary significantly over time, requiring protocols
   to make agile decisions yet minimize the energy cost of topology
   changes.  Thus such networks also referred to as L2Ns (Low Power and
   Lossy networks) have very specific routing requirements that are
   partially addressed by existing mesh routing protocols.  The aim of
   this document is to provide a brief survey of the strengths and
   weaknesses of existing protocol with respect to these issues in order
   to provide guidance on how their lessons can be leveraged in future
   protocol design.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].



































Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Link State Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  OSPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  OLSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Distance Vector protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  RIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  DSDV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Ad-hoc On Demand Vector Routing (AODV) . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  DYMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.5.  DSR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Routing Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Multi-path routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Resource awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  Small footprint  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.4.  Small MTU  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.5.  Flooding Control and Density Awareness . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.6.  Low power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.7.  Multi-topology Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Manageability Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 16




















Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


1.  Terminology

   AODV: Ad-hoc On Demand Vector Routing

   DSDV: Destination Sequenced Distance Vector

   DSR: Dynamic Source Routing

   DYMO: Dynamic Mobile On-Demand

   MANET: Mobile Ad-hoc Networks

   MAC: Medium Access Control

   MPLS: Multiprotocol Label Switching

   MPR: Multipoint Relays

   MTU: Maximum Transmission Unit

   L2N: Low power and Lossy Networks

   LSA: Link State Advertisement

   LSDB: Link State Database

   OLSR: Optimized Link State Routing

   RL2N: Routing in Low power and Lossy Networks

   TDMA: Time Division Multiple Access


2.  Introduction

   Networks of low power wireless devices introduce novel IP routing
   issues.  Nodes (such as sensor, actuator or various forms of objects)
   are constrained in several ways: limited memory and processing power
   and so on.  Furthermore most of them are battery-powered thus making
   the use of energy efficient routing protocol of high importance.
   Wireless links can vary significantly over time, requiring protocols
   to make agile decisions yet minimize the energy cost of topology
   changes.  Thus such networks also referred to as L2Ns (Low Power and
   Lossy networks) have very specific routing requirements that are
   partially addressed by existing mesh routing protocols.  The aim of
   this document is not to provide an exhaustive tutorial on routing
   protocols but to provide a brief survey of the strengths and
   weaknesses of existing protocols with respect to these issues in



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   order to provide guidance on how their lessons can be leveraged in
   future protocol design.

   Routing protocols broadly fall into two classes: link-state and
   distance-vector.

   A router running a link-state protocol first establishes adjacency
   with its neighbors and then floods the local topology information in
   the form of a Link State Advertisement packet using a reliable
   flooding mechanism across the network.  The collection of LSAs
   constitutes the Link State Database (LSDB) that represents the
   network topology.  Thus each node in the network has a complete view
   of the network topology.  Each router then uses the LSDB to compute
   the routing table where each entry (reachable IP destination address)
   points to the next hop along the shortest path according to some
   metric.  Link state protocols (such as OSPF and IS-IS) support the
   concept of area (called "level" for IS-IS) whereby all the routers in
   the same area share the same view (they have the same LSDB) and areas
   are interconnected by border routers according to specific rules that
   advertise IP prefix reachability between areas.

   A distance vector protocol exchanges routing information rather than
   topological information.  A router running a distance vector protocol
   exchanges information with its "neighbors" with which it has link
   layer connectivity.  Tunneling and similar mechanisms can virtualize
   link layer connectivity to allow neighbors that are multiple layer 2
   hops away.  Rather than a map of the network topology from which each
   router can calculate routes, a distance vector protocol node has
   information on what routes its neighbors have.  Each node's set of
   available routes is the union of its neighbors routes plus a route to
   itself.  In a distance vector protocol, nodes may only advertise
   routes which are in use, enabling on-demand discovery.  In comparison
   to link state protocols, distance vector protocols have the advantage
   of only requiring neighbor routing information, but also have
   corresponding limitations which protocols must address, such as
   routing loops (count to infinity, split horizon, ...), slow
   convergence times to mention a few of them.

   Wired networks draw from both approaches.  OSPF or IS-IS, for
   example, are link-state protocols, while RIP is a distance-vector
   protocol.

   MANETs similarly draw from both approaches.  OLSR is a link-state
   protocol, while AODV, DSDV, and DYMO are distance vector protocols.
   The general consensus in the Internet community is to use link state
   routing protocols as IGPs for a number of reasons: in many cases
   having a complete network topology view is required to adequately
   compute the shortest path according to some metrics.  For some



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   applications such as MPLS Traffic Engineering it is even required to
   have the knowledge of the Traffic Engineering Database for constraint
   based routing.

   XXX

   draft-ietf-manet-packetbb-04.txt draft-ietf-manet-nhdp-02.txt

   Furthermore link state protocols are usually superior in terms of
   convergence speed (ability to find an alternate path in case of
   network element failure), they are easier to debug and troubleshoot
   and so on and require less bandwidth than distance vector protocols.
   In contrast, distance vector protocols are simpler, require less
   computation, and have smaller storage requirements.  Most of these
   tradeoffs are similar in wireless networks, with one exception.
   Because wireless links can suffer from significant temporal
   variation, link state protocols can have higher traffic loads as
   topology changes must propagate globally, while in a distance vector
   protocol a node can make local routing decisions with no effect on
   the global routing topology.  One major protocol, DSR, does not
   easily fit into one of these two classes.  Although it is a distance
   vector protocol, DSR has several properties that make it differ from
   most other protocols in this class.  We discuss these differences in
   Section 4.5.

   A brief summary of several well established routing protocols is
   providing before considering the protocol characteristics in terms of
   the RL2N requirements.


3.  Link State Protocols

3.1.  OSPF

   OSPF (specified in [RFC2328] for IPv4 and in [RFC2740] for IPv6) is a
   link state protocol designed for routing within an Internet
   Autonomous System (AS).  OSPF provides the ability to divide a
   network into areas, which can establish a routing hierarchy.  The
   topology within an area is hidden from other areas and IP prefix
   reachability across areas (inter-area routing) is provided using
   summary LSA.  The hierarchy implies that there is a top-level routing
   area (the backbone area) which connects other areas.  Routing
   adjacencies with neighbors are maintained by sending OSPF hello
   messages.  OSPF calculates the shortest path to a node using link
   metrics (that may reflect the link bandwidth, propagation delay,
   ...).  OSPF Traffic Engineering (OSPF-TE) (see [RFC3630]) extends
   OSPF to include information on reservable, unreserved, and available
   bandwidth, affinity and so on.



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


3.2.  OLSR

   Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) (see [RFC3626] and
   [I-D.ietf-manet-olsrv2]) is a link state routing protocol intended
   for wireless mesh networks.  OLSR nodes flood route discovery packets
   throughout the entire network, such that each node has a map of the
   mesh topology.  Because link variations can lead to heavy flooding
   traffic when using a link state approach, OLSR establishes a topology
   for minimizing this communication.  Each node maintains a set of
   nodes called its Multipoint Relays (MPR), which is a subset of the
   one-hop neighbors whose connectivity covers the two-hop neighborhood.
   Each node that is an MPR maintains a set called its MPR selectors,
   which are nodes that have chosen it to be an MPR.

   OLSR uses these two sets to apply three optimizations.  First, only
   MPRs generate link state information.  Second, nodes can use MPRs to
   limit the set of nodes that forward link state packets.  Third, an
   MPR, rather than advertise all of its links, can advertise only links
   to its MPR selectors.  Together, these three optimizations can
   greatly reduce the control traffic in dense networks, as the number
   of MPRs should not increase significantly as a network becomes
   denser.  Together, these optimizations mean that an OLSR node
   maintains closer to O(n) rather than O(n^2) state.

   OLSR selects routes based on hop counts, and assumes an underlying
   protocol that determines whether a link exists between two nodes.
   OLSR's constrained flooding allows it to quickly adapt to and
   propagate topology changes.

   OLSR is closely related to clustering algorithms in the wireless
   sensor networking literature, in which cluster heads are elected such
   that routing occurs over links between cluster heads and all other
   nodes are leafs that communicate to a cluster head.


4.  Distance Vector protocols

4.1.  RIP

   The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) (defined in [RFC2453])
   predates OSPF.  As it is a distance vector protocol, routing loops
   can occur and considerable work has been done to accelerate
   convergence since the initial RIP protocols were introduced.  RIP
   measures route cost in terms of hops, and detects routing loops by
   observing a route cost approach infinity where "infinity" is referred
   to as a maximum number of hops.  RIP is typically not appropriate for
   situations where routes need to be chosen based on real-time
   parameters such as measured delay, reliability, or load or when the



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   network topology needs to be known for route computation.

   It is worth mentioned an important RIP optimization: "Triggered RIP"
   (defined in [RFC2091]) that was originally designed to support "on-
   demand" circuits.  The aim of triggered RIP is to avoid to
   systematically send the routing database on regular intervals but
   only when there was a routing update or a next hop adjacency change.
   Thus once neighbors have exchanged their routing database, only
   incremental updates are further sent.  Because regular broadcast of
   routing tables are replaced by incremental updates on such links,
   triggered RIP introduces acknowledgment based mechanisms.

4.2.  DSDV

   Destination Sequenced Distance Vector Routing uses distance vectors
   to continuously maintain routes throughout a network.  Unlike RIP,
   DSDV uses per-node sequence numbers to provide a total ordering on
   route information age in order to prevent loops.  In DSDV, each node
   maintains a route to each other node, which has O(n) state.

4.3.  Ad-hoc On Demand Vector Routing (AODV)

   AODV specified in [RFC3561] is a distance vector protocol intended
   for mobile ad-hoc networks.  When one AODV node requires a route to
   another, it floods a request in the network to discover a route.  A
   depth-scoped flooding process is advocated to avoid the discovery
   from any single node expanding to the most distant regions of the
   network in directions that are away from the destination.  If the
   route request reaches the destination or a node that already has a
   route to the destination, the recipient sends a reply along the
   reverse route.  All nodes along the reverse route can cache the
   route.  When routes break due to topology changes, AODV issues a new
   request.  If an AODV network supports active flows to D different
   destinations, a node may require O(D) state.  In the worst case, an
   AODV node must maintain a route to every node, requiring O(n) state.

4.4.  DYMO

   Dynamic Mobile On-Demand routing (DYMO) ([I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]) is an
   evolution of AODV.  The basic functionality is the same, but it has
   different packet formats, handling rules, and supports path
   accumulation.  Like AODV, DYMO can require each node to store O(D)
   state and uses hop counts as its routing metric.

4.5.  DSR

   Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) ([RFC4728]) is a distance vector
   protocol, but a DSR packet source explicitly specifies the route for



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   each packet.  Because the route is determined at a single place --
   the source -- DSR does not require sequence numbers or other
   mechanisms to prevent routing loops, as there is no problem of
   inconsistent routing tables.  Unlike DSDV, AODV, and DYMO, by pushing
   state into packet headers, DSR does not require all nodes to store
   O(n) state.  Instead, a node originating packets needs to store up to
   O(n) state (the spanning tree of routes).  In degenerate topologies
   such as lines, a single route may require O(n) state, but in meshes
   the state an originator must maintain is dependent on the number of
   destinations and the topology of the network.


5.  Routing Considerations

   [I-D.culler-rl2n-routing-reqs] provides a superset of the
   requirements of a wide variety of L2Ns.  While it is unlikely that a
   single routing protocol will satisfy all of them well, it is useful
   to consider how well existing protocols meet the requirements of
   L2Ns.  Of course, none of these protocols were designed with all
   these considerations in mind, and so it is not surprising that some
   of the issues remain unsolved.

5.1.  Multi-path routing

   Whereas multipath routing has traditionally been viewed as a load
   balancing mechanism, in L2Ns it is more fundamentally a reliability
   mechanism.  The connectivity between a pair of nodes is subject to
   frequent variations over time, regardless of traffic on that link,
   because RF opaque obstructions may move between the two devices, path
   loss characteristics of free space change with environmental
   conditions, changes in the environment away from the line of sight
   may introduce multipath effects, the noise level may be raised at the
   receive due to other RF communication or unrelated electromagnet
   emissions.  Layer 1 mechanisms to ameliorate these factors, such as
   multiple antennas, that are common in physically large devices are
   less common in small, embedded ones.  Multipath routing provides an
   alternative form of spatial diversity through multiple potential
   receivers.  However, none of the protocols in our survey (except in
   specific conditions) maintain multiple candidates that allow the
   forwarding mechanism to select among them to achieve enhance
   robustness.  In particular, the tree-based discovery and reversal
   techniques in AODV and DYMO bind many such single-path choices at
   time of discovery.  The route management traffic required to detect
   and repair such links may exceed the actual data traffic of many L2N
   applications dramatically.  Reactive forwarding over diverse paths
   may be more easily integrated into proactive protocols, such as OLSR,
   and especially so among the reduced set of MPRs.  L2Ns of large
   extent will typically have multiple ingress/egress points to well-



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   provisioned networks.  Thus, multipath routing has considerations
   beyond the characteristics local to the hops along a physically
   localized path.  For communication external to the L2N, it may be
   important to choose among geographically unrelated options in exiting
   the L2N or in entering the L2N. The considerations are most closely
   related to those in the inter-area routing where OSPF is employed and
   are not yet addressed by the family of MANET protocols.

   DSR actively supports path diversity.  OSPF and IS-IS supports Multi-
   path routing in case of ECMP (Equal Cost Multipath).  All other
   protocols use single path routing.

   Note that it is not uncommon to require asymmetrical load balancing
   of traffic flow along a set of paths of different cost.  IGPs such as
   OSPF, IS-IS or OLSR do not support such features (routing loop
   issues).

5.2.  Resource awareness

   In all existing routing protocols the computed path is based on link
   costs with no consideration of the node attributes and constraints.
   None of the above protocols explicitly acknowledge the presence of
   nodes whose unequal energy or memory resources may allow them to play
   a different routing role.  Such characteristics may be of a permanent
   nature (mains powered device or device with sizable memory or both),
   a predictable nature (solar powered device in full sun), or
   evolutionary (battery has become depleted).  In any case, the
   criteria in the route selection is based on characteristics other
   than the quality of the link or the capacity of the flows.

   In such networks, it may be desirable to use a policy routing based
   approach using hierarchical constraints: for example, avoid using a
   path P1 traversing a node with Node-constraint > X (e.g. reflecting a
   low battery) if an alternate path P2 can be found that provides a
   path cost such that Cost(P2) < K * Cost(P1) (with K>1).

   Furthermore, in some networks, it may be advantageous to follow a
   path where data can be aggregated along the path to a data collector
   (e.g.  Sink).  The knowledge of such node capability could be taken
   into account by the routing process.  Nevertheless, some of them can
   manipulate their mechanisms to achieve this goal.  For example, OLSR
   can preferentially select more powerful nodes to be MPRs but this
   does not provides a high degree of granularity in the routing
   decision.







Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


5.3.  Small footprint

   Most protocols have state (memory) requirements that can be
   prohibitive in this domain, in particular the link state protocol
   where a path to all destinations is systematically computed, which is
   usually not need in most Sensor Networks or L2Ns where arbitrary
   node-to-node communication is not common.  For example, in monitoring
   applications the vast majority of the flows are likely to be between
   the sensor nodes and the data collection points.  In automation
   applications, the majority of the flows are likely to be between
   actuation points (e.g. the light switch) and the associated control
   points (the lights that are controlled by the switch).  In larger
   industrial settings, the control points feed to centralized
   controllers for all control points, so again the majority of flows
   are highly correlated.  At the same time, field devices and remote
   control units may move through the space introducing other point-to-
   point flows, but in a monitory role.

   For networks where there is traffic destinations are highly
   concentrated, O(D) can be kept small.  In the most degenerate case
   where the traffic is mainly P2MP (Point to Multipoint) or MP2P
   (Multipoint to Point), a collection tree, it can be O(1).  Large and
   complex protocols can have prohibitively large code bases.  A typical
   collection tree is 8K of code on a 16-bit micro controller.
   Protocols such as DYMO are slightly larger, as they typically require
   the same complexity of link estimation by additionally have route
   maintenance and timing.  Protocols such as GPSR tend to be very large
   (20kB) due to complexities that real world network behavior bring to
   establishing very regular topologies such as planar graphs.

5.4.  Small MTU

   Most protocols intended for the Internet did not have the tiny MTUs
   of low-power wireless in mind.  The standard AODV header, for
   example, is 24 bytes.

   AODV requires route management packet bandwidth that increases with
   the size of the network to maintain the consistency of the
   distributed data structure.  The protocols that carry a full path in
   the routing packet generally assume the MTU is large enough to
   accommodate the diameter of the network.  This question of small MTU
   is not expected to be only a short term concern.  Low power generally
   implies a low Eb/No ratio.  The frame length shows up in the exponent
   part of the expect probability of successful reception expression
   where it is applied to a quantity smaller than one.






Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


5.5.  Flooding Control and Density Awareness

   Flooding is the straightforward approach to discover network routes
   and neighbors.  However, arbitrary retransmission can be dangerous
   (Broadcast Storm), especially in very dense networks.  Instead,
   flooding protocols that adapt to network density (achieving coverage
   without a retransmission implosion) enable flooding to maintain good
   delivery rates and prevent network collapse.

5.6.  Low power

   None of the above protocols are inherently low power.  Collection
   trees are often used in a low-power application by simply pushing
   power conservation to the MAC layer, either using TDMA or channel
   sampling.  Low-power operation typically adds latency, either through
   TDMA or channel sampling.

   Many L2N will employ deeply power managed layer 2 media managed
   layers that leave the radio turned off for the vast majority (i.e
   99%) of the time.  These generally take one of two forms, sampling
   techniques that frequently listen for very short intervals and
   require the transmitter to expend effort to wake up the receiver and
   TDMA-like techniques to schedule when a node listens to potentially
   receive packets.  Existing analysis of the routing protocols in the
   survey assume an "always on" behavior of the underlying links.
   Sampling techniques approximate this assumption, but still may impact
   the expected delay of a flood, route notification propagation, etc.
   For networks where data communication is measured in small packets
   every many minutes, the overhead, scheduled reception may introduce
   minutes of delay.  Such characteristics may eliminate some protocol
   options.

5.7.  Multi-topology Routing

   MTR (Multi topology Routing) allows for multiple topologies that can
   be used to route packets according to the shortest paths computed for
   specific metrics but this comes at the price of high memory
   consumption.  None of the distance vectors currently defined supports
   for MTR.


6.  Security Issues

   TBD







Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


7.  Manageability Issues

   TBD


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.


9.  Security Considerations

   TBD


10.  Acknowledgements


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

11.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.culler-rl2n-routing-reqs]
              Vasseur, J. and D. Cullerot, "Routing Requirements for
              Low-Power Wireless Networks",
              draft-culler-rl2n-routing-reqs-00 (work in progress),
              July 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]
              Perkins, C. and I. Chakeres, "Dynamic MANET On-demand
              (DYMO) Routing", draft-ietf-manet-dymo-10 (work in
              progress), July 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-manet-olsrv2]
              Clausen, T., "The Optimized Link State Routing Protocol
              version 2", draft-ietf-manet-olsrv2-03 (work in progress),
              March 2007.

   [RFC1387]  Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2 Protocol Analysis", RFC 1387,
              January 1993.

   [RFC2091]  Meyer, G. and S. Sherry, "Triggered Extensions to RIP to
              Support Demand Circuits", RFC 2091, January 1997.



Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC2453]  Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2", STD 56, RFC 2453,
              November 1998.

   [RFC2740]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., and J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6",
              RFC 2740, December 1999.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3626]  Clausen, T. and P. Jacquet, "Optimized Link State Routing
              Protocol (OLSR)", RFC 3626, October 2003.

   [RFC3630]  Katz, D., Kompella, K., and D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering
              (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630,
              September 2003.

   [RFC4728]  Johnson, D., Hu, Y., and D. Maltz, "The Dynamic Source
              Routing Protocol (DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for
              IPv4", RFC 4728, February 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   P Levis
   Stanford University


   Email: pal@cs.stanford.edu


   JP Vasseur
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   USA

   Email: jpv@cisco.com











Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


   D Culler
   Arch Rock
   657 Mission St. Suite 600
   San Francisco, CA  94105
   USA

   Email: dculler@archrock.com












































Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   draft-levis-rl2n-overview-protocols-01        July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Levis, et al.            Expires January 8, 2008               [Page 16]



