INTERNET DRAFT                               C. Huitema, R. Draves
<draft-huitema-multi6-hosts-01.txt>                      Microsoft
Expires December 24, 2002                            June 24, 2002

                    Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming

Status of this memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work
in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

A way to solve the issue of site multihoming is to have a separate
site prefix for each connection of the site, and to derive as many
addresses for each hosts. This approach to multi-homing, which we
call Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming, has the advantage of minimal
impact on the inter-domain routing fabric, since each site prefix can
be aggregated within the larger prefix of a specific provider;
however, it opens a number of issues, which we will discuss in this
memo, including the problem created by the interaction between
ingress filtering and multihoming, which we analyze in detail. We
then propose a set of specific solutions that enable host centric
multihoming, and we review how these solutions meet the requirements
of IPv6 site multihoming.

1	Introduction

There are two basic forms of multihoming, multiple interface per host
and multiple site connections shared by many hosts. This working
group is specifically concerned with site multi-homing. A way to
solve the issue of site multihoming is to have a separate site prefix
for each connection of the site, and to derive as many addresses for
each hosts; this can in fact be supported by a combination of router
renumbering (RFC2894) and Stateless Address Autoconfiguration
(RFC2462). This approach to multi-homing, which we call Host-Centric
IPv6 Multihoming, has the advantage of minimal impact on the inter-

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

domain routing fabric, since each site prefix can be aggregated
within the larger prefix of a specific provider; however, it opens a
number of issues, which we will discuss in this memo, including the
problem created by the interaction between ingress filtering and
multihoming, which we analyze in detail. We then propose a set of
specific solutions that enable host centric multihoming, and we
review how these solutions meet the requirements of IPv6 site
multihoming.

2	Notations

2.1	Requirements language

In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST",  "MUST  NOT",
"optional", "recommended",  "SHOULD",  and  "SHOULD  NOT",  are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.2	Reference topology

In the following discussion, we will use this reference topology:


          /-- ( A ) ---(      ) --- ( C ) --\
X (site X)             ( IPv6 )              (Site Y) Y
          \-- ( B ) ---(      ) --- ( D ) --/

The topology features two hosts, X and Y, whose respective sites are
both multi-homed. Host X has to global IPv6 addresses, which we will
note "A:X" and "B:X", formed by combined the prefixes allocated by
ISP A and B to "site X" with the host identifier of X. Similarly, Y
has two addresses "C:Y" and "D:Y".

We assume that X, when it starts engaging communication with Y, has
learned the addresses C:Y and D:Y, for example because they were
published in the DNS. We do not assume that the DNS is dynamic: there
will be situations in which both C:Y and D:Y are published, while in
fact only one is reachable. We assume that Y, when it receives
packets from X, has only access to information contained in the
packet coming from X, e.g. the source address; we do not assume that
Y can retrieve by external means the set of addresses associated to
X.

2.4	Site exit router

A site exit router is an IPv6 router managing at least one of the
connections between a site and the Internet.

2.5	Ingress filtering

Ingress filtering refers to the verification of the source address of
the IP packets at the periphery of the Internet, typically at the
link between a customer and an ISP. This process, which is described

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

in [RFC2267] is intended to thwart a class of denial of service
attacks in which attackers hide their identity by using a "spoofed"
source address.

2.6 Site exit anycast identifier

A 7 bit anycast identifier whose value is XX. [TBD IANA]

2.7 Site exit anycast address

An IPv6 anycast address built by combining an IPv6 address prefix
allocated to the site with the site exit anycast identifier,
according to the rules specified in [RFC2526]. The proposed used of
this anycast address is detailed in section 5.

3	Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming issues

Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming forces hosts to choose the source and
the destination address of the IPv6 packets, in a way that makes the
best usage, or at least a reasonable usage, of the network resource.
Hosts must first select a destination address, and will then perform
source address selection. Source address selection must be consistent
with ingress filtering, which is sometime implemented at network
interfaces: we call this the "site exit" issue. Destination address
selection is often based on incomplete or obsolete information, which
can be harmful if, for example, hosts fail to notice that one of the
site's connections is suddenly made unavailable. In any case, we must
also consider "low budget" hosts, and make sure that these hosts can
get some benefits from multihoming without enduring too much cost.

3.1	Destination address selection

It is fairly common for hosts to have to choose between multiple
destination addresses for a peer. TCP performs this choice when the
connection is instantiated; SCTP may perform similar choices through
the life-time of the connection; UDP may perform this choice either
for each packet, or at the beginning of an association. We may debate
whether hosts have sufficient information to perform a valid choice,
and it is a complex debate. Some very simple appliances probably
never will have any information; large servers potentially have tons
of information available; personal computers are somewhere in
between. It is not unrealistic to expect progress in this area,
either by communication between the hosts and the routers, by sharing
of experience between hosts, or maybe by innovative application
design that would for example implement a file transfer by parallel
retrieval of fraction of the file from multiple sources. At worst, a
host can always try the proposed addresses one by one, and pick the
first one that actually works -- not very elegant, but definitely
workable.

3.2	Source address selection


Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

The source address selection in most hosts immediately follows the
destination address selection. When a host has multiple interfaces,
the normal procedure is to select the address, then identify the
interface over which packets bound to that address will be routed,
and finally selects a source address associated to that interface.
When the hosts has multiple addresses attached to an interface, which
is the case with host centric IPv6 multihoming, the host could in
theory pick any of these addresses, or at least any of those that
have an appropriate scope. In our example topology, supposing that X
has selected the destination address "C:Y", it can choose as source
address either "A:X" or "B:X".

Choosing the source address will affect the reverse path of the
connection, as the source address of the message will become the
destination address of the responses. This may be a serious matter in
asymmetric applications like web access, in which the bulk of the
data is sent by the server to the client. If the multiple addresses
correspond to different ISP, the hosts should normally pick the
source address that will provide the best performances. As for
destination address selection, we may expect that the host will have
some knowledge of the effect of choosing one or the other address,
for example by observing that web pages are served faster through one
address than through the other.

3.3	The site exit issue

A special complication appears when the ISPs who serve the multihomed
site perform "source address selection." In our generic
configuration, we assume that X is served by ISP A and B, and thus
can be reached by the addresses A:X and B:X. To communicate with Y, X
will choose the destination address that appears to be easier to
reach, for example D:Y; then, it will choose the source address that
provides the most efficient reverse path, say A:X.

Suppose now that the ISP connections at Site X are managed by two
different site exit routers, RXA and RXB, and that there is a similar
configuration at Site Y, with routers RYC and RYB.


          /-- ( A ) ---(      ) --- ( C ) --\
        (RXA)          (      )            (RYC)
X (site X)             ( IPv6 )              (Site Y) Y
        (RXB)          (      )            (RYD)
          \-- ( B ) ---(      ) --- ( D ) --/

Within Site X, the interior routing will decide which of RXA or RXB
is the preferred exit router for the destination "C:Y"; similarly,
within Site Y, the interior routing will decide which of RYC or RYD
is the preferred exit for destination A:X. If the chosen exit router
at Site X is RXB, the packet will flow freely to RYC; If the chosen
exit router at Site X is RYC, the response will also flow freely.
However, if the exit routers are RXA or RYD, and if the ISPs perform

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

ingress filtering, we have a problem: ISP A sees a packet coming from
RXA, whose source address does not match the prefix assigned by A to
X; ISP D, similarly, sees a packet whose match the prefix assigned by
that ISP to Y. If either of these ISPs decides to drop the packet,
the communication will be broken.3.4

3.5	Rapid reaction to topology changes

Network conditions change over time. In order to meet the performance
requirement, we must allow the use of the best path at any time; In
order to meet the "redundancy" requirement, we have to make sure that
if a network connection breaks, the corresponding prefix is not used
as either a source or a destination address.

We may assume that the destination address selection algorithm
mentioned in 3.1 will naturally result in the selection by X of an
appropriate address for Y; X may for example try in turn the
addresses C:Y and D:Y, and retain the address for which a response
comes back. However, we must make sure that X selects a source
address that will be reachable: for example, if the link to ISP A
fails, X must make sure that it uses as source address B:X, not A:X.

4	Analysis of solutions to the site exit issue

The site exit issue is caused by ingress filtering at the site
egress. In this section, we will analyse four ways to solve the
issue: somehow relax the source address check, implement source
address dependent routing, ask hosts to pick "the right" source
address, or ask routers to somehow rewrite the packets so that it can
pass the source address checks. We will then compare the proposed
solutions, in order to prepare a recommendation.

4.1	Relaxing the source address checks

An obvious way to avoid failures due to ingress filtering is to
simply make sure that all the addresses used by the hosts of a given
site will be considered acceptable by each of the site's providers.
In our site X example, that would mean that provider A would accept
addresses of the form "B:X" as valid, and that provider B will in
turn accept addresses of the form "A:X" as valid.

One way to achieve this is simply to ask the service provider to turn
off source address checks on the site connection. This requires a
substantial amount of trust between the provider and the site, as
source address checks are in effect delegated to the site routers.
One possible way to achieve this trust is to make sure that the site
routers, or possibly the site firewalls, meet a quality level
specified by the provider.

Another way to achieve this relaxed level of checking is to check
source addresses against a list of "authorized prefixes" for the site
connection, rather than simply the single prefix delegated by the

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

provider. This solution requires that the site communicates the
authorized prefixes to the provider, either through a management
interface or through a routing protocol. This is obviously more
complex than simply lifting the controls, and in fact ends up with a
very similar requirement of trust: the provider has to be believe
that the site will transmit the right prefixes.

A special case occurs when the site exit is an "automatic tunnel"
interface, such as 6to4 or Shipworm. Source address control for
automatic tunnels is delegated to the "other side" of the tunnel, in
practice to a very large number of relay routers located across the
Internet. Checks are based on the correlation between the IPv6 source
address and the IPv4 source address used in the tunneling protocol.
Asking each potential end of the tunnel to relax its checks is not
realistic; in practice, this means that the exit routers will have to
obtain the right to use as source address a privileged IPv4 address,
such as the 6to4 anycast address or the Shipworm anycast address;
this will imply a negotiation with the provider of the IPv4 service.

In conclusion, relaxing the source address checks requires some form
of explicit trust between the site and its providers. There is no
doubt that this level of trust will exist in many cases; there is
also no doubt that there will be many cases in which the provider is
unwilling to grant this trust, particularly in the case of small
sites, such as for example home networks dual-homes to a DSL provider
and a cable network provider.

4.2	Source address dependent routing

Another solution to the site exit problem is to perform some kind of
source routing within the site, so that the site exit is effectively
a function of the source address in the packet. Current routers
generally do not implement any kind of source address dependent
routing; this implies that this solution would have to be "rolled in"
progressively in the site, following a generic schema such as:

              Multiple site exits
              |     |     |     |
         -----+-----+-----+-----+-----
        (                             )
        ( Source based routing domain )
        (                             )
         ----+----+----+----+----+----
        (                             )
        (   Generic routing domain    )
        (                             )
         -----------------------------

In this schema, all site exit routers are connected to a source based
routing domain. Packets initiated in the generic routing domain and
bound to an "out of site" address are passed to the nearest access
point to the source based routing domain, using classic "hot potato"

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

routing. The routers in the source based routing domain maintain as
many parallel routing tables as there are valid source prefixes, and
would choose a route that is a function of both the source and the
destination address; the packets exit the site through the "right"
router. There are multiple possible implementations of this general
concept.

The simplest implementation is to have only one exit router for the
site; this exit router chooses the exit link on the basis of the
source address in the packet. This simple implementation might be
adequate for very small sites, but introduces a single point of
failure, and thus fails to meet the "redundancy" requirement of
multihoming.

In the most complex set up, each router of the site would maintain as
many parallel routing tables as there are valid source prefixes, and
would choose a route that is a function of both the source and the
destination address. This solution enables "shortest path" routing
and can provide an arbitrary level of redundancy. However,
maintaining parallel routing tables requires a massive re-engineering
of routers and routing protocols, and thus would be hard to deploy in
the short term.

A slightly less complex implementation is to connect all exit routers
to the same link, e.g. to what is often referred to as the "DMZ" for
the site. This solution requires that all routers connected to the
DMZ are upgraded to perform source address based routing. This
configuration is less fragile than a single router solution; however,
the single link requirement seems to preclude "geographic redundancy"
between the site exits. It does requires the re-engineering of some
routers, but not necessarily all routers of the site. In practice, it
could be a way to "phase in" the most complex setup described in the
previous paragraph.

A much simpler alternative is to establish a mesh of "tunnels"
between the site exit routers. A site exit router that receives a
packet bound for an out-of-site address would perform a source
address check before forwarding the packet on one of its outgoing
interfaces; if the source address check is positive, the packet will
effectively be sent on the interface; if it is not, the packet would
be "tunneled" to a more adequate router.

The main requirement of the tunneling alternative is that site-exit
routers be able to perform address checks, and that each site exit
router be able to associate to each valid site prefix the address of
a corresponding site exit router. An obvious possibility is to
configure prefixes and corresponding addresses in each router; it
would however be preferable to derive these addresses automatically.
A strong assumption of the IPv6 architecture is that all prefixes of
a site will have the same length; it is thus possible to derive a
prefix from the source address of a "misdirected" packet, by
combining this prefix with a conventional suffix. The suffix should

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

be chosen to not collide with the subnet numbers used in the site; a
null value will be inadequate, since it could be matched by any
router with knowledge of the prefix, not just the site exit router; a
value of "all ones" could be adequate.

In order to enable tunneling, each router managing a site prefix will
then inject a "host route" for its locally managed prefixes in the
interior routing protocol. Site exit routers performing automatic
tunneling can then use the standard routing procedures to detect
whether the anycast address corresponding to the prefix in use is
reachable; they can automatically reject, rather than tunnel, packets
whose source address does not correspond to a reachable anycast
address.

An inconvenience of the set-up is that some packet will follow a less
than direct path; we will see in the next section how that could be
palliated by host based processing.

Source based routing allows for a large diversity between the site
exits; it also allows for host based policy decision, since a host
can influence the routing of a packet by choosing the appropriate
source address. There is however one drawback of any source address
based scheme, the impossibility to use "asymmetric" path between two
sites:

          ..................................>
         ./-- ( A ) ---(      ) --- ( C ) --\...
  .....>(RXA)          (      )            (RYC)....>
X (site X)             ( IPv6 )              (Site Y) Y
  <.....(RXB)          (      )            (RYD)<....
        . \-- ( B ) ---(      ) --- ( D ) --/...
         <...................................

Using source based routing implies that if the host X chooses the
source address B:X, then its packets will exit through router RXB,
never through RXA. This may provide lesser performances if a link is
congested in one direction but not in the other. However, source
based routing would allow four paths, A-C, A-D, B-C and B-D, thus
providing an adequate redundancy and allowing a great deal of
performance optimization.

4.3	Source address selection by the host

The site exit issue would be mitigated if the hosts chose a source
address that would be compatible with the exit point chosen by the
routing protocol, or alternatively if the host tunneled the packet
directly to an adequate exit router.

The first alternative could be called "source address discovery". In
many ways, source address discovery is similar to path MTU discovery.
The two issues are similar: packets that do not meet some criteria
fixed by the network are dropped; the host has to find the cause of

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

the loss, and to take action in order to make sure that these packets
will be accepted. In the path MTU case, the action is to use shorter
packets; in the ingress filtering case, the action is to present a
different source address.

To implement source address discovery, the hosts would have to
introduce a "preferred source address" parameter in the "destination
cache" mentioned in the Neighbor Discovery standard [RFC2461]. The
primary purpose of the cache is to link a destination address to a
next hop neighbor; it is also the repository of per-destination
parameters such as the path MTU; it is the natural repository for the
new parameter. The source prefix in the destination cache would be
used during source address selection, to select an available
interface address that matches the prefix. There will however be
cases in which the prefix is learned after the source address is
already selected. In these cases, the host would have to insert in
the packet an "home address" option that carries the intended source
address, as specified in [MOBILIP6]; the IPv6 source address will be
set to the available interface address that matches the prefix.

As for path MTU discovery, source address discovery requires that the
hosts receive some information from the network, presumably in the
form of an "incorrect source address" ICMP error; the error message
will have to contain information about the packet that triggered the
error, and also information about the source address prefix that
should be used to pass the source address check. In the absence of an
explicit ICMP message, the hosts would have to rely on a trial an
error process, noticing that packets get dropped and trying
retransmissions with alternate source addresses; the experience of
path MTU discovery shows that such processes are awkward and error
prone.

An alternative to source address discovery is "exit router
discovery", i.e. the discovery by the source of the preferred exit
router for a given source address. This requires a slightly different
change to the caches used in neighbor discovery, specifically the
management of a "source exit cache" that associates a specific source
address with an exit router, or maybe the combination of a
destination address and a source address with an exit router. As with
source address discovery, this would be learned through an ICMP
message; this message would not be an error message, but rather a
variation of the redirect message. After receiving such messages, the
host will tunnel to the specified exit point the packets sent from
the source address to the destination; the exit point will
decapsulate these packets and send them over the appropriate exit
link.

The "exit router discovery" procedure appears to be superior to the
"source address discovery." Both solutions require approximately the
same amount of resource in the host, but the exit router discovery
has two advantages: it enables hosts to actually specify the point of
exit from the site, thus giving them a greater amount of "policy

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

control"; and it does not require third parties to understand and
accept an "home address" option.

We should note that neither "source address discovery" nor "exit
router discovery" are implemented in current hosts. We must meet the
requirement expressed in [MULTI6RQ] that hosts implementing the
current version of IPv6 can continue to operate in a multi-homed
site, even if they would not take advantage of multihoming; in
consequence, these procedures can only be used as an optional
optimization.

4.4	Packet rewriting at exit router

In section 4.2, we explained how a site exit router that discovers
that a packet bound out of the site has the "wrong" source address
can route the the packet to an alternative exit. Another way to pass
the source the source address check is to modify the packet, which
could in theory be done by replacing the source address, by inserting
a "home address" header, or by encapsulating the packet using "IPv6
in IPv6".

In fact, replacing the source address is not necessarily a good idea,
since this will remove information from the packet; it also requires
some level of cooperation between the exit router and the host, if
only to understand what alternative source addresses can be used by
the host, if any.

One could preserve the information by inserting the "home address"
option defined in [MOBILIP6] before rewriting the source address.
After the insertion of the option, the outgoing parameter will have
the following values:

* IPv6 source address: address of the site egress interface,
* IPv6 destination address: from initial packet,
* IPv6 payload type: "destination option",
* destination option, next header: payload type of initial packet,
* destination option length: length of option, as per [RFC2640],
* home address value: source address of initial packet.

According to [MOBILIP6], the host which receives the packet with the
home address option will behave exactly as if it received a packet
from the initial source address.

An alternative to using the home address option would be to
encapsulate the packet in a new IPv6 header, using "IP in IP". The
source address of the new header will be the address used by the
router on the exit interface, the destination address will be the
original destination, and the payload type will be set to "IPv6."
This alternative is probably easier to implement than the insertion
of a destination option; in particular, routers don't have to be
concerned with the fact that there may already be a destination
option in the incoming packet. It creates a slightly larger overhead,

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

40 bytes instead of 24.

4.5	Comparison of the site exit solutions

The four solutions that we have reviewed have different advantages
and inconveniences. The may differences are in terms of
deployability, generality, redundancy, policy control, and impact on
existing hosts, i.e. minimal implementations of IPv6 that would use
only one of the available prefix for the site, that would not perform
any more sophisticated logic than picking a destination address at
random among multiple alternatives, and that would not understand any
additional IPv6 option or any additional ICMP message.

The relaxation of source address checks detailed in 4.1 is easy to
deploy, and would not affect minimal hosts. It is a perfectly
reasonable solution for large sites, i.e. the sites that benefit of
IPv4 multihoming today: it should not be more complex to convince a
provider to relax address checks for a particular customer tomorrow,
than to convince today a similar provider to advertise in its routing
table the global IPv4 address of the site. If we choose this
solution, we should choose its simplest implementation, i.e. one in
which the provider completely delegates source address checks to the
site's router or firewalls. This is however not a general solution,
since we cannot expect all sites to convince every provider to relax
their checks.

The rewriting at exit routers appears to be an inferior solution. It
is not really easier to implement than the "tunneling" variation of
source routing at the exit sites: if a router can detect that a
source address does not pass the checks for a proposed interface, and
if it can encapsulate the packet before forwarding it, then it could
just as well tunnel the packet to the "correct" exit router for the
site. Tunneling the packet to its final destination actually has a
larger impact on the existing hosts than simply tunneling the packet
to another router: we have to assume that the destination host is
willing to accept tunneled packets, which is not an obvious
proposition. Since the packet is tunneled, the destination host has
to trust that the source address in the encapsulated packet is
genuine; in the absence of an authentication header, this is risky
proposition.

When the source address checks cannot be relaxed, the best solution
is probably to perform some kind of source address based routing to
the adequate exit router. In the long term, the IETF may develop
internal routing protocols that take into account the source address
as part of the "reachability information" for a set of destinations;
in the short term, there are no such protocols, and we have to rely
on a tunneling mechanism between site exit routers.

Exit router discovery is a natural complement of the tunneling
mechanism between site exit routers. When an exit router tunnels a
misdirected packet towards another exit, it may send an appropriate

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

"exit redirection" ICMP message. If the host is a minimal IPv6 host,
the ICMP message will be ignored; further packets will continue using
the same slightly sub-optimal path. On the other hand, if the host
has been upgraded to take advantage of multi-homing, the packets will
be tunneled to the appropriate exit router; they will follow a direct
path to this router.

5	Proposed solution

In order to implement the host centric multihoming solution, we must
solve the issues presented in the previous section. In this section,
we will present the recommended ways to solve the site exit issue and
how to trigger rapid reactions to local failures. We will then
present a list of host improvements that would gradually enable hosts
to take full advantage of multihoming.

5.2	Resolving the site exit issue

In line with the analysis presented in the previous section, our
recommendation is to enable multihoming by either relaxing the source
address checks, or by establishing tunnels between the site exit
routers. The tunneling is complemented by the sending of an "exit
redirection" ICMP message when appropriate. In order to implement
this solution, we must define a way to convey the site exit addresses
to the various routers in the site; the simplest solution, which we
propose here, uses an anycast address that is arithmetically derived
from the sites' prefixes.

5.2.1	Site exit anycast address

The site exit anycast address solution assumes that all of the sites
prefixes have the same length L; it also assume that we can define a
conventional "subnet" associated to the prefix. The proposed solution
is to compose the anycast address by appending an "all 1" suffix to
the site prefix:

         <----- L bits -----> <---- 128 - L bits ----->
         +-------------------+-------------------------+
         | Valid site prefix | 1111...............1111 |
         +-------------------+-------------------------+

               -- Site exit anycast address --

Each site exit router that can forward to the outside packets whose
source address is derived from a specific site prefix will advertise
reachability of the corresponding site exit anycast address through
the routing mechanism.

5.2.2	Site exit redirection ICMP message

Routers send site exit redirect packets to inform a host of a better
exit path on the path to a destination.

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|     Type      |     Code      |          Checksum             |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|     Source prefix length      |     Redirection life time     |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                     Site Exit Address                         +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|   Options ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-

IP Fields:

   Source Address
      An address assigned to the router from which this
      message is sent; SHOULD be a site local address whenever
one
      is available.

   Destination Address
      The Source Address of the packet that triggered the
      redirect.

   Hop Limit      255

Authentication Header:

      If a Security Association for the IP Authentication
      Header exists between the sender and the
      destination address, then the sender SHOULD include
      this header.

   ICMP Fields:

   Type           TBD, IANA

   Code           0

   Checksum       The ICMP checksum.  See [ICMPv6].

   Prefix length  The length of the source address prefix, in
bits,
                  expressed as a 16 bit integer, transmitted in
                  network order, i.e. most significant byte

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

first.

   Redirection lifetime
                  The number of seconds during which the
redirection
                  should remain in effect, expressed as a 16 bit
                  integer, in network byte order.

   Site Exit Address
                  An IP address of the preferred exit router to
use
                  for packets sent using as source address the
IPv6
                  destination of this packet, or using any
source
                  address whose prefix matches the first "prefix
                  length" bits of this packet's IPv6
destination.

   Possible options:

      Redirected Header
          As much as possible of the IP packet that triggered
          the sending of the Redirect without making the
          redirect packet exceed 1280 octets.

5.2.3	Tunneling to the appropriate exit

Site exit routers are expected to perform necessary source address
checks before forwarding any packet on a site exit link. The amount
of checking will vary depending on the exit link. If the provider has
agreed to relax source address checking, the router will be
configured to not do any checking at all; if the provider is expected
to enforce a source address check, the site exit router must do the
check first, in order to avoid local packets being routed to a black
hole. If the result of the check is positive, the packet will be
forwarded. If the result is negative, the router will derive a "site
exit anycast address" from the source address of the incoming packet.
If the anycast address is unreachable, the incoming packet will have
to be discarded. If the anycast address is reachable, the incoming
packet will be tunneled towards that address, and the router may
issue a "site exit redirection" ICMP message.

5.3	Rapid reaction to failures

In order to react to local failures, we must establish a
communication channel that quickly signals these failures to the
hosts. The logical channel to use is the "router advertisement"
message, which the routers use to communicate to hosts the list of
available prefixes. We propose here to use the "preferred" and
"valid" flags in these prefixes to signal to hosts the addresses that
should, or should not, be used as source address at anay given time.

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

This solution is sufficient when the site is composed of a single
link; for more complex site, we propose to use the "router
renumbering" mechanism to maintain an up-to-date list of available
prefixes.

5.3.1	Use of "Router advertisements"

The router advertisement messages are defined in [RFC2461]; their use
for address configuration is defined in [RFC2462]. As specified in
[RFC2461], the router advertisements include a variable number of
Prefix Information parameters. Each Prefix Information parameter
specifies:

* an address prefix value,
* an "on-link" flag, used in neighbor discovery,
* an "autonomous" flag, used for autonomous address configuration,
* the "valid" lifetime,
* the "preferred" lifetime.

We propose to use the "preferred" lifetime to indicate whether
addresses derived from the prefix can be used as source address in
multihomed networks. When a prefix is temporarily not available
routers MUST advertise a null preferred lifetime for that prefix.

In conformance with section 5.5.4 of [RFC2461], the hosts will notice
that the formerly preferred address becomes deprecated when its
preferred lifetime expires. They will not use the deprecated
addresses in new communications if an alternate (non-deprecated)
address is available and has sufficient scope.

Manipulating the preferred lifetime only solves part of our problem,
since according to [RFC2461] the hosts should continue to use the
"valid" source address in existing communications. To actually
maintain the transport sessions that used the now unavailable link,
we will need host improvements that are described in a later section.

5.3.2	Use of "Router Renumbering"

In order to advertise a null preferred lifetime for a specific
prefix, the sites routers must be able to learn about that prefix. A
possibility is to use the "Router renumbering" protocol [RFC2894] to
pass this information. The protocol allows an authorized agent, in
that case the egress site, to update the list of prefixes advertised
by the site's routers. The protocol can be used to change parameters
associated to a prefix, such as the preferred lifetime.

5.4	Host improvements

In order to take advantage of host centric multihoming, we will have
to improve the handling of multiple addresses in the hosts. The
handling will be focused on three areas: destination selection
algorithms, source selection algorithms, and adaptive transports or

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

applications.

5.4.1	Destination address selection

Destination selection algorithms can vary from the simplest, e.g.
pick an address at random from a list, to the most sophisticated,
e.g. maintain a routing table based on information learned from
routers, past transmissions or other hosts.

5.4.2	Source address selection

Source destination algorithms can also vary from the simplest to the
more complex. A basic algorithm is to pick a source address at
random, from the list of available source addresses with an adequate
scope and a non zero preferred life time. More sophisticated
algorithms can take into account the same kind of information that is
also used in destination address selection.

5.4.3	Combined source and destination address selection

Many host implementations of IPv6 perform destination address
selection first, and then source address selection. This is
questionable, since hosts are much more likely to gain knowledge
about their local connections than about conditions at a remote
location, and thus are much more likely to develop accurate ranking
of source addresses than destination addresses. A likely evolution is
for hosts to invert the order of the selection, selecting the source
address first, and then the destination address; this may require an
evolution of the "socket" interface.

5.4.4	Exit router discovery

Hosts can be programmed to perform "exit router discovery", i.e.
associate to a source and destination address pair the address of the
preferred exit router, and then tunnel packets directly to that exit
router. Hosts will learn the address of the exit router through ICMP
"site exit redirection" messages.

Any redirection message poses a potential threat, since it can be
used by third parties to misdirect and possibly capture traffic. In a
secure set-up, hosts will establish a security association with the
exit routers, and will only accept site exit redirection messages
that are properly secured by an authentication header. In the absence
of a security association, the host may perform a number of checks
before accepting a site exit ICMP message:

* check that the IPv6 source address is a site local address, or at a
minimum that it corresponds to a local prefix;

* check that the prefix length has a realistic value, e.g. at least
48 bits;


Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

* check that the Site Exit Address matches the site prefix being
redirected;

* select a redirection life time that is the minimum of the ICMP
value and a locally selected maximum duration.

Since site exit discovery is a routing optimization, hosts should
balance the routing gain with the possible security risk.

5.4.5	Transport connection survavibility

In order to survive link failures, transport and applications will
have to be able to use several IP addresses over the course of a
connection. This is already enabled by protocols such as SCTP. It
could be retrofit under existing protocols such as TCP if we use
"redirection" code developed for mobility solutions. For example, the
"Binding Updates" defined in [MOBILIP6] can be used to propose
transmission to a new address, as soon as the local host detects that
the preferred lifetime of the current source address has
expired.5.4.6	5.5

6	Evaluation of Host centric solution and Multihoming Requirements

The MULTI6 working group has elaborated a list of requirements for a
multi-homing solution that is detailed in [MULTI6RQ]. In this
section, we will review how the host centric approach to IPv6
multihoming meets these requirements, which are distributed in two
subsections: matching the capabilities of IPv4 multihoming, and
meeting additional requirements.

6.1	Capabilities of IPv4 Multihoming

IPv4 multihoming is discussed in [MULTI6V4]. The host centric
approach to IPv6 multihoming provides similar or better capabilities.

6.1.1	Redundancy

The solution presented here can provide protection against:

o  Physical link failure,
o  Logical link failure,
o  Routing protocol failure,
o  Transit provider failure, and
o  Exchange failure.

Basic redundancy is provided by the availability of multiple
addresses, that can be tried in turn, and by a reliance on classic
destination based routing protocols. We assume that if an address is
reachable, the routing protocol will find a path that leads to it; at
worst, the host will have to perform several transmission trials,
using different addresses, until the destination is reached.


Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

On the reverse path, redundancy is based on the selection of an
appropriate source address. The "preferred lifetime" mechanism allows
even the simplest hosts to learn which addresses are robust enough to
be used.

Destination and source selection provide a protection against a
failure of the site access link, which is catalogued in the
requirements as Physical link failure, or Logical link failure. The
availability of multiple destination addresses provides a protection
against Routing protocol failure, Transit provider failure, and
Exchange failure on the forward path: the communication will succeed
if at least one of the destination addresses can be routed. The
protection against such failures on the reverse path is provided if
multiple source addresses are tried.

6.1.2	Load Sharing

An enterprise can distribute the inbound traffic by manipulating the
"preference" associated to various addresses in the DNS, e.g. by
using mechanisms such as MX records or SRV records.

6.1.3	Performance

Performance enhancements can be obtained by appropriate development
if destination address selection and source address selection
algorithms.

6.1.4	Policy

Classes of applications may be shifted to a specific provider by
appropriate use of DNS records associated to specific services. For
example, the NNTP traffic could be directed to the specific server
"nntp.example.com", and the enterprise could decide to only advertise
for that server an address provided by one of its providers.

6.1.5	Simplicity

Host centric multihoming is simple to deploy, since it does not
require any cooperation between the site and its providers, or in
fact between the various providers. The main requirement is to
advertise an up-to-date list of prefixes in the router
advertisements; this can be automated using the router renumbering
protocol [RFC2894].

6.1.6	Transport-Layer Survivability

Transport layer survivability is provided if the hosts implement a
minimal set of enhancements, i.e. the sending of binding updates, as
discussed in section 4.3.

Following a re-homing event, the "preferred lifetime" update
guarantees that new transport-layer sessions can be adequately

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

created.

6.2	Additional Requirements

6.2.1	Scalability

The host centric multihoming system does not impose any unreasonable
requirements on the routing system: the sites use multiple addresses,
but each of these addresses can be aggregated under the prefixes of
their respective providers.

6.2.2	Impact on Routers

The solution requires two changes to IPv6 router implementations. In
order to avoid the problems caused by ingress filtering and
filtering, site exit routers should implement the "home address
insertion" procedure. In order to quickly signal to hosts any change
in the sites' connectivity, the site routers should implement the
"router renumbering" procedures, and the exit routers should be able
to use that procedure if a physical or logical link becomes
unavailable.

6.2.3	Impact on Hosts

The solution does not destroy IPv6 connectivity for a legacy host
implementing [RFC2373], [RFC 2460], [RFC2553] and other basic IPv6
specifications current in June 2001. Such hosts may not be taking the
full benefit from multihoming; in particular, their transport
connections may not survive the failure of a site connection.
However, the preferred lifetime mechanism guarantees that after a re-
homing event, the new connections of these basic hosts will follow an
available path.

Hosts will take better advantage of multi-homing if they implement
better destination address and source address selection algorithms,
exit router discovery, as well as a "binding update" solution for the
survival of transport connections. Each of these is a logically
separate function that can be added to existing functions.

The solution does not require changes to the socket API and/or the
transport layer; such changes may however be required if the host
wants to implement a combined selection of the source and destination
addresses, which is an optional additional function. The solution
allows host or application change to enhance session survivability.

6.2.4	Interaction between Hosts and the Routing System

The interaction between a site's hosts and its routing system is
limited to the normal processing of router advertisements.

6.2.5	Operations and Management


Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

It is possible to monitor and configure the multihoming system.

7	Security Considerations

The use of a site exit redirection ICMP message could potentially be
used to redirect and intercept traffic; secure hosts should only
accept such messages if they are properly authenticated.

8	IANA Considerations

This document requests allocation by IANA of a new ICMPv6 message
type.

9	Copyright

The following copyright notice is copied from RFC 2026 [Bradner,
1996], Section 10.4, and describes the applicable copyright for this
document.

Copyright (C) The Internet Society XXX 0, 0000. All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

10	Intellectual Property

The following notice is copied from RFC 2026 [Bradner, 1996], Section
10.4, and describes the position of the IETF concerning intellectual
property claims made against this document.

The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
pertain to the implementation or use other technology described in
this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can
be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
Director.

11	Acknowledgements

This memo incorporates text from a previous draft submitted by
Richard Draves.

12	References

[RFC2373]  R. Hinden, S. Deering. "IP Version 6 Addressing
Architecture." RFC 2373, July 1998.

[RFC2460] S. Deering, R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
(IPv6), Specification." RFC 2460, December 1998

[RFC2461] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery for
IP Version 6 (IPv6)." RFC 2461, December 1998.

[RFC2462] S. Thomson, T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
Autoconfiguration." RFC 2462, December 1998.

[RFC2553] R. Gilligan, S. Thomson, J. Bound, W. Stevens. "Basic
Socket Interface Extensions for IPv6." RFC 2553, March 1999.

[RFC2894] M. Crawford, "Router Renumbering for IPv6", RFC 2894,
August 2000.

[MULTI6RQ] Requirements for IP Multihoming Architectures, Work in
progress.

[MULTI6V4] IPv4 Multihoming Motivation, Practices and Limitations,
Work in progress.

[MOBILIP6] D. Johnson, C. Perkins. "Mobility Support in IPv6." Work
in progress.

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

[RFC2267] P. Ferguson, D. Senie. "Network Ingress Filtering:
Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source Address
Spoofing." RFC 2267, January 1998

[RFC2874] M. Crawford, C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to Support IPv6
Address Aggregation and Renumbering", RFC 2874, July 2000.

[RFC1886] S. Thomson, C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to support IP
version 6", RFC 1886, December 1995.

1)
13	Author's Addresses

Christian Huitema
Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052-6399

Email: huitema@microsoft.com

Richard Draves
Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052-6399

Email: richdr@microsoft.com


























Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

Table of Contents:

1 Introduction ....................................................   1
2 Notations .......................................................   2
2.1 Requirements language .........................................   2
2.2 Reference topology ............................................   2
2.4 Site exit router ..............................................   2
2.5 Ingress filtering .............................................   2
3 Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming issues ............................   3
3.1 Destination address selection .................................   3
3.2 Source address selection ......................................   3
3.3 The site exit issue ...........................................   4
3.5 Rapid reaction to topology changes ............................   5
4 Analysis of solutions to the site exit issue ....................   5
4.1 Relaxing the source address checks ............................   5
4.2 Source address dependent routing ..............................   6
4.3 Source address selection by the host ..........................   8
4.4 Packet rewriting at exit router ...............................  10
4.5 Comparison of the site exit solutions .........................  11
5 Proposed solution ...............................................  12
5.2 Resolving the site exit issue .................................  12
5.2.1 Site exit anycast address ...................................  12
5.2.2 Site exit redirection ICMP message ..........................  12
5.2.3 Tunneling to the appropriate exit ...........................  14
5.3 Rapid reaction to failures ....................................  14
5.3.1 Use of "Router advertisements" ..............................  15
5.3.2 Use of "Router Renumbering" .................................  15
5.4 Host improvements .............................................  15
5.4.1 Destination address selection ...............................  16
5.4.2 Source address selection ....................................  16
5.4.3 Combined source and destination address selection ...........  16
5.4.4 Exit router discovery .......................................  16
5.4.5 Transport connection survavibility ..........................  17
6 Evaluation of Host centric solution and Multihoming Requirements   17
6.1 Capabilities of IPv4 Multihoming ..............................  17
6.1.1 Redundancy ..................................................  17
6.1.2 Load Sharing ................................................  18
6.1.3 Performance .................................................  18
6.1.4 Policy ......................................................  18
6.1.5 Simplicity ..................................................  18
6.1.6 Transport-Layer Survivability ...............................  18
6.2 Additional Requirements .......................................  19
6.2.1 Scalability .................................................  19
6.2.2 Impact on Routers ...........................................  19
6.2.3 Impact on Hosts .............................................  19
6.2.4 Interaction between Hosts and the Routing System ............  19
6.2.5 Operations and Management ...................................  19
7 Security Considerations .........................................  20
8 IANA Considerations .............................................  20
9 Copyright .......................................................  20
10 Intellectual Property ..........................................  20

Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT	      Host-Centric IPv6 Multihoming    June 24, 2002

11 Acknowledgements ...............................................  21
12 References .....................................................  21
13 Author's Addresses .............................................  22


















































Huitema, Draves                                           [Page 24]
