
INTERNET-DRAFT                                              S. Coffey 
Category: Best Current Practice                             S. Strain 
Expires: November 2000              Theale Volunteer Networking Group 
                                                            May 2000 
 
 
Filename: draft-coffeystrain-privatednstld-00.txt  
 
 
            DNS Top Level Domain For Private Networks 
 
 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the 
   Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for 
   improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) Theale Volunteer Networking Group (2000). 
   All Rights Reserved. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   The document outlines the use of a top level DNS domain ".pri", for 
   use within private networks.   
    
   A reserved top level domain would allow private domain names to be 
   chosen that would not conflict with current or future registered 
   public domain names. 
 
Coffey & Strain                                               [Page 1] 
                     DNS TLD For Private Networks             May 2000 


    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Increasingly, private networks require a domain name service for 
   both private and public (internet) domain names. However, it is not 
   required or desirable for the private namespace to be accessible 
   from outside the private network.   A reserved top level domain 
   would allow a private namespace to be defined that would not 
   conflict with current or future registered public domain names.  
       
    
2. Current Common Practice in private network domain names selection 
    
   Currently, common practice when selecting a private network domain 
   name follows one of two unsatisfactory paths: 
    
   (i) Use of registered public domain name 
    
   A private DNS server is configured as authoritative for the 
   registered domain name, in addition to the existing public facing 
   authoritative name server(s). 
    
   The private server holds the "private version" of the registered 
   domain, and delegates to subdomains as necessary. 
    
   This requires two different versions of a single zone, in 
   contravention of RFC1034. This can also lead to practical problems 
   if a DNS query from a server on the private network to a public name 
   server returns additional information regarding names in the "public 
   version" of the registered zone. 
    
   (ii) Use of an unregistered domain name 
    
   An unregistered domain name is chosen for the private network, for 
   example a company with a registered domain "acme.com" might choose 
   "acme.net" for the private network. 
    
   This avoids the problems of using a registered domain name, yet may 
   conflict with a future reservation of the domain chosen. 
    
    
    
3. Using a Reserved Top Level Domain for private network domain names  
    
    
   A reserved top level domain name, ".pri", would allow a private 
   domain name to be chosen safely with no risk of conflict with 
   current or future registered domain names. 
    
   A private DNS server is configured as authoritative for the ".pri" 
   domain, and delegates the private subdomains as appropriate. 
    
 
Coffey & Strain            Expires Nov 2000                   [Page 2] 
                     DNS TLD For Private Networks             May 2000 


   Use of a private domain naming scheme based on a consistent top 
   level domain also allows multiple trusted private networks to 
   integrate their domain naming schemes simply by merging and 
   synchronising the ".pri" zone. 
    
   Use of a clearly private domain name also can provide a clear 
   distinction to users and applications between trusted private hosts 
   and untrusted public hosts. 
     
    
   For example,  Acme Corp may choose  "acme.pri" for their private 
   domain name.   They configure their DNS server to be authority for 
   ".pri" and "acme.pri", whilst all domains outside of the ".pri" 
   domain will be resolved via public DNS servers.  Should Acme Corp 
   wish to make its private domain names accessible to Cowboy Corp, who 
   use the private domain "cowboy.pri", then the two organisations 
   simply merge and synchronize their ".pri" zones. 
    
    
    
4. Existing Reserved Top Level Domains 
    
   Existing reserved top level domains are described in RFC2606. 
    
    
5. IANA Considerations 
    
   To enable the use of the domain ".pri" as described, IANA would need 
   to reserve the domain for this purpose. 
    
    
6. Request for Comments 
    
   Please send comments by e-mail to: 
   sicoffey@yahoo.com,  cc: sandy.strain@integralis.com 
    
    
    
References 
    
   [RFC 1034] Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities"  
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987. 
    
   [RFC 1035] Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and  
              specification" 
              STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987. 
    
   [RFC 1591] Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation" 
              RFC 1591, March 1994. 
    
   [RFC 2606] Eastlake & Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS Names" 
              BCP32, RFC 2606, June 1999. 
    
 
Coffey & Strain            Expires Nov 2000                   [Page 3] 
                     DNS TLD For Private Networks             May 2000 


    
    
 
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Please note that Simon Coffey will not be contactable from  
   24-Jun-200 to 26-Jul-2001 but will be reading e-mail at 
   approximately monthly intervals.  Please contact Sandy Strain with 
   any urgent queries during this period. 
    
      Simon Coffey 
      c/o Integralis Ltd 
      Brunel Rd 
      Theale 
      READING  
      UK 
      EMail: sicoffey@yahoo.com 
    
    
      Sandy Strain 
      c/o Integralis Ltd 
      Brunel Rd 
      Theale 
      READING  
      UK 
      EMail: sandy.strain@integralis.com 
      Phone: +44 118 930 6060 
    

























 
Coffey & Strain            Expires Nov 2000                   [Page 4] 

