Internet Engineering Task Force                            David Kessens
Draft                                                                ISI
Expires January 1998                                           July 1997
<draft-ietf-rps-transition-01.txt>



          A strategy for the transition from RIPE-181 to RPSL


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   This document describes a transition strategy for the Internet
   routing registries from the RIPE181 [1] routing language to RPSL [2].


Introduction

   Changing from one routing policy language to another is a complicated
   matter due to the number of involved parties. First of all it is
   important that the major routing databases will support the new
   language, secondly it is very important that the user community and
   tool developers are informed very well in advance over the changes to
   avoid a loss in the database information quality and to give a chance
   to the tools developers to adapt their tools to the new formats.
   Therefore it seems best to take some time for a smooth transition.
   The transition as proposed here is divided in a small number of
   distinct and managable steps.




Kessens                                                         [Page 1]

Draft                       RPSL transition                    July 1997


   We are currently in stage one and can soon start with stage two.

   The third stage will be most painfull since it involves a switch to
   the RPSL language at the same time and date. This wasn't strictly
   necessary but avoids a lot of confusion and problems for registries
   that still needed access to the old formats which becomes obviously
   impossible after a registry is transitioned.

   The databases will still accept RIPE181 updates during the whole
   transition period and thereafter to ease the whole process for the
   end-users.

First stage: testing and playing

   The new RPSL extensions developed at ISI will be installed on a well
   published test port at ISI for testing purposes. Everybody will start
   working on converting their tools to RPSL.

Second stage: RIPE181 & RPSL databases run in parallel

   All registrations will be made at the RIPE-181 databases and
   registrations will be immediately mirrored in the RPSL database using
   the real-time mirroring feature of the server. Clients and tools
   should be able to run using either server and give similar output.

   Merit/RA will add the RAWhoisd functionality to the new RIPE/ISI
   code.  RIPE and RA will install this software for testing purposes.
   ISI will have a RPSL capable RAtoolset available.

   Merit/RA will introduce the 'import|export:' lines in the production
   version of their database. Those lines will give limited RPSL
   functionality. This will give tool developers and users a chance to
   use some of the functionality of RPSL in an early stage. These extra
   attributes will not affect the other registries. Any other registry
   might want to decide to support the 'import/export:' lines but it is
   not required to. Tools are supposed to use the 'import|export:' lines
   if present and the 'as-(in|out):' lines when not. Old tools will
   automatically use the RIPE181 'as-(in|out):' lines and ignore the
   compatibility.

   ISI will give a tutorials on the new routing language at RIPE, NANOG
   and APRICOT meetings. All registries will put a small but clear
   banner in the acknowledgment messages of the poduction databases with
   a pointer to a website with more information on RPSL and the
   transition strategy. This banner will only appear in acknowledgement
   messages which updated objects that are part of the routing registry
   ('route:', 'aut-num:', 'as-macro:', database. Some people might even
   want to try the 'import|export:' lines in a production environment.



Kessens                                                         [Page 2]

Draft                       RPSL transition                    July 1997


Third stage: switch over to RPSL

   The RIPE181 database is phased out. All registrations are done
   directly in the RPSL database. Users may still send objects in the
   RIPE-181 format in addition to the RPSL format. In this case,
   dbupdate will automatically covert the object to RPSL format,
   register it, and send a warning to the user about the conversion.
   Eventually, RIPE-181 data will not be accepted and will be returned
   back to the user as an error.


Security considerations

   There are no security implications. The transition will solely deal
   with a different representation of routing policies in the Internet
   Registry databases. The update process and access protocol will stay
   the same and will thus have the same properties as previous Internet
   Registry databases had in the past.


Acknowledgments

   I would like to thank Carol Orange, Chris Fletcher, everybody from
   MCI, Bell Canada & Telstra who made invaluable reccomendations, John
   Stuart, Gerald Winters, Joachim Schmitz, Curtis Villamizar, Tony
   Bates, Cengiz Alaettinoglu, and everybody that contributed to the
   work of the rps IETF working group in general, for their various
   comments and suggestions.


References

   [1] T. Bates, E. Gerich, L. Joncheray, J-M. Jouanigot, D. Karrenberg,
       M. Terpstra, and J. Yu, "Representation of IP Routing Policies
       in a Routing Registry", ripe-181, RIPE NCC, Amsterdam,
       Netherlands, October 1994.

   [2] C. Alaettinoglu et. al., draft-ietf-rps-rpsl-02.txt,
       April 1997.


Author's Address:

   David Kessens,
   ISI
   4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001
   Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695
   USA



Kessens                                                         [Page 3]

Draft                       RPSL transition                    July 1997


   davidk@ISI.EDU


















































Kessens                                                         [Page 4]


