Network Working Group                            D. Crocker
Internet Draft                                  Brandenburg
     draft-crocker-spam-techconsider-       Vernon Schryver
     01.txt                               Rhyolite Software
Expires: <11-03>                                John Levine
                                                Taughannock
                                                   Networks
                                                16 May 2003
                              
                  Technical Considerations
                 for Spam Control Mechanisms
     
     
     
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full
     conformance with all provisions of Section 10 of
     RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working documents of the
     Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas and
     its working groups. Note that other groups may also
     distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
     
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum
     of six months and may be updated, replaced, or
     obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is
     inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
     material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."
     
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
          
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
     
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
     accessed at
          
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html
     
     Copyright ¨ The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights
     Reserved.
     
     
     
     SUMMARY
     
     Internet mail has operated as an open and unfettered
     channel between originator and recipient. This invites
     some abuses, called spam, such as burdening recipients
     with unwanted commercial email. Spam has become an
     extremely serious problem, is getting much worse and is
     proving difficult (or impossible) to eliminate. The
     most practical goal is to bring spam under control; it
     will require an on-going, adaptive effort, with
     stochastic rather than complete results. This note
     discusses available points of control in the Internet
     mail architecture, considerations in using any of those
     points, and opportunities for creating Internet
     standards to aid in spam control efforts.  It offers
     guidance about likely trade-offs, benefits and
     limitations.
     
     
     
     CONTENTS
     
     1.   SPAM AND CONSENT
     
     2.   EMAIL ARCHITECTURE CONTROL POINTS
     
     3.   TERMINOLOGY
          3.1. EVALUATION FOCUS
          3.2. ORIGINATOR FOCUS
          3.3. FILTERING RESULTS
          3.4. FILTERING ACTION
          3.5. EXPLICIT FILTERING LISTS
     
     4.   APPROACHES TO CONTROLLING SPAM
          4.1. ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL MECHANISMS
          4.2. INFRASTRUCTURE AND OPERATIONS
          4.3. FILTERING
               4.3.1.  TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
               4.3.2.  CONTENT ANALYSIS
               4.3.3.  FILTER RULES
          4.4. NEGOTIATION
     
     5.   EVALUATING TECHNICAL APPROACHES
          5.1. ADOPTION
          5.2. IMPACT
          5.3. SCALING
          5.4. SCENARIOS
     
     6.   SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
     
     7.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     
     8.   AUTHORSÆ ADDRESSES
     
     9.   FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT
     
     APPENDIX A:            EVALUATION CHECKLIST
     
     



SPAM AND CONSENT
     
     Internet mail has operated as an open and unfettered
     channel between originator and recipient.  It has
     always suffered from some degree of abuse, in which
     originators impose on recipients inappropriately.  In
     recent years, a version of this abuse has grown
     substantially.  Called spam, its definition varies from
     "unsolicited commercial email" to "any email the
     recipient does not want".  Often there are no technical
     differences between spam and "acceptable" email. Their
     format, content and even aggregate traffic patterns may
     be identical. Hence spam is a problem for fundamentally
     non-technical reasons, yet the Internet technical
     community must pursue technical responses to it.  The
     lack of strong community consensus on a single, precise
     definition makes this particularly challenging.
     
     For most working discussions, the term "Unsolicited
     Bulk Email" is sufficient.  The salient point that it
     is a mass-mailing ensures that discussion covers the
     broadest concern of the user and provider
     communities. Mail that is not in some real sense "bulk"
     cannot flood networks or mailboxes. Essentially all
     mail that people object to, as "spam", is bulk. For
     example practically all objectionable advertising mail
     is also bulk, although modern techniques for targeted
     advertising can permit extensive content or address
     tailoring. "Bulk" is usually very difficult for an
     individual recipient to prove, but almost always easy
     to recognize in practice.
     
     More detailed discussion must, of course, be precise in
     the definition of "unsolicited" and usually must
     distinguish between different types of mail, such as
     commercial, religious, political or personal.
     
     The simplistic -- but entirely adequate -- summary of
     the role of spam on Internet mail is that it is an
     extremely serious problem, it is getting much worse,
     and it is proving difficult or impossible to
     eliminate.  Spam is generated by a very wide range of
     clever sources and it always will be. Instead of
     thinking of spam as a disease that might be eliminated,
     it is more useful to think of it like crime, war and
     cockroaches.
     
     It is not realistic to expect to eliminate any of
     these, no matter how much anyone might wish otherwise.
     Therefore the best we can hope to accomplish is to
     bring spam under reasonable control and that control
     will require an on-going, adaptive effort, with
     stochastic rather than complete results.  That is, we
     need multiple, adaptive techniques. As spam changes, so
     must our mechanisms. Different mechanisms will be
     appropriate for different circumstances.
     
     In other words, spam has become a permanent part of the
     Internet mail experience and efforts to control it may
     only reduce it to a tolerable level, rather than
     eliminate it. It is somewhat comforting to remember
     that an individual spam is not damaging.  Rather the
     quantity of spam is what poses a threat.  Hence there
     is flexibility in permitting spam control mechanisms to
     be imperfect.
     
     This note discusses available points of control in the
     Internet mail architecture, considerations in using any
     of those points, and opportunities for creating
     Internet standards to aid in spam control efforts.  It
     offers guidance about likely trade-offs, benefits and
     limitations.
     
     The note does not offer an analysis of the types of
     spam or the types of attacks used in sending spam, nor
     is it intended to specify solutions. Similarly, the
     note does not discuss fine-grained details, such as the
     arguments associated with single opt-in mechanisms,
     versus double opt-in.  These points are important to
     the engineering of particular solutions, but only as
     refinements after the larger architectural and system
     control choices are made.
                
     Note:     This document is intended to evolve, based on
               comments from the Anti-Spam Research Group
               (ASRG) mailing list.  It is certain that the
               current draft is incomplete and entirely
               possible that it is inaccurate.  Hence,
               comments are eagerly sought, preferably in
               the form of suggested text changes, and
               preferably on the ASRG mailing list, at
               <mailto:asrg@ietf.org>



                
     STD            [0]  Throughout this document, opportunities
     OPP            for technical standards are cited.  These
                    represent an attempt to provide a complete
                    list of such possibilities, rather than to
                    offer recommendations. These will be in
                    entries of this form, with the label "STD
                    OPP".



EMAIL ARCHITECTURE CONTROL POINTS
     
     Email transmission sequences can touch many systems,
     between the originator and the recipient.  However for
     most discussions about control, only five major
     components are important:

          +---------------+             +---------------+
          | UA.o -> MTA.o | -> MTA.i -> | MTA.r -> UA.r |
          +---------------+             +---------------+
          
          UA.o:          The originator's user agent,
                         operated by the user and under
                         their direct control
          
          MTA.o:         The mail transfer agent service
                         associated with the originator's
                         environment, possibly operated by
                         the sender and possibly operated
                         under separate control, such as by
                         their employer.
          
          MTA.i:         The mail transfer agent service
                         operated by an independent third-
                         party, such as an Internet Service
                         Provider (ISP)
          
          MTA.r:         The mail transfer agent service
                         associated with the recipient's
                         environment
          
          UA.r:          The recipient's user agent
     
     In many organizations, the MTA service is multi-stage,
     such as including a department MTA and an Internet
     "firewall" MTA. This distinction is of fundamental
     importance for making software and operations
     decisions, but it does not have a significant impact on
     a discussion about points of control.  Points of
     control are primarily affected by crossing
     administrative boundaries.  Therefore the distinction
     between originator's environment, recipient's
     environment and any independent third parties is
     essential to this larger examination.  These are
     separate, independent administrative environments and
     are subject to different policies.  In particular, note
     that a discussion about using control points hinges on
     the scope of the control to be exercised.
     
     Besides constituting a major burden to recipients, the
     volume of spam traffic has become a serious problem for
     transit services.  Hence a precept in controlling spam
     is to seek control as close to the source as possible.
     The fewer downstream resources consumed by spam, the
     better.  Of course, the ideal would be a mechanism in
     UA.o that would prevent spam from being sent in the
     first place.  Indeed, legal remedies seek to affect a
     sender's motivations, so that they will not send the
     spam at all.
     
     Unfortunately there is no opportunity for software
     control of spam in UA.o ,  because the software is
     under the control of the originator.  If they wish to
     bypass any control mechanisms in UA.o ,  they will find
     a way. Of course, some services have UA.o under
     administrative control from the software's user.  This
     affords a software choice, placing controls in that
     module, but does not permit the more general
     architectural specification of controls there, because
     the separate administrative control cannot be relied
     on.
     
     The next opportunity is MTA.o.  Often this service is
     operated by a group independent of the originator.
     
     Wherever the detection mechanism is placed, the
     critical challenge is to identify spam in real time, if
     its relaying and delivery are to be stopped.  The other
     avenue is post-hoc removal of the right to make further
     use of the MTA service.  This may have strong utility
     for spammers attempting to operate within acceptable
     social bounds.  It will have no effect upon spammers
     who avoid accountability.



TERMINOLOGY
     
     When determining whether a message qualifies as spam,
     different types of email attributes can be considered,
     different types of analyses can be performed on them.
     Equally the results of the analyses can be used in
     different ways, for preventing, detecting or following
     up occurrences of spam.


1.1. Evaluation Focus
     
     When discussing both the attributes of spam and the
     mechanisms for controlling it, the major distinction
     for evaluation is between:
          
          Originator:    Evaluate the trustworthiness of
                         creator of the content.  Will the
                         originator create spam?
          
          Content:       Evaluate the message content,
                         itself.  Does the content contain
                         spam?
     
     Validating the originator can often be done with
     excellent reliability.  However current common
     practises for author authentication have resisted wide-
     scale adoption and this approach only protects against
     spam indirectly. The creator might choose to violate
     the criteria used to assess them.  When validation of
     the originator is based on the contents, this certifies
     authorship, but does not certify any other
     characteristic of the content.
     
     By contrast evaluating content is direct -- either it
     is spam or it is not -- but it is impossible to do the
     evaluation perfectly.  For example, legitimate
     subscription-based bulk mail is technically identical
     to spam, in every regard, except that it is solicited
     or desired by its recipients. Simplistic content
     evaluation criteria have a high rate of false positives
     and are easily bypassed by spammers, leading to a high
     rate of false negatives.  Complex criteria are
     difficult to create and maintain.  They, too, are
     likely to have a high rate of false assessments,
     eventually, unless maintenance of the analysis rules is
     diligent.


1.2. Originator Focus
     
     Evaluation of the originator sub-divides between:
          
          Author:        Evaluate whether the person
                         creating the content is likely to
                         create spam.
          
          System:        Evaluate whether the system that is
                         sending email on a person's behalf
                         is likely to permit spam to be
                         sent.
     
     Evaluating the person (or organization) creating the
     message is direct, albeit still carrying the caveats
     noted above. Evaluating the system is indirect, but
     presumes that the system enforces quality assurance
     policies on the email sent from it.
     
     A larger problem with evaluating the originator of mail
     is that Internet mail necessarily and desirably
     involves receiving mail from strangers.  Mailboxes that
     are closed to mail from strangers do not have a spam
     problem. On the other hand, it is impossible to know
     whether copies of a message from a stranger are also
     being sent to 30,000,000 of your closest friends.
     Contrary to often-expressed hopes, a third party that
     is also a stranger cannot attest to the virtue of a
     mail sender.  A letter of introduction from a stranger
     does not make the bearer other than a stranger.
     
     If the history of spam is any guide, organizations such
     as Internet service providers and public key
     infrastructure (PKI) providers cannot be expected to
     ensure that their customers do not send spam.  Even
     with the best of intentions, they will always be
     willing to open new accounts to strangers.  The most
     that can be expected is that they will punish their
     spamming customers such as by imposing substantial fees
     or filing lawsuits. It should be noted that the
     "punishment" of terminating their account often is
     meaningless, because many spammers create one-time
     accounts.


1.3. Filtering Results
     
     Qualification performs tests. Test results are:
          
          Positive:      Message matches the test criteria.
          
          Negative:      Message fails to match the test
                         criteria.
     
     When the tests are heuristic or statistical, some
     portion of the results will be incorrect.
     
     Incorrect results are classed as:
                           
          False Positive  The filter classified a non-spam
          (FP):           message as spam.  That is, the message
                          matches the test criteria, but the
                          criteria are too aggressive.
                           
          False Negative  The filter classifies a spam message
          (FN):           as non-spam.  That is, the message
                          fails to match the test criteria, but
                          the criteria are not sufficiently
                          strong.


1.4. Filtering Action
     
     Filters are used for two, basic and complementary
     purposes:
          
          Acceptance:    Approves mail for delivery.
          
          Rejection:     Withholds or refuses permission for
                         delivery.
     
     Implementations of filter mechanisms may provide for a
     range of choices, rather than simple acceptance or
     rejection.
     
     Note that rules for acceptance are equally subject to
     error.  However Acceptance rules are usually for
     simple, explicit rules rather than heuristics, so that
     FP and FN results are not usually a concern.  Hence
     discussion of FP and FN are usually for Rejection
     rules.


1.5. Explicit Filtering Lists
     
     The simplest method of testing is to have explicit
     lists of simple identifier criteria, such as From
     address.
     
     Pre-assessed senders are entered into:
          
          Whitelist:     Automatic Acceptance
          
          Blacklist:     Automatic Rejection
     
     One approach to maintaining Whitelists and Blacklists
     is to make explicit entries into them, manually.  This
     is often what a spam control service will offer to its
     subscribers. Most such services are for blacklisting
     known sources of spam.
     
     A difficulty with these listing services is the set of
     criteria used for adding and removing senders or sites.
     These policies usually need to be explicit, objective,
     documented and consistently applied. Even then,
     blacklist operators are attractive targets for threats
     of lawsuits claiming inappropriate listing,
     interference in business or trade, etc.



APPROACHES TO CONTROLLING SPAM


1.6. Administrative and Legal Mechanisms
     
     Both government law and service provider contracts can
     be used for defining unacceptable behavior, requiring
     preventive measures, and providing for remedies when
     there are violations.
     
     There are two major problems with this administrative
     approach to the control of spam.  One is that the
     sender often cannot be readily identified by the
     recipient of spam.  There are many opportunities for
     practically anonymous posting of email, including
     Internet cafes, transient access services and free
     email services. The second problem is that the sender
     of spam may not be in the jurisdiction seeking to
     exercise control or a jurisdiction responsive to the
     recipient's jurisdiction.  The Internet is global.
     Unlike postal bulk mail, the cost of sending spam over
     the Internet does not change as the mail crosses
     jurisdictional boundaries.
     
     Hence it seems likely that use of administrative
     procedures can be effective for controlling
     "responsible" spam -- that is, spam sent by
     organizations operating as accountable social
     participants. Perhaps they indulge in overly aggressive
     policies, but they still desire to be socially
     tolerable.  The large number of "rogue" spammers is not
     similarly burdened.
     
     However, most ôrogueö spammers are trying to sell a
     product or service.  There have been notable successes
     against spammers by the U.S. federal government
     ôfollowing the money.ö However the government staff for
     these activities note their lack of resources and the
     extensive effort to achieve the result.


1.7. Infrastructure and Operations
     
     Enhancement of underlying Internet services might
     reduce the effectiveness of some spam transmission
     mechanisms.  For example many spammers prefer to send
     to domain name service MX secondaries because
     secondaries are often not as well filtered as MX
     primaries.  Because of MX secondaries lack a
     coordination protocol, the best advice for all but the
     largest sites is to stop using MX secondaries.  This
     advice sounds radical, but MX secondaries are no longer
     needed to compensate for intermittently connected or
     sending MTAs.  Today MX secondaries are generally
     needed only for ôload balancingö when there is more
     incoming mail than can be handled by a single SMTP
     server.
                     
     STD            [1]  An MX secondary coordination
     OPP            protocol could coordinate filtering
                    rules, white- and blacklist entries and
                    other spam control data among MX
                    servers.
                         
                    [2]  Best Current Practises  (BCP)
                    documentation of preferred MTA operation
                    for spam control, beyond that documented
                    in RFC 2505.  For example, it is better
                    to reject spam by rejecting the SMTP
                    transaction with a 5yz status code than
                    to accept the transaction and later send
                    a delivery failure notification.
                    
                    [3]  BCPs for other services operating
                    to control spam, such as DNS blacklists
     
     Postal mail imposes a fee on the sender for each
     message that is sent. Such a fee makes the cost of
     sending significant, and proportional to the amount
     sent.  In contrast, current Internet mail is very
     nearly free to the sender.  Hence there is interest in
     exploring "sender pays" email.
     
     One form of sender-pays is identical to postal
     stamping.  Another entails "retribution" to the sender,
     taking the fee for their posting only if the recipient
     indicates they were unhappy to receive it. For both
     models, it is not clear that it is possible to
     retroactively fit the necessary mechanisms to Internet
     mail. Its complete absence from the current service and
     the existence of anonymous and free email services may
     provide too much operational inertia.  It is also not
     clear who should receive the fees or how they should be
     disbursed.


1.8. Filtering
     
     The technical mechanism for real-time detection and
     handling of spam is a filter, placed at MTA.o,  MTA.i,
     MTA.r and/or UA.r.  A filter has two functions:
     detection and action. Action is usually either adding a
     special label to the message or disposing of it.
     
     
     4.3.1.    Traffic Analysis
     
     Spam is often referred to as "unsolicited bulk mail" to
     highlight that senders typically post very large
     amounts quickly. Opt-in (subscription) email also
     demonstrates this traffic pattern.  Still there is
     benefit in measuring aggregate email behavior.
                     
     STD            [4]  Traffic reporting protocol, to
     OPP            permit collaboration among independent
                    administrations.
     
     
     4.3.2.    Content Analysis
     
     Filters look for message attributes, such as strings of
     text in the headers or content of the message being
     inspected.  Other attributes include the address or
     domain name of the originating system or the occurrence
     of the same message content in multiple messages at the
     same time. Simple filters look for specific strings. A
     more powerful approach looks for multiple sets of
     strings, assigning a positive or negative score to each
     occurrence; it then labels spam according to its total
     score.
     
     Rule creation is done manually, or by a service, or by
     analysis of a collection of messages.  For example one
     type of service observes email traffic at many Internet
     locations and receives reports as recipients see new
     types of spam. The service then propagates new rules to
     its subscribers. One example of an analytic approach
     performs empirical rule creation, using statistical
     techniques, such as Bayesian, to discern string
     occurrences in known spam, versus mail that is known
     not to be spam.
     
     As rules become common, spammers adapt their messages
     to bypass filters, so that existing rules quickly
     become less effective.  Hence a long-term filter must
     use rules that are continually modified. Empirical
     rules generation must be repeated, or must operate
     continuously, analyze all incoming mail.
     
     Manual rule maintenance is simply not practical for
     typical users; the effort is far too great and the
     nature of rules such as ôregular expressionsö are too
     arcane. A concern about services is that they are
     inherently post-hoc. They are always updating the rule-
     set after an "attack" commences, so that some spam is
     certain to reach some recipients; however the view that
     a small amount of spam is not dangerous mitigates this
     concern.  Lastly, methods using automated analysis rely
     on heuristics, or guesses.  They are certain to have
     some percentage of "false negatives" (FN) that permit
     real spam to reach the recipients, and some percentage
     of "false positives" (FP) that incorrectly label
     legitimate mail as spam.
     
     Any effective, long term filtering mechanism must have
     automatic or semi-automatic rule creation and must
     upgrade the set of rules continuously or periodically.
                      
     STD             [5]  Rule format and exchange, to
     OPP             permit sharing effective rules.
     
                     [6]  Sample message labeling and
                     exchange, to permit submission of
                     candidate content to remote service.
                     
                     [7]  Hash-based identifier of content
     
     
     4.3.3.    Sender-Generated Tagging
     
     Message originators can cooperate in filtering efforts
     by adding standardized information, or tags. The most
     serious difficulty with any scheme that relies on
     tagging is its relationship to the larger body of email
     that is untagged. What does it mean when the tag is not
     present? Is presence of the tag a certain indicator of
     the intended information?  Is there benefit in falsely
     labeling the content? Does the scheme contain a means
     of preventing this spoofing?
     
     If tagging uses a simple string label, such as "ADV" to
     indicate that the contents contain advertising, how is
     this useful when most email is not labeled or is
     labeled incorrectly?  This is like postal-based mass
     marketing that has an envelope marked "personal and
     confidential" but is neither.
     
     Non-forgeable tagging uses cryptographic techniques.
     If the tagging identifies the sender, then the
     recipient must have access to the cryptographic
     identifier. If the tag is independent of the content --
     that is, it identifies and authenticates the sender,
     but uses a scheme that does not integrate the specific
     content of the contained message -- then what is to
     prevent re-using the identification inappropriately?
     
     
     4.3.4.    Filter Rules
     
     The simplest model for a filtering test is to have
     entries containing a single, simple attribute, such as
     sender email address or source system IP address or
     domain name.
     
     For assessments based on the identity of the sender,
     rather than the content of the message, another concern
     is validation of the key attribute used for
     identification.  What if the value for that attribute
     is set falsely?  For example, what if email was not
     send by the address listed in the From field?
                     
     STD            [8]  List format and exchange, to permit
     OPP            sharing Whitelist and Blacklist entries;
     
                    [9]  Enhanced list format and exchange,
                    to permit sharing filtering pattern-
                    matching rules.
                    
                    [10] Common metrics about message sender
                    behaviors, to allow calculation of their
                    "reputation".
                    
                    [11] Format and access to filter logs,
                    such as among MX secondaries.   Spammers
                    sometimes spread their mail among the MX
                    secondaries for a domain. Correlating
                    typical SMTP log files merely by time
                    and data is onerous.
                    
                    [12] Control protocol between recipient
                    and filtering service server, to permit
                    specifying policies and specific rules.
                    
                    [13] Modify SMTP delivery status
                    notifications to avoid flooding innocent
                    mailboxes because of forged senders.
                    [Needs clarification. /ed]
                    
                    [14] Codify best current practices of
                    filters to minimize sending DSN.
                    Delivery status notifications announcing
                    the rejection of spam often go to
                    innocent third parties when the sending
                    address of the spam has been forged.
                    Rejecting the message during the SMTP
                    transaction often, but not always,
                    prevents this ôcollateral damage.ö [This
                    may duplicate a previous opportunity.
                    /ed]
                    
                    [15] Codify DSN and SMTP status message
                    wording, such as saying that rejections
                    resulting from filtering should include
                    a URL for an extended explanation.
                    [Needs clarification. /ed]
                    
                    [16] Replace SMTP.
                         
                         
     
     The idea of replacing SMTP is appealing because it
     permits thinking in terms of creating an infrastructure
     that has accountability and restrictions built in.
     Unfortunately an installed base the size of the
     Internet is not likely to make such a change anytime
     soon.  It seems far more likely that successful spam
     control mechanisms will be introduced as increments to
     the existing Internet mail service.
     
     Moreover, the feature of SMTP that is most responsible
     for spam is the ability to receive mail from strangers.
     Without this feature, there would be no flood of spam,
     but many of the most valuable Internet commercial and
     individual activities would also be impossible.
     Replacing SMTP with a protocol that allows strangers to
     send each other mail would not stop spam any more than
     SMTP-AUTH stopped spam, contrary to insistent claims to
     the contrary, before SMTP-AUTH became widely available
     and used.


1.9. Negotiation
     
     In addition to real-time analysis, a recipient may
     engage in an explicit negotiation with the sender, to
     validate them.
     
     When this is performed at the time of message receipt,
     it is called a "Challenge-Response"(CR) mechanism.
     This mechanism might use regular email exchange, or
     other media supporting interaction.  An example of a
     mechanism could have the recipient MTA contact the
     putative sender's host, as addressed by the DNS MX
     record associated with the Mail-From domain name.  It
     could send that domain a hash of the received message
     and ask, "Did you really send this"?  The effect is
     essentially the same as a cryptographic message
     authentication, but implemented through a callback
     mechanism, rather than being carried with the message
     content.
     
     CR introduces delay in message receipt and creates at
     least one additional email round-trip exchange for
     every new sender/recipient pair.  This is a substantial
     burden both on participants and on the transit
     service.  Senders often refuse to respond to the
     challenge, so that the mechanism dissuades senders from
     all but the most urgent communications.  In addition,
     the delay imposed by CR can render time-sensitive
     messages useless.
                    
     STD                 [17] Validation protocol (such as
     OPP                 "challenge/response") between the
                         recipient's and the sender system



EVALUATING TECHNICAL APPROACHES
     
     The complexity of Internet mail service and the nature
     of spam make it difficult evaluate proposals for
     control mechanisms.  In this section, the key technical
     factors affecting viability are examined.


1.10.     Adoption
     
     A critical barrier to the success of a new mechanism is
     the effort it takes to begin using it. It is essential
     to look carefully at the adoption process.
                         
     Adoption Effort     What is the effort for a new
                         participant to start using the
                         proposed mechanism? This includes
                         installation, learning to use it
                         and performing initial
                         operations. This is also called
                         the "barrier to entry".
                         
     Threshold to        What is required before users get
     benefit             some benefit from the mechanism?
                         Primarily, this looks for the
                         number of users who must adopt
                         the mechanism before the adopters
                         gain utility from it.
     
     A key construct to examination of adoption and benefit
     is "core-vs-edge".  Generally, adoption at the edge of
     a system is easier and quicker than adoption in the
     core. If a mechanism affects the core (infrastructure)
     then it usually must be adopted by most or all of the
     infrastructure before it provides meaningful utility.
     In something the scale of the Internet, it can take
     decades to reach that level of adoption, if it ever
     does.
     
     Remember that the Internet comprises a massive number
     of independent administrations, each with their own
     politics and funding. What is important and feasible to
     one might be neither to another. If the latter
     administration is in the handling path for a message,
     then it will not have implemented the necessary control
     mechanism. Worse, it well might not be possible to
     change this.  For example a proposal that requires a
     brand new mail service is not likely to gain much
     traction.
     
     By contrast, some "edge" mechanisms provide utility to
     the first one, two or three adopters who interact with
     each other. No one else is needed for the adopters to
     gain some benefit. Each additional adopter makes the
     total system incrementally more useful. For example a
     filter can be useful to the first recipient to adopt
     it. A consent mechanism can be useful to the first two
     or three adopters, depending upon the design of the
     mechanism.
                         
     Impact on           What is the impact on the senders
     Participants        and receivers who adopt the
                         proposal? Senders and receivers
                         currently have certain styles of
                         operation.  How are those styles
                         changed?
                         
     Impact on Others    What is the impact on the senders
                         and receivers who do *not* adopt
                         the proposal? What effect does it
                         have on legitimate users of
                         email? What effect does it have
                         on spammers? Is the nature of
                         Internet mail changed for
                         everyone, including non-
                         adopters?
     
     For example, a challenge-response system is irritating
     for the person being challenged, and it imposes extra
     delay on the desired communication. If the originator
     and the recipient both access the Internet only
     occasionally (such as through dial-up when mobile) a
     challenge-response model can impose days of delay. For
     some communications, this can be disastrous.


1.11.     Burden
     
     The purpose of spam control is to cause some email to
     fail to reach its intended destination.  This is, of
     course, directly at odds with the constructive goal of
     email. Hence spam control alters the basic model of
     email service.
     
     Effective mechanisms must place some kind of burden on
     senders and receivers.  Hence a challenge for spam
     control mechanisms is to require enough of a burden to
     be effective, but not so much that it makes email
     unacceptably painful to use.
                         
     Ongoing Usage       Once a user has chosen to make
     effort              the change to adopt a mechanism,
                         how much effort does it take to
                         use it regularly? After the
                         effort to adopt the mechanism,
                         how does it affect regular email
                         use in an ongoing basis?
                         
     Balance of burdens  What is the nature and
                         distribution of the burdens
                         placed on senders and receivers
                         who are affected by the proposed
                         mechanism? Who must work harder
                         to use the proposed mechanism?


1.12.     Scaling
     
     "Adoption" is the process of placing a new mechanism
     into an operational environment.  Scaling looks at the
     effect of having very large numbers of participants use
     that mechanism.
                         
     Use by Full         What happens if everyone on the
     Internet            Internet adopts the proposed
                         mechanism? How is the fabric
                         Internet mail affected when there
                         is very large-scale use?
                         
     Growth of Internet  What if the Internet grows by a
                         factor of 1000? How is the fabric
                         affected when there is much
                         larger-scale use?
     
     Remember that "everyone" is approximately 100 million
     users at the time of this writing.  It will to grow to
     10 billion, if we expect the Internet to be useful for
     some decades. And it is likely there will be more email
     users/accounts than there are people on the planet,
     given that individuals and organizations occupy
     multiple roles.
     
     So, what will it be like for 100 million or 10 billion
     users to employ the proposed mechanism?  Are there
     technology or operations "choke points" in the proposed
     mechanism?
                         
     Efficiency          Will the proposed mechanism be
                         sufficiently efficient? Is
                         Internet mail delivered in a
                         timely fashion? Is the burden on
                         processing and storage
                         acceptable?
                         
     Cost                Will the proposed mechanism be
                         sufficiently inexpensive?
                         
     Reliability         Will the proposed mechanism be
                         sufficiently reliable? Is non-
                         spam email more likely to be
                         delivered correctly?  Less
                         likely?
     
     There is another side to the scaling question:
                         
     Internet Impact     How much of the Internet will be
                         affected by a proposal, if the
                         proposal is adopted?
                         
     Spam Impact         How much spam will be controlled
                         by the proposed mechanism?
     
     If a proposal requires substantial effort to adopt and
     use, but will affect only a small percentage of spam,
     the efficacy of that proposed mechanism is very much in
     question. One example of this concern might be legal
     scope, given that spam is global and there is no global
     law enforcement.


1.13.     Robustness
     
     After a technique is adopted, spammers will adjust
     their techniques, attempting to work around the
     technique.  For example, when people started using
     header filters, spammers started using bland deceptive
     subject lines, which mean that when spam gets past the
     filters, people are more likely to open messages and
     see porn pix.  If whitelists become common, it is
     possible to envision spammers attempting to forge From
     addresses that are likely to be on the recipient's
     whitelist.
                         
     Circumvention       How difficult will it be for
                         spammers to change their mail to
                         bypass the proposed scheme? How
                         are circumvention efforts likely
                         to affect non-spam mail?


1.14.     Scenarios
     
     Almost any proposal will make sense for a particular
     scenario that is sufficiently constrained. The real
     test is how the proposal works for other, likely
     scenarios.
     
     Make sure the proposal considers these likely cases
     carefully. There are many others. Here are some typical
     scenarios that often discriminate among proposals for
     changes to email:
                         
     Personal            For two individuals wishing to
     post/Reply          exchange periodic email, how does
                         the proposed mechanism work for
                         initial contact?  How does it
                         work for ongoing contact?
                         
     Mailing List        Mailing lists are particularly
                         interesting because special
                         software performs a multi-cast
                         redistribution of a message.
                         Still, the From field of the
                         message is from the originator,
                         rather than the mailing list. How
                         does the mechanism perform in
                         this sort of mediated
                         distribution?  Does a recipient
                         "reply" still work properly?
                         
     Inter-Enterprise    Two or more organizations often
                         form special, cross-group teams
                         to collaborate on projects. What
                         is required to configure the
                         proposed mechanism to support
                         such teams?  What is required to
                         maintain the mechanism, as
                         membership in the team changes?
                         How are intra-team communications
                         affected?



SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
     
     This note discusses types of mechanisms for evaluating
     and filtering email.  As such, it covers topics with
     extremely sensitive security concerns.  However it does
     not propose any standards and therefore does not have
     any direct security effects.



PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS
     
     Many spam control techniques affect the privacy of mail
     senders, receivers, or both.  Bulk counting techniques
     can disclose the contents of mail, in systems that
     exchange message bodies, and can permit traffic
     analysis, in systems that use non-text message hashes
     or digests. Content filters can reveal message contents
     if filtered messages are examined by network personnel
     to check for false positives or negatives.  Aggressive
     filtering can cause bounces and double bounces that
     send messages into postmaster mailboxes, disclosing
     content.  If senders or recipients must appeal to have
     filtering criteria changed to avoid false positives,
     informal traffic analysis is possible based on the
     filtering terms in question.
     
     Sender tagging and other techniques intended to deter
     address forgery make it more difficult to send
     anonymous or pseudonymous mail.  E-postage schemes can
     identify senders unless the scheme allows users to buy
     and redeem stamps anonymously.
     
     Several popular spam control systems involve routing
     incoming mail through the mail systems of third parties
     that are responsible for filtering mail. This exposes
     their contents to those parties.
     
     These privacy risks can in principle be known to mail
     receivers, although operators of mail systems often
     fail to inform users of the anti-spam tools and third
     party services through which their mail passes. Mail
     senders often cannot know even in principle about these
     risks to their privacy.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     
     This note is motivate by discussions on the Anti-Spam
     Research Group (ASRG) mailing list and draws a number
     of points from discussion there. The sub-section
     "Burden" was taken from a posting by Dave Hendricks.



AUTHORSÆ ADDRESSES
     
     Dave Crocker
     Brandenburg InternetWorking
     675 Spruce Drive
     Sunnyvale, CA  94086  USA
     Tel: +1.408.246.8253
     dcrocker@brandenburg.com
     
     
     Vernon Schryver
     Rhyolite Software
     2482 Lee Hill Drive
     Boulder, Colorado 80302
     vjs@rhyolite.com
     
     
     John R. Levine
     Taughannock Networks
     PO Box 727
     Trumansburg NY 14886
     Tel: +1.607.330.5711
     johnl@iecctaugh.com



FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT
     
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights
     Reserved.
     
     This document and translations of it may be copied and
     furnished to others, and derivative works that comment
     on or otherwise explain it or assist in its
     implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
     distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction
     of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
     and this paragraph are included on all such copies and
     derivative works.  However, this document itself may
     not be modified in any way, such as by removing the
     copyright notice or references to the Internet Society
     or other Internet organizations, except as needed for
     the purpose of developing Internet standards in which
     case the procedures for copyrights defined in the
     Internet Standards process must be followed, or as
     required to translate it into languages other than
     English.
     
     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and
     will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its
     successors or assigns.
     
     This document and the information contained herein is
     provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY
     AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL
     WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
     LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
     HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
     WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
     PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



APPENDIX A:     EVALUATION CHECKLIST
                                                    
     Criteria                    Proposal A    Proposal  B
                                                    
     Adoption Effort                           
     
     Threshold to benefit
     
     Impact on Participants
     
     Impact on Others
     
     Ongoing Usage effort
     
     Balance of burdens
     
     Use by Full Internet
     
     Growth of Internet
     
     Efficiency
     
     Cost
     
     Reliability
     
     Internet Impact
     
     Spam Impact
     
     Circumvention
     
     Personal post/Reply
   
     Mailing List
    
     Inter-Enterprise
     
          
     
     
     
     
