

Network Working Group                                        James Polk
Internet-Draft                                            Cisco Systems
Expires: April 16th, 2007                                Oct 16th, 2006
                                                         


            IANA Registering a SIP Resource Priority Header 
              Namespace for Local Emergency Communications
           draft-polk-ecrit-local-emergency-rph-namespace-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16th, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document IANA registers the new Session Initiation Protocol 
   (SIP) Resource Priority header (RPH) namespace Fred&Barney for local
   emergency usage to a public safety answering point (PSAP), between 
   PSAPs, and between a PSAP and first responders and their 
   organizations.








Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies      Oct 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     1.1   Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   2.  Rules of Usage of the Resource Priority Header  . . . . . . .  
   3.  Namespace Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     3.1   Namespace Definition Rules and Guidelines . . . . . . . .  
     3.2   The "Fred&Barney" Namespace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     3.1   IANA Resource-Priority Namespace Registration . . . . . .  
     3.2   IANA Priority-Value Registrations . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     7.1   Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     7.2   Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
       Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . .  


1.  Introduction

   This document IANA registers the new Session Initiation Protocol 
   (SIP) Resource Priority header (RPH) [RFC4412] namespace Fred&Barney
   for local emergency usage to a public safety answering point (PSAP),
   between PSAPs, and between a PSAP and first responders and their 
   organizations.  

   As an additional indication for preferential treatment in servers 
   along the signaling path from a caller to a PSAP, which most 
   jurisdictions consider to be highly important calls, the Fred&Barney
   namespace is created by this document.  This type of emergency 
   calling, i.e. to the PSAP from a person in distress, is a relatively
   localized event with respect to where the first responders are in 
   relation to the caller. This means the caller and the ultimate PSAP 
   should be relatively near each other, even though the signaling 
   messages may traverse a VPN back through some corporate network half
   a world away, or may go to a centralized facility before being 
   directed out to a PSAP near the caller.  How SIP signaling finds the
   appropriate PSAP is out of scope for this document.

   The primary or near-term usage for this local emergency namespace 
   will be for callers to PSAPs.  However, there currently is no reason
   why the preferentially treated calling between PSAPs, say for a call
   transfer, or calls into the first responder network by PSAPs 
   shouldn't use the same RPH namespace.  [RFC4412] advises limiting 
   the number of namespaces used to as few as possible.

   That said, it is not up to the IETF, at this time, to specify or 
   even identify which priority-values within this Fred&Barney 
   namespace will be used for what purpose.  IETF discussion, in 


Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies      Oct 2006

   conjunction with other SDOs and jurisdictional feedback could yield 
   a better answer here in subsequent versions of this document.

   [RFC4412] requires a Standards Track RFC for IANA registering new 
   RPH namespaces.


1.1  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described 
   in [RFC2119].


2.  Rules of Usage of the Resource Priority Header

   The rules of usage of the SIP RPH are defined by [RFC4412].  This 
   document does not extent the usage or treatment options at this 
   time.  However, usage of this namespace does not have a normal call 
   level.  In other words, there is not a "namespace.0" like 
   namespace.priority-value that Joe Public is going to use in SIP 
   messages when communicating to another type of entity than a PSAP or
   equivalent.  Every use of this namespace will be in times of an 
   emergency.

   The Fred&Barney namespace has 5 priority-values, in a specified 
   relative priority order, and is a queue based treatment namespace.  
   Individual jurisdictions MAY configure their SIP entities for 
   preemption, but this is optional.


3.  Namespace Definition

   Obviously, the namespace string "Fred&Barney" is not going to last, 
   as a simple global replace of this string replaces it with a 
   consensus based string throughout this document.  The idea here is 
   to get this effort going to decide on an appropriate namespace 
   string.  IETF discussion is expected to finalize the choice of a 
   more appropriate namespace string.  

   One thing to keep in mind for now is the fact that this namespace 
   shouldn't be considered just "EMERGENCY" because there are a lot of 
   different kinds of emergencies, some on a military scale ([RFC4412] 
   defines 3 of these), some on a national scale ([RFC4412] defines 2 
   of these), some on an international scale.  These types of 
   emergencies can also have their own namespaces, and although there 
   are 5 defined for other uses, more are possible - so the 911/112/999
   style of public user emergency calling for police or fire or 
   ambulance (etc) does not have a monopoly on the word "emergency".

   Here are a series of quick initial choices of a namespace to start 


Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies      Oct 2006

   folks thinking (in which perhaps the acronym could become the 
   namespace):

   Option #1 - Local Emergency Services - acronym "LES" or "LEMS"

           Example:  Resource-Priority: LES.0

   Option #2 - Public Safety Answering Point - acronym "PSAP"

           Example:  Resource-Priority: PSAP.0

   Option #3 - Emergency Services Call - acronym "ESC"

           Example:  Resource-Priority: ESC.0

   Option #4 - Public Emergency Call - acronym "PUC"

           Example:  Resource-Priority: PUC.0

   Option 5# -  ECRIT

           Example:  Resource-Priority: ECRIT.0

   Option 6# - SOS 

           Example:  Resource-Priority: sos.0

   Option # -  - acronym ""

           Example:  Resource-Priority: .0

   We're sure there will be others suggested on the way to consensus of 
   this namespace.


3.1.  Namespace Definition Rules and Guidelines

   This specification defines one unique namespace below: Fred&Barney, 
   constituting its registration with IANA.  This IANA registration 
   contains the facets defined in Section 9 of [RFC4412].  (once an 
   appropriate namespace is chosen) For recognizability, we will label 
   the namespace in capital letters, but note that namespace names are 
   case insensitive and are customarily rendered as lowercase in 
   protocol requests.

3.2.  The "Fred&Barney" Namespace

   The Fred&Barney namespace comes from ...

   The Fred&Barney namespace has a finite list of relative 
   priority-values, listed below from lowest priority to highest 
   priority:


Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 4]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies      Oct 2006


      (lowest)  Fred&Barney.0
                Fred&Barney.1
                Fred&Barney.2
                Fred&Barney.3
      (highest) Fred&Barney.4

   The Fred&Barney namespace operates according to the priority queuing
   algorithm (Section 4.5.2 of [RFC4412]) from the public user to the 
   PSAP.

   NOTE: at this time, there has not been sufficient discussion about 
         whether or not preemption will be used for communications 
         between PSAPs or between PSAPs and First responders (and their
         organizations).


4.  IANA Considerations

4.1  IANA Resource-Priority Namespace Registration

   Within the "Resource-Priority Namespaces" of the sip-parameters 
   section of IANA (created by [RFC4412]), the following entries will 
   be added to this table:

                        Intended      New warn-   New resp.
   Namespace  Levels    Algorithm     code        code      Reference
   ---------  ------  --------------  ---------   --------- ---------
  Fred&Barney   5        queue           no          no     [This doc]


4.2  IANA Priority-Value Registrations

   Within the Resource-Priority Priority-values registry of the 
   sip-parameters section of IANA, the following (below) is to be added
   to the table:

   Namespace: Fred&Barney
   Reference: (this document)
   Priority-Values (least to greatest): "0", "1","2", "3", "4"


5.  Security Considerations

   The Security considerations that apply to RFC 4412 [RFC4412] apply 
   here.  This document introduces no new security issues relative to 
   RFC 4412.

6.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ken Carlberg, Janet Gunn and Fred Baker for help with this 
   doc.


Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 5]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies      Oct 2006


7.  References

7.1  Normative References

 [RFC4412] Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., "Communications Resource 
           Priority for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 
           4411, Feb 2006

 [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997

7.2  Informative References

   none

Author's Address

   James M. Polk
   3913 Treemont Circle
   Colleyville, Texas  76034
   USA

   Phone: +1-817-271-3552
   Email: jmpolk@cisco.com


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.   
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.




Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 6]
Internet-Draft    SIP RPH Namespace for Local Emergencies      Oct 2006

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
































Polk                       Expires April 2007                  [Page 7]
