                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   Internet Engineering Task Force                           S.Ayyasamy 
   Internet Draft                                                  UMKC 
   Expires: December 2002                                       F.Baker 
                                                          Cisco Systems 
    
    
      Recommended Internet Service Provider Procedures For Emergency 
                               Preparedness 
                <draft-ayyasamy-ieprep-isp-recommend-00.txt> 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   The purpose of this document is to express what the engineering 
   community expects of Service providers with respect to emergency 
   preparedness. The document can be considered as a set of 
   recommendations to support mission-critical traffic at various 
   locations like access and core.  
    
   The goal of the draft is to raise discussion among Internet service 
   providers (ISPs) on the importance of accommodating emergency 
   services across Internet. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The recommendations are stated as points ordered chronologically. For 
   example,∆∆R (X)∆∆ indicates recommendation number X. But, they don't 
   represent any order of preference. 
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 1] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
    
1. Introduction  
 
    
1.1 Background  
    
   The Internet can be useful before, during, and after disaster events. 
   For a long time, it has proved to be useful when other communication 
   failed, there by acting as a secondary form of communication .The 
   process of identifying and prioritizing mission-critical traffic is 
   the basic requirement. The other obvious requirements that internet 
   can serve includes information dissemination for media and public, 
   accessing operational data on-line, providing back up communication, 
   instant messaging and visualizing events via video. The other useful 
   area includes listing of victims, route maps and dynamically updated 
   information source. But, Internet has some drawbacks, such as 
   congestion, dependence on power, security risks and software/hardware 
   requirements. Though some shortcomings exist, history shows Internet 
   worked fine during disaster times when compared with telephone 
   circuits [3]. But, the success of emergency management lies in 
   integrating the information from satellite, surveillance, ad-hoc 
   management and location identification from global positioning system 
   (GPS) into the Internet. 
    
1.2 Objective  
 
   The solution techniques proposed for emergency requirements [4] is 
   very broad. It includes effective control of best-effort traffic, 
   enhancements to QoS models like intserv and diffserv, application 
   level signaling support with SIP/H.323, traffic engineering methods 
   using IP, MPLS and other multi-service networks etc.The document[5] 
   serves as the frame work for supporting emergency traffic in IP 
   telephony environment .The solution space can be enhanced or may even 
   change as newer applications and technologies arise. Hence, an 
   effective implementation lies in the hands of ISPs. They can just 
   over-provision or implement any of the standard solutions recommended 
   by IETF. 
    
   The service providers manage autonomous systems, which form the 
   global Internet. They operate the backbone network, which provide 
   communication between the customers and the rest of the Internet. In 
   today's commercial Internet, the backbone networks are engineered in 
   a way that there is virtually no packet loss, even during the worst 
   possible network congestion .The access and peering points are 
   carefully rate limited and tuned to adhere to service level 
   agreements and peering arrangements. Hence, recommendations vary 
   largely between the access and peering points in comparison to the 
   backbone, which necessitate a separate study. 
    
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 2] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   The need for awareness among ISPs for possible use of Internet as a 
   mission critical information transfer medium is the objective behind 
   the draft. 
    
1.3 Scope  
    
   The draft focuses on recommendations for emergency management within 
   Internet and doesn∆t deal with mode of action at junction points 
   between Internet and PSTN network. Also, the draft addresses service 
   providers only. 
    
1.4 Terminology 
    
   1.Authorized Users 
    
   They include people authorized by appropriate authority (Ex: NCS [6] 
   in US) to establish emergency communication sessions through public 
   networking facilities for facilitating immediate disaster recovery 
   operation [4].  
    
   2.Disaster  
    
   It includes incidents (Ex: terrorist attacks, forest fire, state 
   emergencies etc), which leads to event driven congestion across 
   Internet and other telecommunication networks. 
    
   3.Mission-critical traffic 
    
   The information transfer between authorized users is classified as 
   mission-critical traffic. It excludes other priority traffic, which 
   doesn∆t support emergency management. Other alternative terms include 
   IEPREP traffic or high-priority traffic. 
    
   4.Emergency service  
    
   It includes any type of service, which helps the process of critical 
   information dissemination. For example, service can be at an 
   application-level like instant massaging (IM) or at a physical layer 
   level like optical restoration techniques. 
    
   5. Emergency management 
    
   It includes operation and management (OAM) functionalities necessary 
   for providing priority across Internet. Traffic engineering, 
   signaling and reservation are part of operation functionalities while 
   traffic monitoring and measurement comes under management functions. 
    
   6. Service providers 
    
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 3] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   It includes organizations in the business of providing Internet 
   connectivity or other Internet services including but not restricted 
   to web hosting services, content providers and e-mail services. 
       
2. Intra-domain issues 
 
2.1 Over-Provisioning 
    
   This is the default capacity management technique exercised by 
   service providers on backbone networks .In the face of extreme 
   congestion, QoS methods like Intserv, diffserv and MPLS etc work when 
   the overall capacity requirement of emergency traffic is less than 
   the available bandwidth. Network performance degrades rapidly as the 
   high-priority traffic exceeds the limit. Some of the issues in over-
   provisioning include: 
    
   R (1): An improved switching and capacity augmentation guarantee high 
   probability of call completion across Internet. Adding backbone 
   capacity appears to be an obvious step although bandwidth alone 
   cannot solve the problem. The other possible areas of improvement 
   include deploying dense wave division multiplexing (DWDM) equipment 
   to increase the transmission capacity. Routers still remain a 
   bottleneck to the bandwidth supply. Hence, switching and routing 
   capacity can also be increased. 
    
   R (2):It is also important to conserve bandwidth wisely. Some of the 
   techniques for bandwidth management includes [7], traffic shifting, 
   dynamic delay pools, dynamic bandwidth allocation and content supply 
   tools. 
    
   R (3): Unpredictable event driven congestion during periods of 
   disaster leads to excess web traffic. Hence, redundancy and increase 
   in content supply can avoid the loading of web servers. This helps in 
   reducing access congestion thereby increasing the availability 
   requirement.  
    
   R (4):If the service providers have agreements for providing 
   guarantee to high-priority traffic, it is advisable to over-provision 
   rather than over-subscribe links. 
     
   R (5): Sometimes, capacity augmentation increases the congestion due 
   to uneven traffic distribution. Hence, network planners are 
   recommended to use a combination of QoS and bandwidth augmentation 
   approach for an effective emergency management. 
       
2.2 QoS and Diffserv 
    
   Over provisioning cannot prevent or avoid hot spots caused by uneven 
   traffic distribution. The various Quality of service models (Intserv, 
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 4] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   Diffserv, MPLS etc) are the only means by which a predictable service 
   can be guaranteed. The framework document [5] is the standard 
   document to be consulted for giving priority to VoIP applications in 
   a QoS environment. The following points has to be taken into account 
   while using QoS as a mode of availability: 
    
   R (6): To avoid inter-operability problems, it is highly recommended 
   to re-use the existing technology rather than implement new methods. 
   But, it is also equally emphasized that one can use any kind of 
   method within their domain as long it doesn∆t have impact on the 
   Internet. 
    
   R  (7): Complex implementations/ modifications should be avoided .Our 
   goal highly depends on short time scale and hence, complex 
   implementations make the work difficult (Ex: specifying multiple 
   parameters for per-flow queuing schemes). 
    
       
2.2.1 diffserv 
 
   R (8): A combination of Differentiated Services Architecture [8] and 
   the Framework for Integrated Services Operation over Differentiated 
   Services Networks [9] avoids inter-class effects. The exact 
   configuration is documented in [10]. Our requirements are best 
   achieved when diffserv is used in combination with traffic 
   engineering and active queue management [11] techniques. 
    
   R (9): The various active queue management schemes can be used for 
   managing capacity and can act as best effort control in addition to 
   the functions mentioned in [11]. The queuing and discard behavior of 
   the AF PHB group as stated in section 4 of [12] provides many 
   suggestions on possible use of RED [13] within diffserv domain. RED 
   can be used to implement queues with packets of different drop 
   priorities. During times of congestion, low priority traffic can be 
   preferentially dropped while packets within emergency traffic being 
   dropped last.    
    
   R (10): New PHB traffic classes and code points can be used within 
   private network. But, one has to conform [14] when used across 
   Internet. 
    
   R (11): The per-domain behavior (PDB) [15] defines PDB as "The 
   expected treatment that an identifiable or target group of packets 
   will receive from "edge-to-edge" of a DS domain. A particular PHB 
   (or, if applicable, list of PHBs) and traffic conditioning 
   requirements are associated with each PDB."  
    


 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 5] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   The virtual wire PDB offers strict traffic conditioning and 
   attributes. Virtual wire gives a highly guaranteed support for 
   emergency services. 
    
    
   Author's note: The draft on virtual wire PDB has expired. Recent 
   discussion in Diffserv mailing list suggests further work on this 
   side. 
 
2.2.2 MPLS  
 
   Some of the recommendations include: 
    
   R (12): Explicit routes can be specified for Label switched paths 
   (LSPs) which can be configured manually or dynamically using 
   Constrained-based routing. The fast reroute [16] serves as a back up 
   when the primary route fails by pre-configuring the desired link.  
   Explicit routing and fast-reroute are the two important techniques 
   recommended for emergency services. 
    
   R (13): The providers who has ATM core and want to support IEPREP, 
   can use MPLS as a circuit-emulation technology and can easily inter-
   operate with IP networks. 
 
2.3 Traffic Engineering (TE) 
 
   Traffic engineering is the method by which traffic is routed 
   selectively and control are applied at various levels to bring the 
   congested network to normal conditions. The term is highly misused 
   and depends on the context of the problem to be approached. 
    
2.3.1 TE in IP network 
    
   R (14):Interior-gateway protocols (IGP) use link weights in finding 
   which route a packet should take .The additive weights are assigned 
   manually to influence the route used. Hence, IGP metrics can be 
   tailored such that emergency traffic is routed on an alternate path 
   thereby avoiding congested links. Some of the limitations include: 
   First, there is no effective relation between metric attributes and 
   the routes. Second, additive metrics like link state attributes does 
   not provide the ability to manipulate non-additive based constraints. 
    
   TE in IP networks is normally done at large time scales. But, 
   disaster events require service within short time scales. Hence, a 
   hybrid approach with MPLS has to be used to converge at short time 
   scales. [17] Provides pointers on doing traffic engineering in IP 
   networks. 
    

 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 6] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   R (15): The congestion arising due to uneven distribution of traffic 
   during periods of disaster can be averted by following Equal cost 
   multi-path (ECMP) technique. This technique will allow distribution 
   of traffic evenly among the available paths. 
    
2.3.2 TE with MPLS 
    
   R (16): A combination of the stated techniques in section 2.2.2 with 
   constrained based routing algorithms is helpful in dynamic emergency 
   management. The overview and principle of traffic engineering RFC 
   [18] explains in more detail on various TE techniques. 
 
2.4 Other recommendations 
    
   R (17) During extreme overload conditions, OSPF LSA ACK and Hello 
   packets can be prioritized by some DSCP marking [19]. 
    
   R (18) Dynamic routing schemes can be used along with constrained  
   Based algorithms for pre-emption and re-routing of desired traffic  
   [20]. 
 
 
3. Inter-domain issues 
    
   The inter-domain has long been neglected because of policy issues. 
   Redundancy, symmetry and load balancing are some of the Inter-domain 
   protocol properties relevant to our objectives. Though prevalent in 
   use, BGP is considered as the weakest link in the Internet. Stability 
   and configuration problems affect High-priority traffic than other 
   background traffic. Hence, BGP have to be made more robust and 
   resilient. 
    
   Some of the factors to be considered include: 
    
   R (19): For a long time, the service providers involve in manual 
   configurations to tweak the BGP routing policies. Humans are prone to 
   mistakes which are reflected in the BGP peering. One of the reasons 
   for the longer convergence time includes massive prefix loss from the 
   routing tables during peak congestion [21]. It underscores the 
   importance of a robust Inter-domain protocol. The service providers 
   are recommended to avoid manual mis-configuration, which leads to 
   excess loss on periods of disaster. 
 
   R (20): The service providers should make public their filtering 
   policies and contact information. 
    
   R (22): The evolutionary architecture advocated by IRTF routing group 
   [22] must support diffserv domains to recognize service level 
   specifications.  
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 7] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
    
   The routing system MUST provide means for detecting infrastructural 
   failures of both node equipment and communication links at short time 
   intervals. The future routing architecture should take these factors 
   into account for a resilient Internet. 
    
    
   R (23): The class of inter-domain protocols is governed by policies 
   of the respective peering domains. Hence, co-ordination between 
   service providers is essential. The service provider conference like 
   nanog [24] are the places where discussions between service providers 
   can be initiated for emergency management by way of BOF sessions. 
 
4. Access network: 
    
   The access providers give connectivity to customers at various levels 
   depending on the infrastructure cost. The customers increase their 
   fault tolerance and capacity by means of multi-homing. Also, access 
   can be more congested than the backbone because there is less 
   statistical multiplexing. For instance, a flash crowd can easily 
   overwhelm a web site while having little effect on backbone traffic. 
    
   Recommendations in section 2 apply to access networks too. 
    
   Some recommended practices include: 
    
   R (25): The flash crowd problem results in many SYNs and SYN ACKs, 
   congesting the access links. This causes some dropping of SYNs, but 
   also results in loss of data. SYNs and SYN ACKs, in opposing 
   directions, represent new sessions. Under this circumstance, the SYNs 
   and SYN ACKs can be put at a lower priority, meaning that they will 
   either get dropped or will simply wait. One has to identify the 
   traffic of emergency service to give higher priority. When early 
   congestion notification is applied to subsequent packets in the TCP 
   exchange, they can help in characterizing emergency traffic, while 
   dropping SYNs and SYN ACKs [35]. 
    
   Author's note: Multi-homing with BGP, speed mis-match issues and ??   
   can also discussed.  
 
5. Peering and service level agreements 
 
   R (26): The robustness of the Internet lies in the redundancy among 
   service providers in providing service to a particular geographical 
   area. A certain degree of volunteering is necessary other than the 
   business motives behind the peering agreements. The tier one-service 
   providers can give transit at subsidized rates for other service 
   providers who want to route the emergency traffic. The respective 
   government agencies can also decrease the regulations and provide 
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 8] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   incentives for the service providers who support emergency 
   management. The Peering BOF sessions [24] should also discuss ways 
   for effective co-operation between the service providers on times of 
   disaster. The ISP should also consider providing their contact 
   information transparently and correctly for urgent contacts. 
    
   R (27): Service level specification (SLS) trades various technical 
   requirements to be met by the provider to the customer or another 
   provider. The technical specification required for satisfying 
   availability requirement is more important than guaranteed service. 
   Automatic and dynamic negotiation of service level specification can 
   be exercised. Reliability parameters like maximum down time and 
   recovery time are most important factors to be negotiated than other 
   performance metrics .A tight bound SLS can also be guaranteed for 
   emergency services on use of virtual leased lines. 
    
    
   R (28): For a long-time, flat rate based pricing was the commonly 
   used practice to charge customers. Though, it satisfies the social 
   fairness criteria of pricing, it is not suitable for economic 
   efficiency of service providers in general and for emergency 
   management operations in particular. Any pricing scheme used by  
   Service providers should assume that resources will be scarce or the 
   network is running at high level of utilization. Since, prices 
   indicate one's usage, pricing based on priority adds economic value 
   to the providers and also serve as a useful method for charging high-
   priority users. Though, social fairness cannot be accommodated, at 
   least proportional fairness have to be exercised. The Service level 
   specifications should also address this recommendation. 
    
   R (29): The presence of priority fields in the protocol formats 
   tempts one to insert local priority policy into the protocol fields. 
   The end -to-end principle requires separating label from policy .So, 
   policy of a particular domain should be stored either in SIP proxies 
   or bandwidth brokers in a diffserv domain, thereby allowing dynamic 
   policy allocation and transfer. 
    
   Another debatable issue is preemption. This term is more related to 
   circuit based networks and has little relevance when considering 
   connection-less networks, like Internet. Even with circuit-emulation 
   technologies like MPLS, a particular LSP can pre-empt another LSP and 
   as such it doesn∆t depend on any policy issue.  
    
6. Infrastructure management  
 
   The problem of link outages and destruction of transmission system 
   can thwart all priority mechanisms implemented across one's network. 
   Hence, this is an important factor to be considered by service 
   providers. 
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002               [Page 9] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
    
   R (30)[25]: During outages, Interoperability and reliability are the 
   main issues to be considered for re-routing the traffic across other 
   network. Also, vendors should work cooperatively with service 
   providers to get essential communications up and running. Power 
   consumption and conservation should also be addressed. 
 
7. Traffic monitoring 
 
   R (31): A recommended method for giving priority to mission-critical 
   traffic edge to edge is stated below: 
    
   Traffic tools should be employed to do the following four steps: 
      1.Traffic differentiation 
      2.Examine traffic 
      3.Control mechanisms. 
      4. Verification. 
    
   Traffic differentiation can be done either at packet-level or flow -
   level. The recommended classification markers include SIP resource 
   priority header [26] at application level and Diffserv markers [10] 
   at network level. Classification based on fancy applications (like 
   MPLS) has become a norm in present day routers obviating predicate 
   classification based on <offset, length, mask, and value>.  
    
   The second part concentrates on performance and utilization analysis 
   of various flows (responsive flow, high bandwidth flow, irresponsive 
   flow, high priority flow). It throws light on various efficiency 
   factors, which has to be considered for bandwidth allocation. The 
   result of this phase can be obtained from sniffers like tcp dump [27] 
   or by passive packet measurement techniques [28], [29]. 
    
    
   Reports provide insight into historical performance, emergency 
   service compliance, and metric analysis and billing .If the reports 
   are not to our expectations, control policies of the ISP should be 
   modified or SLAs have to be reviewed. These mechanisms are 
   standardized at packet level as in [28] and flow level as in [30]. 
 
 
8. Specific recommendations 
 
8.1 Web hosting services 
    
    R (33): Disaster events lead to access congestion at news and 
    government web sites. An obvious approach to reduce access 
    congestion is to increase the content supply. Mirroring works by 
    duplicating entire websites at several locations by placing them 
    closer to the user. But, Each site has different uniform resource 
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002              [Page 10] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
    header (URL) and the user must choose one of the mirror sites with 
    no idea which site might provide the best performance. Content 
    distribution network (CDN) can be employed by web hosting services 
    for load balancing the web traffic during such hard times. 
     
    CDN is a network optimized to deliver specific content, such as 
    static web pages, transaction-based web sites, and streaming media. 
    It works more like a web cache system but in addition place copies 
    of their data to the user as near as possible by any casting method 
    [31]. 
     
    R (34) content limitation& reduction: A gradual reduction can be 
    done starting from removing advertisements & graphics, Links and 
    other information to just text format. The rate of reduction can 
    depend on the congestion at the server. 
     
 
8.2 Application service providers 
    
    R (35): The Potential applications which supports emergency service 
    include information retrieval from distributed database, Instant 
    messaging and presence, application layer signaling (SIP / H.323), 
    VoIP based services, electronic mail, file transfer and world wide 
    web. 
     
    R (36): Most of the emergency calls originate from PSTN networks and 
    have their destination in Internet. This requires an access platform 
    for transferring emergency calls. ASPs can use soft switches for 
    providing critical connectivity to the PSTN in a highly scalable and 
    reliable fashion. 
     
    R (37): The I Am Alive (IAA) system works as a database for handling 
    victim's information. But, those web sites often become vulnerable 
    to security hazards. Hence, the application service providers should 
    come up with more reliable distributed algorithms. 
     
    
9. Other recommendations  
 
    R (38): Regardless of transport, applications should comply with the 
    IETF Congestion Control Principles [33]. 
     
    R (39): Today's Internet is predominantly point to point or unicast. 
    Multicast offers ISPs the promise of significant bandwidth savings 
    and information transfer. Multicast can be used to reduce demand on 
    the server. Multicast is one of the few services used on September 
    11 for communication. But, multicasting is difficult to deploy and 
    is not in much use. If the Service providers offer multicast based 

 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002              [Page 11] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
    solutions, they are recommended to create a ubiquitous and reliable 
    Internet. 
                                                                         
 
10. Security Considerations 
 
    The draft [34] details on the security mechanisms required for 
    emergency preparedness. 
    
11. Acknowledgements 
 
    Many thanks to Jennifer Rexford Of AT&T research for private 
    discussions on traffic engineering and other inter-domain issues. 
    Additional thanks to Arvind and Kapil for reviewing the draft. 
 
 
12. Reference 
    
   1  Bradner, S., "The internet standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026,October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate requirement 
      levels ", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   3  Brewin, B., "Nation's Networks See Large Volume Spikes After 
      attacks," Computer world, September 17, 2001.  
    
   4  Folts, H., Beard, C, "Requirements for Emergency telecommunication 
      capabilities in the internet," Internet draft, Work in Progress, 
      June 2002.  
    
   5  Carlberg, K. and I. Brown, "Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP 
      Telephony," Internet draft, work in progress, May 2002. 
    
   6  http://www.ncs.gov/   
    
   7  Dias, G.V., "Managing Internet Bandwidth: The LEARN Experience∆∆, 
      NET 2001,June 2001.  
    
   8  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z., and  
      Weiss, w., "An Architecture for Differentiated Services", RFC 
      2475,December 1998. 
    
   9  Bernet, Y., Ford, P., Yavatkar, R., Baker, F., Zhang, L., Speer, 
      M., Braden, R., Davie, B., Wroclawski, J. and E.Felstaine, "A 
      Framework for Integrated Services Operation over Diffserv 
      Networks", RFC 2998, November 2000. 10 Baker, F.,"Edge Interface 
      PHB recommendations," Internet draft, work in progress, June 2002.  
    
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002              [Page 12] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   11 Braden, B., Clark, D., Crowcroft, J., Davie, B., Deering, S., 
      Estrin, D., Floyd, S., Jacobson, V., Minshall, G., Partridge, C., 
      Peterson, L., Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker, S., Wroclawski, J., 
      Zhang, L.,ÊÊRecommendations on queue management and congestion 
      avoidance in the internet,∆∆ RFC - 2309, April 1998. 
    
   12 Heinanen, J., Baker, F., Weiss, W. and Wroclawski, J., "Assured 
      forwarding PHB," RFC 2597, June 1999. 
    
   13 Floyd, S., and Jacobson, V., ÊÊRandom Early Detection gateways for 
      Congestion Avoidance∆∆. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Volume 
      1, Number 4, August 1993, pp. 397-413. 
    
   14 Brim, S., Carpenter, B. and F. Le Faucheur, Black, D, "Per Hop 
      Behavior Identification Codes", RFC 3140, June 2001. 
    
   15 Nichols, K., Carpenter, B., ÊÊDefinition of Differentiated Services 
      Per-domain Behaviors and Rules for their Specification∆∆, RFC-3086, 
      April 2001. 
    
   16 Ping, P., Der-Haw, G., George, S., Jean, P.V., Dave, C., Alia, A., 
      Markus, J.,"Fast Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", 
      Internet Draft, work in progress, July 2002. 
    
   17 Feldmann, A., Greenberg, A., Lund, C., Reingold, N., Rexford, J., 
      "NetScope: Traffic engineering for IP networks," IEEE Network 
      Magazine, Mar./Apr. 2000,pp.11-19. 
    
   18 Awduche, D., Chiu, A., Elwalid, I., Widjaja, X., Xiao,X.,"Overview 
      and Principles of Internet Traffic Engineering", RFC 3272,May 2002 
    
   19 Ash, J., Choudhury, G.L., Sapozhnikova, V.D., Sherif, M., Manral, 
      V., Maunder, A.," Congestion Avoidance & Control for OSPF 
      Networks", Internet Draft, Work in progress, April 2002. 
    
   20 Ash, G.R., "Dynamic Routing in Telecommunications Network", 
      MacGraw Hill, 1998. 
    
   21 Mahajan, R., wetherall, D., Anderson, T.,ÊÊthe impact of BGP 
      misconfiguration on connectivity,∆∆ in proc. nanog23, October 2001. 
    
   22 http://www.irtf.org. 
    
   23 Feamster, N., Borkenhagen, J., Rexford, J.,"Controlling the impact 
      of BGP policy changes on IP traffic," AT&T Research Technical 
      Report 011106-02, November 2001. 
    
   24 http://nanog.org. 
    
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002              [Page 13] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
   25 Yankee group, " September 11, 2001: Infrastructure Impacts, 
      Implications, and Recommendations ", Special Report, September 
      2001. 
    
   26 Polk, J., Schulzrinne, H, "SIP Communications Resource Priority 
      Header", Internet Draft, Work In Progress, December 2001. 
    
   27 http://www.tcpdump.org 
    
   28 Duffield, N., Greenberg, A., Grossglauser, M., Rexford, J.,"A 
      Framework for Passive Packet Measurement", work in progress, 
      February 2002. 
   29 http://www.Sflow.org. 
    
   30 http://ipfix.doit.wisc.edu/. 
    
   31 Partridge, C., Mendez, T., Milliken, W.,"Host Any casting 
      Service", RFC 1546,November 1993. 
    
   32 Berners-Lee, T., Gettys, J., Nielsen, H.F., "Replication and 
      Caching Position Statement," World-Wide Web consortium, November 
      2000. 
    
   33 Floyd, S., "Congestion Control Principles", BCP 41, RFC2914, 
      September 2000. 
    
    
   34 Brown, I., "A Security Framework for Prioritised Emergency 
      Communication", Internet draft, March 2002. 
    
   35 http://iepscheme.net/archive/ 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002              [Page 14] 
                               Document                      June 2002 
 
 
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
                     
    
    
      Ayyasamy SenthilKumar                 Fred Baker 
      University Of Missouri                Cisco Systems 
      Kansas City                           1121 Via Del Rey 
      MO  64110                             Santa Barbara, CA  93117 
      USA                                   USA 
                                          
                                            Phone: +1-408-526-4257 
      Email:  saq66@umkc.edu                Fax:   +1-413-473-2403 
                                            Email: fred.baker@cisco.com 
       
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    






















 
 
Ayyasamy               Expires - December 2002              [Page 15] 
