MANET and OSPF Working Groups
Internet-Draft                                                R. Ogier
Expires: January 19, 2005                                July 19, 2004



   Alternative Designs for OSPF Extensions for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
                draft-ogier-manet-ospf-extension-01.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.


   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
   Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


Abstract


   This draft discusses alternative candidate techniques for the design
   of an an extension of OSPF to support mobile ad-hoc network (manet)
   interfaces. Several design decisions need to be made before such an
   extension can be specified, including (1) defining the set of relay
   nodes used for flooding LSAs, (2) defining the set of LSAs that each
   node is responsible for relaying/reporting, and (3) defining the
   mechanism used to efficiently deliver (flood) each LSA to all nodes.





















Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



1. Introduction


   The document [Baker03] provides a good statement of the goals and
   issues that need to be addressed to extend OSPF [RFC2328] to work
   well in a network that contains both traditional interfaces (e.g.,
   Ethernet and point-to- point) and mobile ad-hoc network (manet)
   interfaces.  This draft discusses alternative protocol designs and
   techniques for such an extension, which appear promising for
   satisfying the goals stated in [Baker03].


   Several decisions need to be made regarding the design of a proactive
   protocol, before we can write a detailed specification.  Some of
   these decisions may require further discussions, analysis, and/or
   simulations before the final choice is made.  In particular, we need
   to:


   -  Define the set of relay nodes, or relay node set (RNS), used for
      flooding each LSA. The RNS may or may not depend on the originator
      of the LSA. Examples include multipoint relays (MPRs), which can
      be selected in different ways; a connected dominating set (CDS);
      and the non-leaf nodes of a min-hop spanning tree rooted at the
      originator.


   -  Define the set of LSAs (or originators) that each relay node is
      responsible for relaying/reporting. To ensure reliable delivery to
      all nodes, it is important for a node to know exactly what LSAs it
      is responsible for reporting to existing and new neighbors.  (This
      is not the case when the decision to forward an LSA is based only
      on the previous hop and not the originator.)


   -  Define the mechanism used to efficiently deliver each LSA to all
      nodes. Should unreliable or reliable flooding be used?  If
      reliable flooding is used, what mechanism should be used?  (The
      OSPF mechanism based on ACKs and database exchange with each new
      neighbor generates too much control traffic.)


2. Defining the Relay Node Set


   The relay node set (RNS) may or may not depend on the originator of
   the LSA being relayed.  An example of an origin-independent RNS is a
   connected dominating set (CDS), i.e., a connected subset of nodes
   such that every node in the network is a neighbor of at least one
   node in the subset.  Two examples of an origin-dependent RNS are MPRs
   and the non-leaf nodes of a min-hop tree rooted at the originator.
   These three choices, and variations of them, are discussed in the
   following subsections.






Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



2.1 Connected Dominating Set


   A dominating set is a subset of nodes, called dominators, such that
   each node is a neighbor of at least one dominator. In a connected
   dominating set (CDS), these nodes form a connected graph, which
   allows them to be used for efficient flooding, especially if the
   number of nodes in the CDS is small. To flood an LSA, it is only
   necessary for each node of a CDS to broadcast the LSA to its
   neighbors. The nodes of a CDS have also been called "overlapping
   relays".


   Several algorithms have been proposed for constructing a small CDS,
   e.g., [Das97][Kozat01][Wu01][Lin03b][Adjih02].  A simple algorithm
   for constructing a relatively small CDS can be based on 2-hop
   neighbor information, e.g. [Wu01][Lin03b].  2-hop neighbor
   information can be obtained from the LSAs originated from all
   neighbors, as is done in [Chandra04] and TBRPF [RFC3684].  It is also
   possible to obtain 2-hop neighbor information by modifying Hello
   packets to distinguish between 1-way and 2-way neighbors, as proposed
   in [Ahrenholz04].


   Reference [Adjih02] presents and evaluates CDS algorithms that
   require the computation of MPRs; these algorithms are actually based
   on 3-hop neighbor information, since a node uses 2-hop neighbor
   information to select MPRs, and each node decides whether it is in
   the CDS based on the MPR selection of its neighbors.


   One advantage of using a CDS for flooding LSAs is that it is a simple
   solution, and each node is responsible for relaying all LSAs
   originating from routers in the same area (since a CDS is an origin-
   independent RNS). A CDS node is a natural generalization of a
   Designated Router (DR): for example, adjacencies can be formed
   between each CDS node and its neighbors.


   Using a CDS also allows OSPF Hello packets to be used without
   modification. The DR field can be used to identify a CDS node, which
   can be the sending node itself.  The Router Priority (used for
   electing a DR in OSPF), can be used to indicate the priority for
   selecting the router to be in the CDS.


   A possible disadvantage of using a CDS as the RNS, compared to either
   MPRs or a min-hop tree rooted at each origin, is that a min-hop path
   between two given nodes may not exist that uses only nodes of the CDS
   as intermediate nodes. I.e., the shortest route between two nodes may
   have to use non-RNS nodes as relays.  However, this is not
   necessarily a disadvantage in OSPF, since each node knows the full
   topology and thus can compute the shortest path to all other nodes in
   the same area. I.e., there is no disadvantage if the CDS is used only




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   for flooding and not for selecting routes.


2.2  Originator-Based Min-Hop Trees


   The RNS for a given LSA can consist of the non-leaf nodes of a min-
   hop tree rooted at the LSA originator.  We discuss two ways that a
   node can learn that it is such a non-leaf node, and then discuss an
   approximate method that is equivalent to selecting MPRs.


   In one such method, each node computes its next-hop, or parent, on a
   min-hop path to each originator u, and informs its parent of this
   decision. All nodes compute the min-hop paths consistently by using
   minimum node ID to break ties. A parent determines that it is a non-
   leaf node if it has no children. This method was used in the
   original, full-topology version of TBRPF [Bellur99].  The main
   drawback of this method is that the reporting of parents generates a
   large amount of control traffic.


   It is possible to avoid the overhead of reporting parents, by having
   each node i compute the min-hop paths from each neighbor j to each
   originator u. If the path from neighbor j to originator u goes
   through node i, then node j is a child, and node i is a non-leaf of
   the tree rooted at node u.  The main drawback of this method is that
   it requires additional processing, but this may be acceptable with
   today's faster processors.


   This processing can be reduced, at the expense of some redundancy, by
   having each node compute only the min-hop paths from each neighbor to
   each other neighbor, as is done in TBRPF [RFC3684] and other
   protocols [Wu01][Lin03a]. Some of these protocols [Lin03a] use node
   degree, instead of or in addition to node ID, to break ties, which
   can reduce the number of relays. A node i then determines that it is
   a non-leaf (i.e., in the RNS) for originator u, if the computed path
   from some neighbor k to the next-hop p(u) on the min-hop path to u
   goes through node i.


   The above method actually involves a method for computing MPRs.  If
   node i determines that the min-hop path from some neighbor k to
   another neighbor j goes through node i, then it can be said that node
   i is an MPR of neighbor j, or equivalently, that neighbor j is an MPR
   source of node i.  In this method, MPRs select themselves, unlike
   other methods [Ahrenholz04] in which each node selects a subset of
   its neighbors as MPRs.


2.3  Multipoint Relays


   A set of multipoint relays (MPRs) for node i is defined to be a
   subset of the 1-hop neighbors of node i that covers all 2-hop




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   neighbors of node i, i.e., each 2-hop neighbor is a neighbor of at
   least one of the MPRs.


   As discussed above, there are different ways to compute MPRs.  For
   example, a node can select itself as an MPR, or can select a subset
   of its neighbors as MPRs.  If node i is an MPR of node j, we say that
   node j is an MPR source (or selector) of node i.


   There are also different ways in which MPRs can be used to flood
   LSAs. For example, a node can decide to forward only LSAs that are
   received from an MPR source (as in [Ahrenholz04]). Alternatively, a
   node can decide to forward an LSA only if the next hop p(u) on the
   min-hop path to the originator u is an MPR source. The latter method
   has the advantage that the set of LSAs (or originators) that an MPR
   is responsible for forwarding is well-defined, which, as discussed in
   Section 3, is important for achieving reliable flooding.  The latter
   method may also result in a smaller relay node set (RNS), thus
   reducing the number of transmissions required for flooding, although
   simulations are needed to verify this.


   Simulations are also needed to determine whether MPRs should select
   themselves or be selected by neighbors. These simulations should not
   only consider the size of the resulting RNS, but should also consider
   the overhead required for reporting the selected MPRs, and the time
   required to select a new MPR following a link breakage.  If MPRs
   select themselves, then it is not necessary to report MPRs in Hello
   messages, thus reducing overhead. Also, faster recovery from link
   breakages is possible if MPRs select themselves. Finally, reference
   [Lin03] describes a modification of OLSR in which MPRs select
   themselves, and shows by simulations that this method results in a
   smaller RNS.


   In fact, MPRs can be considered analogous to the Designated Router
   (DR) of OSPF.  In OSPF, DRs select themselves. (The node with the
   lexicographically largest value of (router priority, router ID)
   selects itself as DR, unless another node has already selected itself
   as DR.)  Thus, if MPRs are used in an extension of OSPF, it would be
   natural for MPRs to also select themselves.


   The reason why OSPF includes the selected DR in Hello messages is so
   that another node does not select itself as DR if a DR already
   exists, thus reducing the frequency of DR changes.  Something similar
   can be done to reduce the frequency of MPR changes, assuming that
   MPRs select themselves.  Since an node is an MPR with respect to some
   neighbor (the MPR source), each node can advertise its MPR sources,
   and this information can be used by each neighbor to avoid selecting
   itself as an MPR for a given MPR source if it the existing MPRs that
   it knows about are sufficient. (For example, this could be a




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   modification of the algorithm described in [Lin03] in which MPRs
   select themselves.)


   However, it may not be important to reduce the frequency of MPR
   changes, if the protocol is designed so that MPR changes do not
   generate much additional control traffic. This is the case if the
   protocol uses either unreliable, periodic flooding of LSAs, or the
   reliable flooding mechanism proposed in Section 6.  Therefore, if
   MPRs select themselves (or if a CDS is used for flooding), then it
   may not be necessary for Hello message to advertise MPRs or MPR
   sources.


3. Defining the Set of LSAs That Each Node Relays


   The reliable flooding mechanism proposed in the next section requires
   each node to know the set of LSAs (or originators) that it is
   responsible for relaying/reporting to existing and new neighbors.
   This will be called the reported originator set (ROS).  This
   knowledge is required for reliable flooding.  For example, if two
   nodes become neighbors, it is important to know what topology
   information each node must report to the other node.


   If a CDS is used for the RNS, then each CDS node is responsible for
   reporting all LSAs originating from the same area.  However, if MPRs
   are used, then each MPR node is only responsible for reporting LSAs
   originating from a subset of the nodes in the area.


   In the OSPF extension proposed in [Ahrenholz04], each node does not
   explicitly know exactly what LSAs it is responsible for relaying,
   i.e., each node does not know its ROS.  Instead, an LSA is forwarded
   only if it was received from an MPR selector, regardless of the LSA
   originator.  Exact knowledge of the ROS is not required, since their
   extension uses unreliable, periodic flooding.  (We note that a node
   can keep track of the originators for LSAs that were recently
   forwarded, but this may be inaccurate and outdated since flooding is
   unreliable and recent topology changes may not be reflected.)


   If MPRs are used for flooding, a node can compute its ROS as follows.
   A node u belong to ROS if and only if the next hop on the
   lexicographic min-hop path (from the local node) to node u is an MPR
   source. By "lexicographic" we mean that node ID is used to break ties
   when multiple min-hop paths exist. Lexicographic min-hop paths are
   required so that all nodes compute the paths consistently. Note that
   these paths are used for the purpose of computing the ROS, and it is
   not necessary to use them for routing packets.


   If originator-based min-hop trees are used for flooding, then a node
   u belongs to the ROS if and only if the local node is a non-leaf node




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   of the min-hop tree rooted at node u.


4. Reliable vs. Unreliable Flooding


   One decision to make is whether to use unreliable, periodic flooding
   of LSAs, as proposed in [Ahrenholz04]. As discussed in [Baker03], it
   is a waste of resource to repeatedly flood an LSA to nodes that have
   already received it.  On the other hand, it has not yet been proven
   that reliable flooding can result in better performance in highly
   dynamic, dense networks.


   If unreliable, periodic flooding is used, then the period must be
   relatively small, so that an LSA not received on the first try will
   have a high probability of being received within a reasonable delay.
   However, a small period will result in a large amount of control
   traffic.


   One argument for using unreliable, periodic flooding in manets is as
   follows.  If a node has 100 neighbors, and node mobility is moderate,
   then there is a good chance that at least one neighbor will be lost
   within any 10-second interval. Therefore, it will be necessary to
   generate an LSA every 10 seconds anyway.


   Of course, this argument is not valid if a node has less than 10
   neighbors and nodes are slow moving or stationary.  Therefore, it
   would be useful to use a reliable flooding mechanism at least in
   these cases, and perhaps switch to unreliable, periodic flooding only
   when the average number of neighbor changes per second is above some
   threshold.  Section 5 describes a simple way to dynamically switch
   between reliable and unreliable flooding in OSPF.


   However, the above argument for using unreliable, periodic flooding
   in manets also becomes invalid if differential LSAs are allowed,
   which report only the *changes* in the LSA. Thus, if a node loses one
   of its 100 neighbors, it only needs to report the loss of one
   neighbor in a differential LSA (instead of the full LSA which
   includes all neighbors). Full LSAs can also be transmitted
   periodically with a relatively large period as in OSPF, for added
   robustness. The reliable flooding mechanism described in Section 6
   allows the use of differential LSAs as an option.


5. Hybrid Reliable/Unreliable Flooding in OSPF


   OSPF uses reliable flooding to disseminate LSAs. ACKs are used to
   deliver each transmitted LSA reliably to all adjacent neighbors.
   (ACKs can be delayed and aggregated, so that that a single ACK packet
   can be sent to acknowledge several LSAs received from different
   neighbors.)  As suggested in [Baker02], we assume that each neighbor




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   on a manet interface is represented as a point-to-point link within a
   router LSA. Thus, a new instance of the router LSA, with a larger
   sequence number, is originated when a neighbor changes state.  If at
   least one neighbor changes state every MinLSInterval (equal to 5
   seconds in OSPF), then the router will originate and flood a new LSA
   every 5 seconds. Clearly, in this case, it should not be necessary to
   flood each LSA instance reliably, since a new instance of the LSA
   will be received approximately every 5 seconds.


   This section describes a simple method that allows the originator of
   an LSA to dynamically decide whether each instance of the LSA is
   flooded reliably ("reliable mode") or unreliably ("unreliable mode"),
   depending on how frequently the LSA is changing.  (We discuss below
   how to measure this.)  The originator accomplishes this by setting a
   new option bit that indicates whether the LSA is "ackable" (in
   reliable mode) or "non-ackable" (in unreliable mode).  An ackable LSA
   must be flooded reliably (using ACKs) as in OSPF.  A non-ackable LSA
   is never ACKed, and the same instance is never retransmitted. In
   unreliable mode, a new instance of a non-ackable LSA is originated
   every MinLSInterval seconds.  When switching from unreliable to
   reliable mode, an ackable LSA must be originated whether or not any
   change has occurred since the last (unreliable) LSA instance.  (As
   discussed below, hysteresis should be used to avoid frequent
   switching between the two modes.)


   The advantage of unreliable mode is that we avoid the overhead due to
   ACKs and retransmitted LSAs. An originator should use unreliable mode
   only if LSAs would be generated almost every MinLSInterval anyway
   (i.e., the network is highly mobile), so that less overhead is
   generated in unreliable mode than in reliable mode.


   To reduce overhead further, it is possible to use a period larger
   than MinLSInterval in unreliable mode (call this PeriodicLSInterval),
   although this would slow down the dissemination of topology
   information and thus slow down the network's reaction to topology
   changes when mobility is high (exactly when we need a fast response
   time). However, this may be necessary if the overhead is too large
   for the network to handle.  For this reason, the reliable flooding
   method of Section 6 may be a better solution (since it avoids both
   ACKs and periodic flooding).


   As mentioned above, unreliable mode should be used for a given LSA
   only if it generates less overhead than reliable mode, which will be
   the case if a change to the LSA almost always occurs every
   MinLSInterval (or PeriodicLSInterval) seconds.  To make this
   decision, the originator can maintain an exponential moving average
   (EMA) that estimates the probability that the LSA will change within
   MinLSInterval seconds, based on how often this has occurred in the




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   recent past.  Other measurements could instead be used, such as an
   EMA that measures the average number of neighbor changes per
   MinLSInterval, or the average time between neighbors changes.  If the
   originator is in reliable mode, it transitions to unreliable mode if
   the EMA goes above some threshold.  If the originator is in
   unreliable mode, it transitions to reliable mode if the EMA goes
   below a possibly different threshold.


   To avoid frequent switching between the two modes, hysteresis should
   be employed, e.g., by choosing the second threshold to be smaller
   than the first one.  Simulations can be used to evaluate alternative
   mechanisms for deciding whether to use reliable or unreliable mode.


   In [Spagnolo04], a mechanism is described and evaluated in which the
   originator decides dynamically whether to send a given LSA on an
   event-driven basis (as in OSPF) or on a periodic basis (where the
   period could be greater than MinLSInterval).  This mechanism assumes
   that all LSAs are ackable and therefore uses only reliable flooding,
   but saves overhead by sending LSAs less frequently (periodically)
   when neighbor changes are frequent.  Instead of using an EMA, the
   method *predicts* whether a neighbor change will occur soon, thus
   allowing an LSA to be sent earlier (on an event-driven basis) if no
   additional neighbor changes are predicted to occur within the next
   period.


   Prediction is clearly helpful, e.g., for reducing the LSA latency (by
   allowing an LSA to be sent earlier if no additional neighbor changes
   are predicted). However, simulations are needed to determine whether
   the use of prediction will significantly improve the performance of
   the hybrid reliable/unreliable flooding method described above.


6. Defining a Reliable Flooding Mechanism


6.1  Reliable Flooding in OSPF


   In addition to using ACKs for the reliable flooding of LSAs, OSPF
   employs a Database Exchange Process to ensure that two routers that
   become neighbors have synchronized databases (and become "fully
   adjacent").  Both the ACKs and the Database Exchange Process generate
   a substantial amount of control traffic, so a more efficient
   mechanism for reliable flooding is needed for manets.


   One improvement, suggested in [Baker02], is to use implicit ACKs, so
   that a received LSA is implicitly ACKed if/when this LSA is
   forwarded.  However, this method would only apply to nodes in the
   relay node set, which should include only a small percentage of all
   nodes.  All non-relay nodes would still be required to send an
   explicit ACK.




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005                [Page 9]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   Also, ACKs used in conjunction with MPRs are not sufficient to
   provide reliable flooding, since some nodes may fail to receive some
   LSAs if the MPR selection changes in response to link breakages.  The
   OSPF extension proposed in [Chandra04] overcomes this problem by
   requiring even non-MPR nodes to forward LSAs when necessary.
   However, such techniques add complexity and involve significant
   changes to OSPF.


6.2  Reliable Flooding Using Periodic Database Description Packets


   This section proposes a reliable flooding mechanism for OSPF on manet
   interfaces, which reduces overhead by avoiding the use of LS ACKs. In
   this mechanism, each relay node (e.g., CDS node) transmits each LSA
   instance only once, unless some neighbor does not receive the LSA.
   Duplicate detection of LSAs is done as in OSPF, based on the LSA
   sequence number in the database. This mechanism uses only packet
   types already defined in OSPF.


   In the OSPF Database Exchange Process, two nodes that become
   neighbors first send Database Description (DD) Packets to each other,
   to allow each node to determine what LSAs it needs (if any) from the
   other node.  A DD packet does not contain LSAs, but only LSA headers,
   where each LSA header identifies the instance of the LSA via the LS
   sequence number.


   Sending DD packets reliably to each new neighbor can generate a lot
   of control traffic in manets, where typically a node will have at
   least one new neighbor every few seconds.  A better approach in such
   networks is to periodically broadcast a set of DD packets on each
   manet interface (unreliably).  This technique is used in IS-IS, in
   which the designated router of a broadcast network periodically
   broadcasts a set of Complete Sequence Numbers (CSN) packets
   [RFC1142], which perform essentially the same function as DD packets.
   We therefore propose to borrow a technique from IS-IS, and fit it
   into the framework of OSPF. (An alternative approach would be to
   design an extension to IS-IS instead of OSPF.)


   If a CDS is used to relay LSAs, then each CDS node periodically
   broadcasts (on all manet interfaces) a complete set of DD packets
   that contains the headers of all LSAs originating from the same area.
   However, if MPRs are used to relay LSAs, then each MPR periodically
   broadcasts a partial set of DD packets that contains only the headers
   of LSAs originating from the reported originator set (ROS).  (The ROS
   for MPR flooding is defined in Section 3.)


   In addition, each non-CDS router (which originates its own router LSA
   when a neighbor changes state) periodically broadcasts (on all manet
   interfaces) a DD packet that includes the header of the current




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   instance of its own router LSA.  This ensures the reliable delivery
   of the router LSA to all neighbors, including CDS neighbors which
   will relay the LSA.


   Note that if unreliable, periodic flooding is used, each relay node
   would periodically broadcast all LSAs (not just LSA headers)
   originating from nodes in the ROS. In general, LSAs are much larger
   than LSA headers.  For example, an LSA that describes 100 neighbors
   will have at least 1200 bytes for IPv4 (although some compression is
   possible for manets), compared to an LSA header which is only 20
   bytes.  Thus, the proposed method generates much less control traffic
   than unreliable, periodic flooding, at least when topology changes
   are not frequent.


   The proposed periodic transmission of DD packets serves two purposes:


   -  The reliable delivery of LSAs to neighbors.
   -  The exchange of LSAs between new neighbors.


   In either case, if a router receives a DD packet from a neighbor that
   includes an LSA header with a larger sequence number than the
   corresponding LSA in the router's database (which indicates that the
   neighbor is relaying or originating a more recent instance of the
   LSA), then the router requests the LSA via a Link State Request
   packet (as in OSPF).  (We note that such a request for an LSA is
   equivalent to a NACK, which informs the neighbor that the LSA has not
   been received.)


   This can happen either because the router missed a previous
   transmission of the LSA (due to an unreliable link), or because the
   router recently became a neighbor of a CDS node, or because a
   neighbor recently became a CDS node.


   Note that it is possible for a router to receive a given LSA from
   more than one neighbor, e.g., if it has more than one CDS neighbor.
   In this case, the router only needs to request the LSA from one of
   the neighbors (e.g., the one that it has selected as its dominator).


   In summary, a router can receive a particular LSA from any neighbor
   that includes the LSA in a Link State Update packet, and can request
   the LSA from any neighbor that includes the LSA header in periodic DD
   packets.  On manet interfaces, DD and Link State Update packets are
   always broadcast to all neighbors (assuming this method is used),
   while LS Request packets are always unicast to a single neighbor.


   A node does not respond immediately to each Link State Request
   packet, but waits for some time (e.g., based on a periodic timer) and
   then sends a Link State Update packet that may contain LSAs in




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 11]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   response to several Link State Requests from different neighbors.
   Thus, responses to Link State Requests are aggregated in order to to
   reduce control traffic.


6.3  Reducing the Number of Link State Requests


   One might argue that a lot of LS Request packets will be sent on
   manet interfaces, due to failed transmissions, resulting in a lot of
   control traffic. (Note however that having each neighbor acknowledge
   each LSA would generate much more control traffic.)  One factor that
   mitigates this is that a node can receive the same LSA from different
   neighbors, thus increasing the probability that it will receive a
   given LSA without having to send a LS Request.  This can be ensured
   by selecting the CDS redundantly, so that each node is a neighbor of
   at least two CDS nodes.  The Backup DR field of the OSPF Hello packet
   can be used to identify a redundant CDS node.


   The number of LS Requests can also be reduced by using multiple
   transmissions, i.e., when a node transmits an Link State Update
   packet, it can transmit it multiple times, to increase the
   probability that all neighbors receive it. The number of such
   retransmissions can depend on the recent history of LS Requests
   received from neighbors.


6.4  Differential LSAs


   As discussed in Section 4, control traffic can be reduced by using
   differential LSAs, which report only differences (new links, lost
   links, and metric changes) between the current instance and a
   previous instance of an LSA, instead of reporting the entire LSA.
   For example, if a node has 100 neighbors and loses one of them, it
   would be wasteful to generate a full LSA with 99 neighbor IDs, when
   the loss could be reported in a differential LSA containing a single
   neighbor ID.


   TBRPF [RFC3684] uses both differential Hello messages and
   differential LSAs to reduce overhead in highly mobile networks.
   Differential (or incremental) Hello packets are also used in the OSPF
   extension for manets proposed in [Chandra04].


   A differential LSA includes two LS sequence numbers sn1 < sn2,
   instead of one, with the following meaning. Assuming you have an
   instance of the LSA whose sequence number is at least sn1 but less
   than sn2, then incorporating the changes in this LSA will give you
   the correct LSA with sequence number sn2. The checksum in the
   differential LSA is the checksum for the entire LSA with sequence
   number sn2.





Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 12]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   The LS Request packet is also modified to include an LS sequence
   number for each requested LSA, indicating that the sending node has
   the instance of the LSA with this sequence number.  If a node
   receives a LS Request for the same LSA from different neighbors, but
   with different sequence numbers, the node will respond by
   broadcasting a differential LSA with sn1 equal to the minimum of the
   requested sequence numbers, or by transmitting a full LSA if the node
   does not have sufficient information to generate a differential LSA.
   To generate a differential LSA, a node must store additional sequence
   number information for each link of the LSA, or must store
   differential LSAs that it recently transmitted.  At a minimum, each
   node should store each transmitted differential LSA at least until it
   transmits its next few periodic Database Description packets, so that
   it can send a differential LSA in response to LS Requests.


   The exact specification for using differential LSAs requires some
   additional work.  However, it is clear that their use can reduce the
   amount of control traffic, although simulations are needed to
   determine how much improvement can be achieved.  Also note that the
   use of differential LSAs can be optional.


6.5  Adjacencies


   In OSPF, an adjacency is formed between two nodes connected by a
   point-to-point link, and between each DR or Backup DR and each of its
   neighbors. In OSPF, adjacent neighbors perform a database exchange to
   synchronize their databases.  When this exchange is complete, the
   neighbors are said to be "fully adjacent".


   This section proposes a modified definition of fully adjacent for
   links between a CDS node and its neighbors.  In OSPF, the database
   exchange between two adjacent nodes is symmetric, i.e., each node
   ensures that it has the same instance of each LSA that is in the
   other node's database.  However, this requires that both nodes,
   including non-CDS nodes, transmit a complete set of DD packets.


   To reduce overhead due to unnecessary DD packets, we propose that
   only CDS nodes transmit a complete set of DD packets.  Non-CDS nodes
   can transmit a short DD packet that includes only the header of the
   node's own router LSA.  This is proposed whether DD packets are sent
   periodically as described above, or whether DD packets are sent only
   to newly adjacent neighbors (which would be the case if LSA ACKs are
   used).


   Thus, a link (i,j) between a non-CDS node i and a CDS node j is
   defined to be fully adjacent if node i has the same instance of each
   LSA that is in node j's database.  For the CDS node j to consider the
   reverse link (j,i) to be fully adjacent, node j only needs to have




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 13]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   the current instance of the router LSA originated by the non-CDS node
   i.


   Thus, for manet interfaces, an adjacency between a CDS node and a
   non-CDS node is asymmetric, which makes sense, since only the CDS
   nodes are responsible for forwarding LSAs.  In OSPF, a link must be
   fully adjacent before it is advertised in an LSA. It may be
   beneficial to also require this for manet interfaces, but this
   requires further investigation.


7. Conclusions


   Alternative candidate techniques were discussed for extending OSPF to
   support manet interfaces. Although recommendations were made in favor
   of some of these techniques, additional discussions, analysis, and/or
   simulations are needed before deciding which methods to include in
   the final design.


   If it is an important goal to minimize the changes to OSPF, then it
   may be preferable to use a CDS instead of MPRs, since a CDS node is a
   natural generalization of a designated router, and the OSPF Hello
   packet can be used without modification, except that the DR field is
   used to identify a CDS node.  Thus, in a simple extension of OSPF,
   adjacencies can be formed between each CDS node and each of its
   neighbors.  In such a simple extension, reliable flooding can be
   performed either using the periodic broadcast of Database Description
   packets as described in Section 6.2, or using ACKs as in OSPF. In the
   latter case, hybrid reliable/unreliable flooding can be used as
   described in Section 5, to reduce overhead by not requiring reliable
   flooding when LSAs are updated frequently.


8. Summary of Changes


   Changes from version 00 to version 01:


   -  The hybrid reliable/unreliable mechanism (Section 5) has been
      modified so that the *originator* decides dynamically whether a
      given LSA should be flooded reliably or unreliably.
      (Version 00 described a method in which each receiver decides
      whether to suppress ACKs for a given LSA based on how frequently
      the LSA is being updated.)


   -  Text has been added for the following added references:
      [Spagnolo04], [Chandra04], [RFC3684], and [Adjih02].








Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 14]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



References


   [Baker02] F. Baker. "An Outsider's View of MANET", Internet-Draft
        (work in progress), draft-baker-manet-review-01.txt, March 2002.


   [Baker03] F. Baker et al. "Problem Statement for OSPF Extensions for
        Mobile Ad Hoc Routing, Internet-Draft (work in progress),
        September 2003.


   [Bellur99] B. Bellur and R. Ogier. "A Reliable, Efficient Topology
        Broadcast Protocol for Dynamic Networks", Proc. IEEE INFOCOM,
        March 1999.


   [Das97] B. Das and V. Bhargavan, "Routing in ad-hoc networks using
        minimum connected dominating sets," Proc. IEEE International
        Conference on Communications, vol. 1, pp. 376-380, 1997.


   [Kozat01] U.C. Kozat, G. Kondylis, B. Ryu, M.K. Marina. "Virtual
        dynamic backbone for mobile ad hoc networks," Proc. IEEE
        International Conference on Communications (ICC), vol. 1, pp.
        250-255, 2001.


   [Lin03a] T. Lin, S.F. Midkiff, and J.S. Park. "A Framework for
        Wireless Ad Hoc Routing Protocols", IEEE WCNC, March 2003.


   [Lin03b] T. Lin, S. F. Midkiff, and J. S. Park. "Approximation
        Algorithms for Minimal Connected Dominating Sets and Application
        with Routing protocol in Wireless Ad Hoc Network," IEEE
        International Performance Computing and Communications
        Conference (IPCCC), pp. 157-164, 2003.


   [RFC3684] R. Ogier, F. Templin, and M. Lewis. "Topology Dissemination
        Based on Reverse Path Forwarding", RFC 3684, February 2004.


   [RFC2328] J. Moy.  "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April 1998.


   [RFC1142] D. Oran. "OSI IS-IS Intra-Domain Routing Protocol", RFC
        1142, February 1990.


   [Ahrenholz04] J. Ahrenholz, T. Henderson, P. Spagnolo, E. Baccelli,
        T. Clausen, and P. Jacquet. "OSPFv2 Wireless Interface Type",
        Internet-Draft (work in progress), draft-spagnolo-manet-ospf-
        wireless-interface-01, May 2004.


   [Spagnolo04] P. Spagnolo, T. Henderson, and G. Pei. "Design
        Considerations for a Wireless OSPF Interace", Internet-Draft
        (work in progress), draft-spagnolo-manet-ospf-design-00.txt,
        April 2004.




Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 15]
Internet-Draft         OSPF Extensions for Manets              July 2004



   [Wu01] J. Wu and H. Li. "A Dominating-Set-Based Routing Scheme in Ad
        Hoc Wireless Networks", Telecommunication Systems, Vol. 18, pp.
        31-36, 2001.


   [Chandra04] M.W. Chandra, Editor. "Extensions to OSPF to Support
        Mobile Ad Hoc Networking", Internet-Draft (work in progress),
        draft-chandra-ospf-manet-ext-00.txt, February 2004.


   [Adjih02] C. Adjih, P. Jacquet, and L. Viennot. "Computing connected
        dominated sets with multipoint relays", INRIA research report
        No. 4597, October 2002.



Author's Address


   Richard G. Ogier
   EMail: rich.ogier@earthlink.net


































Ogier                   Expires January 19, 2005               [Page 16] 