


Network Working Group                                         Pars Mutaf
Internet-Draft                                     Institut National des
Intended status: Informational                        Telecommunications
Expires: September 15, 2007                               March 14, 2007


                       Disposable home addresses
                        draft-mutaf-dhoa-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   The "home address" in Mobile IPv6 should be considered as private
   information, as it allows access to a mobile host regardless of its
   location.  This document presents a discussion of "disposable home
   addresses" for Mobile IPv6.







Mutaf                  Expires September 16, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Disposable home addresses             March 2007


1.  Introduction

   Inspired from [TDIGITS] [DPN], this document presents a discussion of
   "disposable home addresses" in Mobile IPv6.

   A Mobile IPv6 host can have multiple home addresses in the same or
   different home networks.  This has important benefits in terms of
   privacy and security.  A mobile host can configure and distribute
   different home addresses to different entities.  Later, if one of the
   addresses is abused (for example, for spam, DoS attack, or location
   discovery), then that home address can be disposed (or, destroyed) by
   its owner i.e. the mobile host.  This means that, the address will
   be deconfigured by the host and removed from the home network were it
   was registered.

   It should be noted that, similarly to disposable phone numbers,
   disposable home addresses will be shared with "a priori trusted"
   users, upon user contact (using a technology like Bluetooth), or via
   e-mail etc.  Another possibility for sharing private information is
   described in [PIQ].

   A disposable home address may not be registered to the DNS, it can be
   given a name that has local significance only by the user who
   receives it.  For example, when Alice gives her disposable home
   address to Bob, Bob can store the home address under the name
   "alice".  Later, if Bob spams Alice's host, Alice can destroy the
   home address given to Bob.


2.  Security considerations

   TBD.


3.  IANA considerations

   None.


4.  Conclusion

   This document presented a discussion of disposable home addresses.


5.  Informative References

   [DPN]      Disposable phone numbers,
              URL: http://www.tossabledigits.com/.



Mutaf                  Expires September 16, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Disposable home addresses             March 2007


   [TDIGITS]  Tossable Digits, URL: http://www.tossabledigits.com/.

   [PIQ]      Mutaf, P., "Private information queries (Problem
              Statement)", draft-mutaf-piqproblem-00.txt (work in
              progress), 2007.


Author's Address

   Pars Mutaf
   Institut National des Telecommunications

   Email: pars.mutaf@int-evry.fr






































Mutaf                  Expires September 16, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Disposable home addresses             March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Mutaf                  Expires September 16, 2007               [Page 4]

