


MIPSHOP WG                                                  Gabor Bajko 
Internet Draft                                                    Nokia 
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                   September 15, 2008 
Expires: March 14, 2009                                                 
                                                                        
    
    
                  Locating Mobility Servers using DNS 
                draft-ietf-mipshop-mos-dns-discovery-02 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on DATE. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
 
Abstract 
    
   This document defines application service tags that allow service 
   location without relying on rigid domain naming conventions, and DNS 
   procedures for discovering servers which provide Mobility Services. 
   Mobility Services are used to assist an MN in handover preparation 
   (network discovery) and handover decision (network selection). The 
   services addressed by this document are the Media Independent 
   Handover Services defined in [1]. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    


  
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 1] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
    
Terminology and abbreviations used in this document 
    
   Mobility Services: comprises of a set of different services provided 
   by the network to mobile nodes to facilitate handover preparation 
   and handover decision.  
    
   Mobility Server: a network node providing Mobility Services. 
    
   MIH: Media Independent Handover, as defined in [1]. 
    
   MIH Service: IS, ES or CS type of service, as defined in [1]. 
    
   Application service:  is a generic term for some type of 
   application, independent of the protocol that may be used to offer 
   it. Each application service will be associated with an IANA-
   registered tag.  
    
   Application protocol: is used to implement the application service. 
   These are also associated with IANA-registered tags. 
    
Table of Content 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................2  
   2. Discovering a Mobility Server...................................3  
        2.1 Selecting a Mobility Service..............................3  
        2.2 Selecting the transport protocol..........................4  
        2.3 Determining the IP address and port.......................5  
   3. IANA Considerations.............................................6  
   4. Security Considerations.........................................6  
   5. Normative References............................................6  
   6. Informative References..........................................7  
   7. Author's Address................................................7 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   IEEE 802.21 [1] defines three distinct service types to facilitate 
   link layer handovers across heterogeneous technologies:  
    
   a) Information Services (IS)  
        IS provides a unified framework to the higher layer entities 
        across the heterogeneous network environment to facilitate 
        discovery and selection of multiple types of networks existing 
        within a geographical area, with the objective to help the 
        higher layer mobility protocols to acquire a global view of the 
        heterogeneous networks and perform seamless handover across 
        these networks.  
    
   b) Event Services (ES) 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 2] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
        Events may indicate changes in state and transmission behavior 
        of the physical, data link and logical link layers, or predict 
        state changes of these layers. The Event Service may also be 
        used to indicate management actions or command status on the 
        part of the network or some management entity.  
    
   c) Command Services (CS) 
        The command service enables higher layers to control the 
        physical, data link, and logical link layers. The higher layers 
        may control the reconfiguration or selection of an appropriate 
        link through a set of handover commands. 
    
   In IEEE terminology these services are called Media Independent 
   Handover (MIH) services. 
   While these services may be co-located, the different pattern and 
   type of information they provide does not necessitate the co-
   location.  
    
   Service Management" service messages, i.e., MIH registration, MIH 
   capability discovery and MIH event subscription messages, are 
   considered as ES and CS when transporting MIH messages over L3 
   transport. 
    
   An MN may make use of any of these MIH service types separately or 
   any combination of them. 
    
   It is anticipated that a Mobility Server will not necessarily host 
   all three of these MIH Services together, thus there is a need to 
   discover the MIH Service types separately. 
    
   This document defines a number of application service tags that 
   allow service location without relying on rigid domain naming 
   conventions.  
    
2. Discovering a Mobility Server  
    
   The procedures defined here assume that the MN knows the domain name 
   of the network where it wants to locate a Mobility Server. The 
   domain name of the network can either be pre-configured, discovered 
   using DHCP or learned from a previous Information Service (IS) query 
   [1] as described in [ID.ietf-mipshop-mstp-solution]. 
   The procedures defined here result in an IP address, port and 
   transport protocol where the MN can contact the Mobility Server 
   which hosts the service the MN is looking for. 
    
2.1 Selecting a Mobility Service 
    
   The MN should know the characteristics of the Mobility Services 
   defined in [1] and based on that it should be able to select the 
   service it wants to use to facilitate its handover. The services it 
   can choose from are: 
           - Information Service (IS)  
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 3] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
           - Event Service (ES)  
           - Command Service (CS)  
    
   The service identifiers for the services are "IS", "ES" and "CS" 
   respectively. 
   The server supporting any of the above services MUST support UDP and 
   TCP as transport, as described in [ID.ietf-mipshop-mstp-solution]. 
    
2.2 Selecting the transport protocol  
    
   After the desired service has been chosen, the client selects the 
   transport protocol it prefers to use. Note, that transport selection 
   may impact the handover performance.  
    
   The services relevant for the task of transport protocol selection 
   are those with NAPTR service fields with values "IS+M2X" for IS 
   service, "ES+M2X" for the ES service, "CS+M2X" for the CS service, 
   where X is a letter that corresponds to a transport protocol 
   supported by the domain. This specification defines M2U for UDP, M2T 
   for TCP and M2S for SCTP.   This document also establishes an IANA 
   registry for NAPTR service name to transport protocol mappings.  
    
   These NAPTR [3] records provide a mapping from a domain to the SRV 
   [2] record for contacting a server with the specific transport 
   protocol in the NAPTR services field. The resource record will 
   contain an empty regular expression and a replacement value, which 
   is the SRV record for that particular transport protocol. If the 
   server supports multiple transport protocols, there will be multiple 
   NAPTR records, each with a different service value.  As per RFC 3403 
   [3], the client discards any records whose services fields are not 
   applicable. 
    
   The MN MUST discard any service fields that identify a resolution 
   service whose value is not "M2X", for values of X that indicate 
   transport protocols supported by the client.  The NAPTR processing 
   as described in RFC 3403 will result in the discovery of the most 
   preferred transport protocol of the server that is supported by the 
   client, as well as an SRV record for the server. 
    
   As an example, consider a client that wishes to find IS service in 
   the example.com domain. The client performs a NAPTR query for that 
   domain, and the following NAPTR records are returned: 
    
           order pref flags  service     regexp       replacement  
   IN NAPTR  50   50   "s"  "IS+M2T"       ""  _IS._tcp.example.com  
   IN NAPTR  90   50   "s"  "IS+M2U"       ""  _IS._ucp.example.com  
    
   This indicates that the domain does have a server providing IS 
   services over TCP and UDP, in that order of preference. Since the 
   client supports TCP and UDP, TCP will be used, targeted to a host 
   determined by an SRV lookup of _IS._tcp.example.com.  That lookup 
   would return: 
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 4] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
    
   ;;          Priority  Weight    Port        Target  
        IN  SRV    0        1      XXXX   server1.example.com  
        IN  SRV    0        2      XXXX   server2.example.com 
    
   If no NAPTR records are found, the client constructs SRV queries for 
   those transport protocols it supports, and does a query for each. 
   Queries are done using the service identifier "_IS" for the 
   Information Service, "_ES" for the Event Service and "_CS" for 
   Command Service. A particular transport is supported if the query is 
   successful.  The client MAY use any transport protocol it desires 
   which is supported by the server. 
    
   Note, that the regexp field in the NAPTR example above is empty. 
   This document discourages the use of this field as its usage can be 
   complex and error prone; and the discovery of the MIH services do 
   not require the flexibility provided by this field over a static 
   target present in the TARGET field.  
    
2.3 Determining the IP address and port  
    
   Once the server providing the desired service and the transport 
   protocol has been determined, the next step is to determine the IP 
   address and port. 
    
   If TARGET is a numeric IP address, the MN uses that IP address and 
   the already chosen transport to contact the server providing the 
   desired service. 
    
   If the TARGET was not a numeric IP address, then the MN performs an 
   A and/or AAAA record lookup of the domain name, as appropriate. The 
   result will be a list of IP addresses, each of which can be 
   contacted using the transport protocol determined previously. 
    
   If the result of the SRV query contains a port number, then the MN 
   SHOULD contact the server at that port number. If the SRV record did 
   not contain a port number then the MN SHOULD contact the server at 
   the default port number of that particular service. A default port 
   number for MIH services is requested from IANA in [ID.ietf-mipshop-
   mstp-solution]. 
    
3. IANA considerations 
    
   The usage of NAPTR records described here requires well known values 
   for the service fields for each transport supported by Mobility 
   Services. The table of mappings from service field values to 
   transport protocols is to be maintained by IANA. 
    
   The registration in the RFC MUST include the following information: 
    
        Service Field: The service field being registered. 
         
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 5] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
        Protocol: The specific transport protocol associated with that 
        service field.  This MUST include the name and acronym for the 
        protocol, along with reference to a document that describes the 
        transport protocol. 
         
        Name and Contact Information: The name, address, email address 
        and telephone number for the person performing the 
        registration.  
    
   The following values have been placed into the registry: 
    
   Service Fields               Protocol 
      IS+M2T                       TCP 
      IS+M2U                       UDP 
      IS+M2S                       SCTP 
      ES+M2T                       TCP 
      ES+M2U                       UDP 
      ES+M2S                       SCTP 
      CS+M2T                       TCP 
      CS+M2U                       UDP 
      CS+M2S                       SCTP 
    
   New Service Fields are to be added via Standards Action as defined 
   in [RFC5226]. New protocols to existing Service Fields are added by 
   IANA on a First Come First Served' basis [RFC5226]. 
    
4. Security considerations 
    
   Fake DNS requests and responses may cause DoS. Where networks are 
   exposed to such DoS, it is recommended that DNS service providers 
   use the Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) as described 
   in [RFC4033]. 
    
   Readers may also refer to [RFC4641] to consider the aspects of 
   DNSSEC Operational Practices. 
    
5. Normative References 
    
   [2] Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P. and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for 
       Specifying the Location of Services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782, 
       February 2000. 
    
   [3] Mealling, M., "DDDS, The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 
       3403, October 2002.  
    
   [RFC4033] DNS Security Introduction and Requirements, Arends et al, 
       March 2005  
    
   [RFC5226] Guidelines for Writing an IANA Considerations Section in 
       RFCs, T. Narten et al, May 2008 
    
    
 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 6] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
6. Informative References 
    
   [1] IEEE 802.21 Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: 
       Media Independent Handover Services  
    
   [ID.ietf-mipshop-mstp-solution] Mobility Services Transport Protocol 
       Design, Melia et al, April 2008, work in progress  
    
   [RFC4641] DNSSEC Operational Practices, Kolkman et al, September 
       2006 
 
    
7. Author's Addresses 
    
   Gabor Bajko 
   gabor.bajko@nokia.com 
    
    


































 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 7] 
 
 
Locating Mobility Servers using DNS                     September 2008 
    
   Full Copyright Statement  
    
    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).  
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights.  
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
    
    
   Intellectual Property  
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.  
    
    
   Acknowledgment  
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
 
 



 
G. Bajko                   Expires 03/14/09                  [Page 8] 
 