Individual Submission                                          G. Huston
Internet-Draft                                                     APNIC
Expires: May 16, 2005                                  November 15, 2004


                        Deprecation of "ip6.int"
                      draft-huston-ip6-int-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 16, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document advises of the deprecation of the use of "ip6.int" for
   Standards Conformant IPv6 implementations.

Draft Notes

   [This section not for RFC publication]

   This memo has been prepared as part of the activities of an ad hoc



Huston                    Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  ip6.int                    November 2004


   advisory committee to advise the IAB on a number of matters relating
   to IPv6.  It is proposed that the note be published as an Internet
   Standards action for IPv6 as a BCP.

   Comments on this draft should be sent to either the author, or to the
   document's editing group.  This group can be reached at the mail
   address "draft-huston-ip6-int@potaroo.net".

   This advice does not directly address legacy issues concerning
   continued support for "ip6.int", beyond a request to the RIRs to
   prepare a schedule relating to their phase-out of ip6.int support as
   part of registry services.  In considering the orderly phase out of
   ip6.int it is noted that there appears to be, at present, some level
   of continued use of the "ip6.int" domain by earlier IPv6
   implementations.

   Some exploratory activity has been noted, proposing the use of DNAME
   records in "ip6.int" using a redirection pointer to the relevant
   delegation points in the "ip6.arpa" domain.  There are some
   associated issues with the use of base relative names in reverse
   domains to allow the DNAME to work, and there may also be a need for
   some investigatory activity relating to the soundness of the use of
   DNAME redirection in this context.  However, this activity falls more
   into an operational task regarding legacy management, and no
   particular advice regarding IAB actions is offered here.

1.  IPv6 Standards Action

   In August 2001 the IETF published RFC 3152 [1], which advised that
   the use of "ip6.int" as the domain for reverse-mapping of IPv6
   addresses to DNS names was to be deprecated.  The document noted that
   the use of "ip6.int" would be phased out in an orderly fashion.

   With the publication of this memo, the IETF advises the community
   that the DNS domain "ip6.int" should no longer be used to perform
   reverse mapping of IPv6 addresses to domain names, and that the
   domain "ip6.arpa" should be used henceforth, in accordance with the
   IANA Considerations described in RFC 3596 [2].  The domain "ip6.int"
   is deprecated, and its use as part of Internet Standards conformance
   of IPv6 implementations is discontinued.

   The Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) are advised that maintenance
   of delegation of entries in "ip6.int" is no longer required as part
   of infrastructure services in support of Internet Standards
   conformant IPv6 implementations.  The RIRs are requested to work with
   their communities to adopt a schedule regarding cessation of support
   of registration services for the "ip6.int" domain.




Huston                    Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  ip6.int                    November 2004


2.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is advised that the "ip6.int" domain for reverse mapping of IPv6
   addresses to domain names is no longer part of Internet Standards
   Conformant support of IPv6.

3.  Security Considerations

   While DNS spoofing of address to name mapping has been exploited in
   IPv4, removal of the "ip6.int" zone creates no new threats to the
   security of the internet.

4.  Acknowledgements

   The document was prepared with the assistance of Kurt Lindqvist,
   Thomas Narten, Paul Wilson, David Kessens, Bob Hinden and Brian
   Haberman.

5  Normative References

   [1]  Bush, R., "Delegation of IP6.ARPA", BCP 49, RFC 3152, August
        2001.

   [2]  Thomson, S., Huitema, C., Ksinant, V. and M. Souissi, "DNS
        Extensions to Support IP Version 6", RFC 3596, October 2003.


Author's Address

   Geoff Huston
   APNIC

   EMail: gih@apnic.net


















Huston                    Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  ip6.int                    November 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Huston                    Expires May 16, 2005                  [Page 4]