


MMUSIC                                                         V. Stirbu
Internet-Draft                                          J. Costa-Requena
Expires: August 15, 2005                                           Nokia
                                                            P. Shrubsole
                                                        Philips Research
                                                       February 11, 2005


        Requirements for Scalable Remote Access to Applications
                  draft-stirbu-mmusic-scal-sharing-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This memo describes the requirements for accessing graphical user
   interface (GUI) applications remotely, so that devices with different
   form factors and UI capabilities can scale and adapt the exported UI
   to their local platform UI look and feel (LAF).



Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1   Functional and Architectural Requirements  . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2   Input Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3   Output Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4   Transport Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  8







































Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


1.  Introduction

   Recent advances in technology now allow for a wide range of devices
   to become network enabled.  They are usually equipped with one or
   several network interfaces, usually wireless (i.e.  GPRS/WCDMA,
   wireless LAN, Bluetooth).  This makes them ideal for use across
   varying environments.  A mobile phone or a personal digital assistant
   can at the same time be connected into a home network via the
   WLAN/Bluetooth interface and to the cellular network via the
   GPRS/WCDMA interface.  Such devices tipically have a rich set of user
   interface features such as a color display and a graphical user
   interface used for output and keypad, touch screens or pointing
   devices for input.  These smart devices are intended for a diverse
   range of purposes and their capabilities can vary considerably;
   screen ratio, color depth, windowing system with various widget sets,
   input methods that make the environment highly heterogenous.

   A user interface may be composed of several widgets, wherein a widget
   is understood as an element of a user interface that displays
   information or provides a specific way for a user to interact with an
   application.  Widgets may for instance comprise icons, pull-down
   menus, buttons, selection buttons, progress indicators, on-off
   checkmarks, scrollbars, windows, window edges, tongle buttons, forms
   and any other elements for displaying information, inviting,
   accepting, and responding to user actions.

   Therefore, when designing a protocol for accessing graphical user
   interface (GUI) applications remotely, provisions need to be made for
   customizing the remoted UI to match the characteristic display style
   (the so-called look & feel) of a device platform.  This is of
   particular importance for ensuring that the user experience is not
   compromised from one device to another.  The IETF architecture can be
   implemented on multiple platforms with its own UI framework for
   controling the rendering of local application(s) UI(s).  Each
   platform has its specific appearance to provide the appropriate user
   experience.  This platform customisation of the UI has to be
   replicated with the maximum fidelity on the new platform where the UI
   is remoted.  Therefore, the remoting GUI protocol has to ensure a
   favorable user experience regardless of the underlying viewing
   platform, so that the user can perceive the GUI as a local
   application making it intuitively usable.

   However, existing remote UI protocols, like for instance T.120, do
   not allow for client devices to adapt a remoted UIs to their
   capabilities, nor do they allow for a customisation of remoted UI to
   match the characteristic display style of different remote device
   platforms.  In this memo, we summarize some requirements that a
   scalable and and adaptive remote UI protocol or set of protocols



Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


   should satisfy, in order to accomodate both sharing and remote access
   to applications.

   Unlike previous systems, such as T120, scalable application sharing
   should be integrated into the existing IETF session model,
   encompassing session descriptions using Session Description Protocol
   (SDP) [1] or successors and the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
   [2].  However, in order to re-use the protocol in other environments
   such as home networks, we believe that a remote UI protocol should be
   independent to signalling and discovery mechanisms.  The remote UI
   protocol can use the discovery and session setup service from SIP
   (i.e.  in broadband networks) or other mechanisms, such as defined in
   the UPnP Remote UI [3] (i.e.  in home networks).

   The remote UI protocol should allow remote users to interact with
   applications in remote systems.

2.  Requirements

2.1  Functional and Architectural Requirements

   1.  Protocol negotiation is handled at session setup level, and is
       capability-based.

   2.  The protocol must have a modular architecture.

   3.  The protocol must scale to different device classes, where each
       class represents a particular set of UI capabilities.

   4.  Applications might not have any means of rendering the user
       interface directly on the host device.


2.2  Input Requirements

   1.  The protocol must support client initiated updates to the server
       in response to local widget events generated by the user.  Such
       events could be triggered from user input such as keys (with
       various configurations) as well as touch/mouse interaction with
       drag and drop.

   2.  The protocol should allow for certain events to be prevented from
       being sent to the server when they are not relevant to the
       application.

   3.  The protocol must not restrict the number of simultaneous input
       sources.




Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


2.3  Output Requirements

   1.  The application should be able to generate the UI in a
       descriptive format.  For example, the description may define the
       part and the layout of the screen on the client that is used to
       render the remote UI or could provide additional styling hints to
       parts of the UI.

   2.  The protocol should allow the UI to be rendered on various screen
       sizes, which could be larger than the maximum visible screen size
       of the  device running the application, without the need for
       scrolling and/or "magnification glasses".

   3.  The client should be able to adapt the UI provided by the
       application to the look & feel of the local platform.

   4.  Support for smooth updates on clients by facilitating incremental
       updates of UI data (to avoid always sending fullscreen updates).
       Incremental updates must support the grouping of server initiated
       UI updates before they are sent to a client when necessary, as
       well as supporting fine grain UI updates.

   5.  The protocol must support server-initiated updates to one or more
       clients to allow for important notifications from an application
       to be sent to the user.

   6.  The protocol must handle collocated AV streams and should allow
       for them to be integrated within a user interface environment.


2.4  Transport Requirements

   1.  Some applications require perfect reliability.

   2.  Some applications may export the UI to a large number of clients,
       so the posibility for relaxing reliability.

   3.  The protocol must be able to tolerate limitations in available
       bandwidth.

   4.  Latency must be minimised to maintain interactivity.

   5.  The protocol must have support for authentication and secure
       sessions.







Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


3.  Security Considerations

   Input and output data may be highly sensitive.  For example input
   data may contain user's personal data, such as passwords.  At the
   same time the user needs to be sure that the UI he want to interact
   with was not tampered.  Other applications may not require
   confidentiality in their UI output.  By taking into account the wide
   range of possible applications, the remoting protocol MUST support
   end-to-end confidentiality and integrity protection mechanism.

4.  Informative References

   [1]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998,
        <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2327.txt>.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002,
        <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3261.txt>.

   [3]  UPnP Forum, "Remote UI Client and Server V 1.0", August 2004,
        <http://www.upnp.org/standardizeddcps/remoteui.asp>.

   [4]  Schulzrinne, H., Lennox, J., Nieh, J. and R. Barrato, "Sharing
        and Remote Access to Applications",
        Internet-Draft draft-schulzrinne-mmusic-sharing-00 (work in
        progress), September 2004,
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-schulzrinne-mmusic-sh
        aring-00.txt>.

   [5]  Lennox, J., Schulzrinne, H., Nieh, J. and R. Barrato, "Protocols
        for Application and Desktop Sharing",
        Internet-Draft draft-lennox-avt-app-sharing-00 (work in
        progress), December 2004,
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-lennox-avt-app-sharin
        g-00.txt>.














Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Vlad Stirbu
   Nokia
   Tieteenkatu 1
   Tampere  33720
   Finland

   Phone: +358 7180 60572
   Email: vlad.stibu@nokia.com


   Jose Costa-Requena
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 321
   NOKIA GROUP  FIN-00045
   Finland

   Phone: +358 7180 08000
   Email: jose.costa-requena@nokia.com


   Paul Shrubsole
   Philips Research
   Prof. Holstlaan 4
   Eindhoven  5656 AA
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31 40 27 42102
   Email: paul.shrubsole@philips.com





















Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Scalable Remote Access to Applications   February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Stirbu, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 8]




