


Network Working Group                                        C. Holmberg
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Updates: 5763,7345 (if approved)                              R. Shpount
Intended status: Standards Track                             TurboBridge
Expires: September 22, 2016                               March 21, 2016


             Using the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS
                   draft-ietf-mmusic-dtls-sdp-11.txt

Abstract

   This draft defines the SDP offer/answer procedures for negotiating
   and establishing a DTLS association.  The draft also defines the
   criteria for when a new DTLS association must be established.

   This draft defines a new SDP media-level attribute, 'dtls-
   association-id'.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 22, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Establishing a new DTLS Association . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Change of Local Transport Parameters  . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  Change of ICE ufrag value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  SDP dtls-association-id Attribute . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  SDP Offer/Answer Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Generating the Initial SDP Offer  . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.3.  Generating the Answer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.4.  Offerer Processing of the SDP Answer  . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.5.  Modifying the Session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  ICE Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Transport Protocol Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.1.  Transport Re-Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  SIP Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  RFC Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.1.  General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.2.  Update to RFC 5763  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.3.  Update to RFC 7345  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   11. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   12. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   13. Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   14. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     14.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     14.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23

1.  Introduction

   [RFC5763] defines SDP Offer/Answer procedures for SRTP-DTLS.
   [RFC7345] defines SDP Offer/Answer procedures for UDPTL-DTLS.  This
   specification defines general Offer/Answer procedures for DTLS, based
   on the procedures in [RFC5763].  Other specifications, defining
   specific DTLS usages, can then reference this specification, in order
   to ensure that the DTLS aspects are common among all usages.  Having
   common procedures is essential when multiple usages share the same
   DTLS association [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation].

   As defined in [RFC5763], a new DTLS association MUST be established
   when transport parameters are changed.  Transport parameter change is



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   not well defined when Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE)
   [RFC5245] is used.  One possible way to determine a transport change
   is based on ufrag change, but the ufrag value is changed both when
   ICE is negotiated and when ICE restart [RFC5245] occurs.  These
   events do not always require a new DTLS association to be
   established, but currently there is no way to explicitly indicate in
   an SDP offer or answer whether a new DTLS association is required.
   To solve that problem, this draft defines a new SDP attribute, 'dtls-
   association-id'.  The attribute contains a unique value associated
   with a DTLS association, and by providing a new value in SDP offers
   and answers the attribute can be used to indicate whether a new DTLS
   association is to be established/re-established.

2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Establishing a new DTLS Association

3.1.  General

   A new DTLS association MUST be established in the following cases:

   o  The DTLS roles change;

   o  One or more fingerprint values are modified, added or removed; or

   o  The intent to establish a new DTLS association is explicitly
      signaled;

   NOTE: The first two items list above are based on the procedures in
   [RFC5763].  This specification adds the support for explicit
   signaling.

   Whenever an entity determines, based on the criteria above, that a
   new DTLS association is required, the entity MUST initiate an
   associated SDP offer/answer transaction, following the procedures in
   Section 5.

   The sections below describe typical cases where a new DTLS
   association needs to be established.








Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


3.2.  Change of Local Transport Parameters

   If an endpoint modifies its local transport parameters (address and/
   or port), and if the modification requires a new DTLS association,
   the endpoint MUST change its DTLS role, change its fingerprint value,
   and/or use the SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute with a new value
   Section 4.

   If the underlying transport explicitly prohibits a DTLS association
   to span multiple transports, and if the transport is changed, a new
   value MUST be assigned to the the SDP 'dtls-association-id'
   attribute.  An example of such case is when DTLS is carried over
   SCTP, as described in [RFC6083].

3.3.  Change of ICE ufrag value

   If an endpoint uses ICE, and modifies a local ufrag value, and if the
   modification requires a new DTLS association, the endpoint MUST
   either change its DTLS role, a fingerprint value and/or assign a new
   value to the SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute Section 4.

4.  SDP dtls-association-id Attribute

   The SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute contains a unique value
   associated with a DTLS association.


          Name: dtls-association-id

          Value: conn-value

          Usage Level: media

          Charset Dependent: no

          Syntax:

              conn-value = 1*256alphanum

          Example:

              a=dtls-association-id:abc3dl


   A 'dtls-association-id' attribute that contains a new value indicates
   an intention to establish a new DTLS association.  A 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute that contains a previously assigned value
   indicates an intention to reuse an existing association.



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   There is no default value defined for the SDP 'dtls-association-id'
   attribute.  Implementations that wish to use the attribute MUST
   explicitly include it in SDP offers and answers.  If an offer or
   answer does not contain an attribute (this could happen if the
   offerer or answerer represents an existing implementation that has
   not been updated to support the attribute defined in this
   specification or an implementation which allocates a new temporary
   certificate for each association and uses change in fingerprint to
   indicate new association), other means needs to be used in order for
   endpoints to determine whether an offer or answer is associated with
   an event that requires the DTLS association to be re-established.

   The mux category [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-mux-attributes] for the 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute is 'IDENTICAL', which means that the
   attribute value must be identical across all media descriptions being
   multiplexed [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation].

   For RTP-based media, the 'dtls-association-id' attribute apply to
   whole associated media description.  The attribute MUST NOT be
   defined per source (using the SDP 'ssrc' attribute [RFC5576]).

   The SDP Offer/Answer [RFC3264] procedures associated with the
   attribute are defined in Section 5

5.  SDP Offer/Answer Procedures

5.1.  General

   This section defines the generic SDP offer/answer procedures for
   negotiating a DTLS association.  Additional procedures (e.g.
   regarding usage of specific SDP attributes etc) for individual DTLS
   usages (e.g.  SRTP-DTLS) are outside the scope of this specification,
   and need to be specified in a usage specific specification.

   NOTE: The procedures in this section are generalizations of
   procedures first specified in SRTP-DTLS [RFC5763], with the addition
   of usage of the SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute.  That document
   is herein revised to make use of these new procedures.

   The procedures in this section apply to an SDP media description
   ("m=" line) associated a DTLS-protected media/data stream.

   In order to negotiate a DTLS association, the following SDP
   attributes are used:

   o  The SDP 'setup' attribute, defined in [RFC4145], is used to
      negotiate the DTLS roles;




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   o  The SDP 'fingerprint' attribute, defined in [RFC4572], is used to
      provide a fingerprint value; and

   o  The SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute, defined in this
      specification, indicates a unique value associated with the DTLS
      association.  The attribute value can be used to explicitly
      indicate the intention of establishing a new DTLS association.

   This specification does not define the usage of the SDP 'connection'
   attribute [RFC4145] for negotiating a DTLS connection.  However, the
   attribute MAY be used if the DTLS association is used together with
   another protocol, e.g.  SCTP or TCP, for which the usage of the
   attribute has been defined.

   Unlike for TCP and TLS connections, endpoints MUST NOT use the SDP
   'setup' attribute 'holdconn' value when negotiating a DTLS
   association.

   Endpoints MUST support SHA-256 for generating and verifying any
   fingerprint value associated with the DTLS association.  The use of
   SHA-256 is preferred.

   Endpoints MUST, at a minimum, support
   TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 and MUST support
   TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256.  UDPTL over DTLS MUST prefer
   TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 and any other Perfect Forward
   Secrecy (PFS) cipher suites over non-PFS cipher suites.
   Implementations SHOULD disable TLS-level compression.

   The certificate received during the DTLS handshake MUST match at
   least one of the certificate fingerprints received in SDP
   'fingerprint' attributes.  If no fingerprint matches the hashed
   certificate, then an endpoint MUST tear down the media session
   immediately.  Note that it is permissible to wait until the other
   side's fingerprint has been received before establishing the
   connection; however, this may have undesirable latency effects.

   SDP offerers and answerers might reuse certificates across multiple
   DTLS associations, and provide identical fingerprint values for each
   DTLS association.  It MUST be ensured that the combination of the
   fingerprint values and the SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute value
   is unique across all DTLS associations.

   If an SDP offerer or answerer generates a new temporary self-signed
   certificate for each new DTLS association, they can omit the SDP
   'dtls-association-id' attribute.





Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


5.2.  Generating the Initial SDP Offer

   When the offerer sends the initial offer, and the offerer wants to
   establish a DTLS association, it MUST insert an SDP 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute with a new value in the offer.  In
   addition, the offerer MUST insert an SDP 'setup' attribute according
   to the procedures in [RFC4145], and one or more SDP 'fingerprint'
   attributes according to the procedures in [RFC4572], in the offer.

   If the offerer inserts the SDP 'setup' attribute with an 'actpass' or
   'passive' value, the offerer MUST be prepared to receive a DTLS
   ClientHello message (if a new DTLS association is established by the
   answerer) from the answerer before it receives the SDP answer.

5.3.  Generating the Answer

   If an answerer receives an offer that contains an SDP 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute with a new value, or if the answerer
   receives an offer that contains an 'dtls-association-id' attribute
   with a previously assigned value and the answerer determines (based
   on the criteria for establishing a new DTLS association) that a new
   DTLS association is to be established, the answerer MUST insert a new
   value in the associated answer.  In addition, the answerer MUST
   insert an SDP 'setup' attribute according to the procedures in
   [RFC4145], and one or more SDP 'fingerprint' attributes according to
   the procedures in [RFC4572], in the answer.

   If an answerer receives an offer that contains an SDP 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute with a new value, and if the answerer does
   not accept the establishment of a new DTLS association, the answerer
   MUST reject the "m=" lines associated with the suggested DTLS
   association [RFC3264].

   If an answerer receives an offer that contains a 'dtls-association-
   id' attribute with a previously assigned value, and if the answerer
   determines that a new DTLS association is not to be established, the
   answerer MUST insert a 'dtls-association-id' attribute with the
   previously assigned value in the associated answer.  In addition, the
   answerer MUST insert an SDP 'setup' attribute with a value that does
   not change the previously negotiated DTLS roles, and one or more SDP
   'fingerprint' attributes values that do not change the previously
   sent fingerprints, in the answer.

   If the answerer receives an offer that does not contain an SDP 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute, the answerer MUST NOT insert a 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute in the answer.





Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   If a new DTLS association is to be established, and if the answerer
   inserts an SDP 'setup' attribute with an 'active' value in the
   answer, the answerer MUST initiate a DTLS handshake by sending a DTLS
   ClientHello message towards the offerer.

5.4.  Offerer Processing of the SDP Answer

   When an offerer receives an answer that contains an SDP 'dtls-
   association-id' attribute with a new value, and if the offerer
   becomes DTLS client (based on the value of the SDP 'setup' attribute
   value [RFC4145]), the offerer MUST establish a DTLS association.  If
   the offerer becomes DTLS server, it MUST wait for the answerer to
   establish the DTLS association.

   If the answer contains an SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute with a
   previously assigned value, the offerer will continue using the
   previously established DTLS association.  It is considered an error
   case if the answer contains a 'dtls-association-id' attribute with a
   previously assigned value, and a DTLS association does not exist.

   An offerer needs to be able to handle error conditions that can occur
   during an offer/answer transaction, e.g. if an answer contains an SDP
   'dtls-association-id' attribute with a previosuly assigned value even
   if no DTLS association exists, or if the answer contains one or more
   new fingerprint values for an existing DTLS association.  If such
   error case occurs, the offerer SHOULD terminate the associated DTLS
   association (if it exists) and send a new offer in order to terminate
   each media stream using the DTLS association, by setting the
   associated port value to zero [RFC4145].

5.5.  Modifying the Session

   When the offerer sends a subsequent offer, and if the offerer wants
   to establish a new DTLS association, the offerer MUST insert an SDP
   'dtls-association-id' attribute with a new value in the offer.  In
   addition, the offerer MUST insert an SDP 'setup' attribute according
   to the procedures in [RFC4145], and one or more SDP 'fingerprint'
   attributes according to the procedures in [RFC4572], in the offer.

   when the offerer sends a subsequent offer, and the offerer does not
   want to establish a new DTLS association, and if a previously
   established DTLS association exists, the offerer MUST insert an SDP
   'dtls-association-id' attribute with a previously assigned value in
   the offer.  In addition, the offerer MUST insert an SDP 'setup'
   attribute with a value that does not change the previously negotiated
   DTLS roles, and one or more SDP 'fingerprint' attributes with values
   that do not change the previously sent fingerprints, in the offer.




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   NOTE: When a new DTLS association is established, each endpoint needs
   to be prepared to receive data on both the new and old DTLS
   associations as long as both are alive.

6.  ICE Considerations

   When ICE is used, the ICE connectivity checks are performed before
   the DTLS handshake begins.  Note that if aggressive nomination mode
   is used, multiple candidate pairs may be marked valid before ICE
   finally converges on a single candidate pair.

   An ICE restart [RFC5245] does not by default require a new DTLS
   association to be established.

   As defined in [RFC5763], each ICE candidate associated with a
   component is treated as being part of the same DTLS association.
   Therefore, from a DTLS perspective it is not considered a change of
   local transport parameters when an endpoint switches between those
   ICE candidates.

7.  Transport Protocol Considerations

7.1.  Transport Re-Usage

   If DTLS is transported on top of a connection-oriented transport
   protocol (e.g.  TCP or SCTP), where all IP packets are acknowledged,
   all DTLS packets associated with a previous DTLS association MUST be
   acknowledged (or timed out) before a new DTLS association can be
   established on the same transport.

8.  SIP Considerations

   When the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] is used as the
   signal protocol for establishing a multimedia session, dialogs
   [RFC3261] might be established between the caller and multiple
   callees.  This is referred to as forking.  If forking occurs,
   separate DTLS associations MUST be established between the caller and
   each callee.

   It is possible to send an INVITE request which does not contain an
   SDP offer.  Such INVITE request is often referred to as an 'empty
   INVITE', or an 'offer-less INVITE'.  The receiving endpoint will
   include the SDP offer in a response associated with the response.
   When the endpoint generates such SDP offer, if a previously
   established DTLS association exists, the offerer SHOULD insert an SDP
   'dtls-association-id' attribute, and one or more SDP 'fingerprint'
   attributes, with previously assigned attribute values.  If a
   previously established DTLS association did not exists offer SHOULD



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   be generated based on the same rules as new offer Section 5.2.
   Regardless of the previous existence of DTLS association, the SDP
   'setup' attribute MUST be included according to rules defiend in
   [RFC4145] and if ICE is used, ICE restart MUST be initiated as
   defined in [RFC5763].

9.  RFC Updates

9.1.  General

   This section updates specifications that use DTLS-protected media, in
   order to reflect the procedures defined in this specification.

9.2.  Update to RFC 5763


Update to section 5:
--------------------

OLD TEXT:

5.  Establishing a Secure Channel

   The two endpoints in the exchange present their identities as part of
   the DTLS handshake procedure using certificates.  This document uses
   certificates in the same style as described in "Connection-Oriented
   Media Transport over the Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in
   the Session Description Protocol (SDP)" [RFC4572].

   If self-signed certificates are used, the content of the
   subjectAltName attribute inside the certificate MAY use the uniform
   resource identifier (URI) of the user.  This is useful for debugging
   purposes only and is not required to bind the certificate to one of
   the communication endpoints.  The integrity of the certificate is
   ensured through the fingerprint attribute in the SDP.  The
   subjectAltName is not an important component of the certificate
   verification.

   The generation of public/private key pairs is relatively expensive.
   Endpoints are not required to generate certificates for each session.

   The offer/answer model, defined in [RFC3264], is used by protocols
   like the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] to set up
   multimedia sessions.  In addition to the usual contents of an SDP
   [RFC4566] message, each media description ("m=" line and associated
   parameters) will also contain several attributes as specified in
   [RFC5764], [RFC4145], and [RFC4572].




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   When an endpoint wishes to set up a secure media session with another
   endpoint, it sends an offer in a SIP message to the other endpoint.
   This offer includes, as part of the SDP payload, the fingerprint of
   the certificate that the endpoint wants to use.  The endpoint SHOULD
   send the SIP message containing the offer to the offerer's SIP proxy
   over an integrity protected channel.  The proxy SHOULD add an
   Identity header field according to the procedures outlined in
   [RFC4474].  The SIP message containing the offer SHOULD be sent to
   the offerer's SIP proxy over an integrity protected channel.  When
   the far endpoint receives the SIP message, it can verify the identity
   of the sender using the Identity header field.  Since the Identity
   header field is a digital signature across several SIP header fields,
   in addition to the body of the SIP message, the receiver can also be
   certain that the message has not been tampered with after the digital
   signature was applied and added to the SIP message.

   The far endpoint (answerer) may now establish a DTLS association with
   the offerer.  Alternately, it can indicate in its answer that the
   offerer is to initiate the TLS association.  In either case, mutual
   DTLS certificate-based authentication will be used.  After completing
   the DTLS handshake, information about the authenticated identities,
   including the certificates, are made available to the endpoint
   application.  The answerer is then able to verify that the offerer's
   certificate used for authentication in the DTLS handshake can be
   associated to the certificate fingerprint contained in the offer in
   the SDP.  At this point, the answerer may indicate to the end user
   that the media is secured.  The offerer may only tentatively accept
   the answerer's certificate since it may not yet have the answerer's
   certificate fingerprint.

   When the answerer accepts the offer, it provides an answer back to
   the offerer containing the answerer's certificate fingerprint.  At
   this point, the offerer can accept or reject the peer's certificate
   and the offerer can indicate to the end user that the media is
   secured.

   Note that the entire authentication and key exchange for securing the
   media traffic is handled in the media path through DTLS.  The
   signaling path is only used to verify the peers' certificate
   fingerprints.

   The offer and answer MUST conform to the following requirements.

   o  The endpoint MUST use the setup attribute defined in [RFC4145].
      The endpoint that is the offerer MUST use the setup attribute
      value of setup:actpass and be prepared to receive a client_hello
      before it receives the answer.  The answerer MUST use either a
      setup attribute value of setup:active or setup:passive.  Note that



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


      if the answerer uses setup:passive, then the DTLS handshake will
      not begin until the answerer is received, which adds additional
      latency. setup:active allows the answer and the DTLS handshake to
      occur in parallel.  Thus, setup:active is RECOMMENDED.  Whichever
      party is active MUST initiate a DTLS handshake by sending a
      ClientHello over each flow (host/port quartet).

   o  The endpoint MUST NOT use the connection attribute defined in
      [RFC4145].

   o  The endpoint MUST use the certificate fingerprint attribute as
      specified in [RFC4572].

   o  The certificate presented during the DTLS handshake MUST match the
      fingerprint exchanged via the signaling path in the SDP.  The
      security properties of this mechanism are described in Section 8.

   o  If the fingerprint does not match the hashed certificate, then the
      endpoint MUST tear down the media session immediately.  Note that
      it is permissible to wait until the other side's fingerprint has
      been received before establishing the connection; however, this
      may have undesirable latency effects.


NEW TEXT:

5.  Establishing a Secure Channel

   The two endpoints in the exchange present their identities as part of
   the DTLS handshake procedure using certificates.  This document uses
   certificates in the same style as described in "Connection-Oriented
   Media Transport over the Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in
   the Session Description Protocol (SDP)" [RFC4572].

   If self-signed certificates are used, the content of the
   subjectAltName attribute inside the certificate MAY use the uniform
   resource identifier (URI) of the user.  This is useful for debugging
   purposes only and is not required to bind the certificate to one of
   the communication endpoints.  The integrity of the certificate is
   ensured through the fingerprint attribute in the SDP.

   The generation of public/private key pairs is relatively expensive.
   Endpoints are not required to generate certificates for each session.

   The offer/answer model, defined in [RFC3264], is used by protocols
   like the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] to set up
   multimedia sessions.




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   When an endpoint wishes to set up a secure media session with another
   endpoint, it sends an offer in a SIP message to the other endpoint.
   This offer includes, as part of the SDP payload, a fingerprint of
   a certificate that the endpoint wants to use.  The endpoint SHOULD
   send the SIP message containing the offer to the offerer's SIP proxy
   over an integrity protected channel.  The proxy SHOULD add an
   Identity header field according to the procedures outlined in
   [RFC4474].  The SIP message containing the offer SHOULD be sent to
   the offerer's SIP proxy over an integrity protected channel.  When
   the far endpoint receives the SIP message, it can verify the identity
   of the sender using the Identity header field.  Since the Identity
   header field is a digital signature across several SIP header fields,
   in addition to the body of the SIP message, the receiver can also be
   certain that the message has not been tampered with after the digital
   signature was applied and added to the SIP message.

   The far endpoint (answerer) may now establish a DTLS association with
   the offerer.  Alternately, it can indicate in its answer that the
   offerer is to initiate the DTLS association.  In either case, mutual
   DTLS certificate-based authentication will be used.  After completing
   the DTLS handshake, information about the authenticated identities,
   including the certificates, are made available to the endpoint
   application.  The answerer is then able to verify that the offerer's
   certificate used for authentication in the DTLS handshake can be
   associated to the certificate fingerprint contained in the offer in
   the SDP.  At this point, the answerer may indicate to the end user
   that the media is secured.  The offerer may only tentatively accept
   the answerer's certificate since it may not yet have the answerer's
   certificate fingerprint.

   When the answerer accepts the offer, it provides an answer back to
   the offerer containing the answerer's certificate fingerprint.  At
   this point, the offerer can accept or reject the peer's certificate
   and the offerer can indicate to the end user that the media is
   secured.

   Note that the entire authentication and key exchange for securing the
   media traffic is handled in the media path through DTLS.  The
   signaling path is only used to verify the peers' certificate
   fingerprints.

   The offerer and answerer MUST follow the SDP offer/answer procedures
   defined in [RFCXXXX].


Update to section 6.6:
----------------------




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


OLD TEXT:

6.6.  Session Modification

   Once an answer is provided to the offerer, either endpoint MAY
   request a session modification that MAY include an updated offer.
   This session modification can be carried in either an INVITE or
   UPDATE request.  The peers can reuse the existing associations if
   they are compatible (i.e., they have the same key fingerprints and
   transport parameters), or establish a new one following the same
   rules are for initial exchanges, tearing down the existing
   association as soon as the offer/answer exchange is completed.  Note
   that if the active/passive status of the endpoints changes, a new
   connection MUST be established.

NEW TEXT:

6.6.  Session Modification

   Once an answer is provided to the offerer, either endpoint MAY
   request a session modification that MAY include an updated offer.
   This session modification can be carried in either an INVITE or
   UPDATE request. The peers can reuse an existing DTLS association,
   or establish a new one, following the procedures in [RFCXXXX].

Update to section 6.7.1:
------------------------

OLD TEXT:

6.7.1.  ICE Interaction

   Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE), as specified in
   [RFC5245], provides a methodology of allowing participants in
   multimedia sessions to verify mutual connectivity.  When ICE is being
   used, the ICE connectivity checks are performed before the DTLS
   handshake begins.  Note that if aggressive nomination mode is used,
   multiple candidate pairs may be marked valid before ICE finally
   converges on a single candidate pair.  Implementations MUST treat all
   ICE candidate pairs associated with a single component as part of the
   same DTLS association.  Thus, there will be only one DTLS handshake
   even if there are multiple valid candidate pairs.  Note that this may
   mean adjusting the endpoint IP addresses if the selected candidate
   pair shifts, just as if the DTLS packets were an ordinary media
   stream.

   Note that Simple Traversal of the UDP Protocol through NAT (STUN)
   packets are sent directly over UDP, not over DTLS.  [RFC5764]



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   describes how to demultiplex STUN packets from DTLS packets and SRTP
   packets.

NEW TEXT:

6.7.1.  ICE Interaction

   The Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) [RFC5245]
   considerations for DTLS-protected media are described in
   [RFCXXXX].

   Note that Simple Traversal of the UDP Protocol through NAT (STUN)
   packets are sent directly over UDP, not over DTLS.  [RFC5764]
   describes how to demultiplex STUN packets from DTLS packets and SRTP
   packets.


9.3.  Update to RFC 7345


Update to section 4:
--------------------

OLD TEXT:

4.  SDP Offerer/Answerer Procedures

4.1.  General

   An endpoint (i.e., both the offerer and the answerer) MUST create an
   SDP media description ("m=" line) for each UDPTL-over-DTLS media
   stream and MUST assign a UDP/TLS/UDPTL value (see Table 1) to the
   "proto" field of the "m=" line.

   The procedures in this section apply to an "m=" line associated with
   a UDPTL-over-DTLS media stream.

   In order to negotiate a UDPTL-over-DTLS media stream, the following
   SDP attributes are used:

   o  The SDP attributes defined for UDPTL over UDP, as described in
      [ITU.T38.2010]; and

   o  The SDP attributes, defined in [RFC4145] and [RFC4572], as
      described in this section.

   The endpoint MUST NOT use the SDP "connection" attribute [RFC4145].




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 15]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   In order to negotiate the TLS roles for the UDPTL-over-DTLS transport
   connection, the endpoint MUST use the SDP "setup" attribute
   [RFC4145].

   If the endpoint supports, and is willing to use, a cipher suite with
   an associated certificate, the endpoint MUST include an SDP
   "fingerprint" attribute [RFC4572].  The endpoint MUST support SHA-256
   for generating and verifying the SDP "fingerprint" attribute value.
   The use of SHA-256 is preferred.  UDPTL over DTLS, at a minimum, MUST
   support TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 and MUST support
   TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256.  UDPTL over DTLS MUST prefer
   TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 and any other Perfect Forward
   Secrecy (PFS) cipher suites over non-PFS cipher suites.
   Implementations SHOULD disable TLS-level compression.

   If a cipher suite with an associated certificate is selected during
   the DTLS handshake, the certificate received during the DTLS
   handshake MUST match the fingerprint received in the SDP
   "fingerprint" attribute.  If the fingerprint does not match the
   hashed certificate, then the endpoint MUST tear down the media
   session immediately.  Note that it is permissible to wait until the
   other side's fingerprint has been received before establishing the
   connection; however, this may have undesirable latency effects.

4.2.  Generating the Initial Offer

   The offerer SHOULD assign the SDP "setup" attribute with a value of
   "actpass", unless the offerer insists on being either the sender or
   receiver of the DTLS ClientHello message, in which case the offerer
   can use either a value of "active" (the offerer will be the sender of
   ClientHello) or "passive" (the offerer will be the receiver of
   ClientHello).  The offerer MUST NOT assign an SDP "setup" attribute
   with a "holdconn" value.

   If the offerer assigns the SDP "setup" attribute with a value of
   "actpass" or "passive", the offerer MUST be prepared to receive a
   DTLS ClientHello message before it receives the SDP answer.

4.3.  Generating the Answer

   If the answerer accepts the offered UDPTL-over-DTLS transport
   connection, in the associated SDP answer, the answerer MUST assign an
   SDP "setup" attribute with a value of either "active" or "passive",
   according to the procedures in [RFC4145].  The answerer MUST NOT
   assign an SDP "setup" attribute with a value of "holdconn".

   If the answerer assigns an SDP "setup" attribute with a value of
   "active" value, the answerer MUST initiate a DTLS handshake by



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 16]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   sending a DTLS ClientHello message on the negotiated media stream,
   towards the IP address and port of the offerer.

4.4.  Offerer Processing of the Answer

   When the offerer receives an SDP answer, if the offerer ends up being
   active it MUST initiate a DTLS handshake by sending a DTLS
   ClientHello message on the negotiated media stream, towards the IP
   address and port of the answerer.

4.5.  Modifying the Session

   Once an offer/answer exchange has been completed, either endpoint MAY
   send a new offer in order to modify the session.  The endpoints can
   reuse the existing DTLS association if the key fingerprint values and
   transport parameters indicated by each endpoint are unchanged.
   Otherwise, following the rules for the initial offer/answer exchange,
   the endpoints can negotiate and create a new DTLS association and,
   once created, delete the previous DTLS association, following the
   same rules for the initial offer/answer exchange.  Each endpoint
   needs to be prepared to receive data on both the new and old DTLS
   associations as long as both are alive.

NEW TEXT:

4.  SDP Offerer/Answerer Procedures

   An endpoint (i.e., both the offerer and the answerer) MUST create an
   SDP media description ("m=" line) for each UDPTL-over-DTLS media
   stream and MUST assign a UDP/TLS/UDPTL value (see Table 1) to the
   "proto" field of the "m=" line.

   The offerer and answerer MUST follow the SDP offer/answer procedures
   defined in [RFCXXXX] in order to negotiate the DTLS association
   associated with the UDPTL-over-DTLS media stream. In addition,
   the offerer and answerer MUST use the SDP attributes defined for
   UDPTL over UDP, as defined in [ITU.T38.2010].


Update to section 5.2.1:
------------------------

OLD TEXT:

5.2.1.  ICE Usage

   When Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) [RFC5245] is being
   used, the ICE connectivity checks are performed before the DTLS



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 17]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   handshake begins.  Note that if aggressive nomination mode is used,
   multiple candidate pairs may be marked valid before ICE finally
   converges on a single candidate pair.  User Agents (UAs) MUST treat
   all ICE candidate pairs associated with a single component as part of
   the same DTLS association.  Thus, there will be only one DTLS
   handshake even if there are multiple valid candidate pairs.  Note
   that this may mean adjusting the endpoint IP addresses if the
   selected candidate pair shifts, just as if the DTLS packets were an
   ordinary media stream.  In the case of an ICE restart, the DTLS
   handshake procedure is repeated, and a new DTLS association is
   created.  Once the DTLS handshake is completed and the new DTLS
   association has been created, the previous DTLS association is
   deleted.


NEW TEXT:

5.2.1.  ICE Usage

   The Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) [RFC5245]
   considerations for DTLS-protected media are described in
   [RFCXXXX].


10.  Security Considerations

   This specification does not modify the security considerations
   associated with DTLS, or the SDP offer/answer mechanism.  In addition
   to the introduction of the SDP 'dtls-association-id' attribute, the
   specification simply clarifies the procedures for negotiating and
   establishing a DTLS association.

11.  IANA Considerations

   This document updates the "Session Description Protocol Parameters"
   registry as specified in Section 8.2.2 of [RFC4566].  Specifically,
   it adds the SDP dtls-association-id attribute to the table for SDP
   media level attributes.


    Attribute name: dtls-association-id
    Type of attribute: media-level
    Subject to charset: no
    Purpose: Indicate whether a new DTLS association is to be established/re-established.
    Appropriate Values: see Section 4
    Contact name: Christer Holmberg
    Category: IDENTICAL




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 18]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


12.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Justin Uberti, Martin Thomson, Paul Kyzivat, Jens Guballa,
   Charles Eckel and Gonzalo Salgueiro for providing comments and
   suggestions on the draft.

13.  Change Log

   [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please remove this section when publishing]

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-10

   o  Modified document to use dtls-association-id instead of dtls-
      connection

   o  Changes are based on comments from Eric Rescorla, Justin Uberti,
      and Paul Kyzivat.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-08

   o  Offer/Answer section modified in order to allow sending of
      multiple SDP 'fingerprint' attributes.

   o  Terminology made consistent: 'DTLS connection' replaced with 'DTLS
      association'.

   o  Editorial changes based on comments from Paul Kyzivat.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-07

   o  Reference to RFC 7315 replaced with reference to RFC 7345.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-06

   o  Text on restrictions regarding spanning a DTLS association over
      multiple transports added.

   o  Mux category added to IANA Considerations.

   o  Normative text regarding mux category and source-specific
      applicability added.

   o  Reference to RFC 7315 added.

   o  Clarified that offerer/answerer that has not been updated to
      support this specification will not include the dtls-association-
      id attribute in offers and answers.




Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 19]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   o  Editorial corrections based on WGLC comments from Charles Eckel.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-05

   o  Text on handling offer/answer error conditions added.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-04

   o  Editorial nits fixed based on comments from Paul Kyzivat:

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-03

   o  Changes based on comments from Paul Kyzivat:

   o  - Modification of dtls-association-id attribute section.

   o  - Removal of IANA considerations subsection.

   o  - Making note into normative text in o/a section.

   o  Changes based on comments from Martin Thompson:

   o  - Abbreviations section removed.

   o  - Clarify that a new DTLS association requires a new o/a
      transaction.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-02

   o  - Updated RFCs added to boilerplate.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-01

   o  - Annex regarding 'dtls-association-id-id' attribute removed.

   o  - Additional SDP offer/answer procedures, related to certificates,
      added.

   o  - Updates to RFC 5763 and RFC 7345 added.

   o  - Transport protocol considerations added.

   Changes from draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-dtls-00

   o  - SDP 'connection' attribute replaced with new 'dtls-association-
      id' attribute.

   o  - IANA Considerations added.



Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 20]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   o  - E-mail regarding 'dtls-association-id-id' attribute added as
      Annex.

   Changes from draft-holmberg-mmusic-sdp-dtls-01

   o  - draft-ietf-mmusic version of draft submitted.

   o  - Draft file name change (sdp-dtls -> dtls-sdp) due to collision
      with another expired draft.

   o  - Clarify that if ufrag in offer is unchanged, it must be
      unchanged in associated answer.

   o  - SIP Considerations section added.

   o  - Section about multiple SDP fingerprint attributes added.

   Changes from draft-holmberg-mmusic-sdp-dtls-00

   o  - Editorial changes and clarifications.

14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3261, June 2002,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3261>.

   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model
              with Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3264, June 2002,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3264>.

   [RFC4145]  Yon, D. and G. Camarillo, "TCP-Based Media Transport in
              the Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 4145,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4145, September 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4145>.






Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 21]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, DOI 10.17487/RFC4566,
              July 2006, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4566>.

   [RFC4572]  Lennox, J., "Connection-Oriented Media Transport over the
              Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in the Session
              Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 4572,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4572, July 2006,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4572>.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5234, January 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5234>.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5245, April 2010,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5245>.

   [RFC5763]  Fischl, J., Tschofenig, H., and E. Rescorla, "Framework
              for Establishing a Secure Real-time Transport Protocol
              (SRTP) Security Context Using Datagram Transport Layer
              Security (DTLS)", RFC 5763, DOI 10.17487/RFC5763, May
              2010, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5763>.

   [RFC7345]  Holmberg, C., Sedlacek, I., and G. Salgueiro, "UDP
              Transport Layer (UDPTL) over Datagram Transport Layer
              Security (DTLS)", RFC 7345, DOI 10.17487/RFC7345, August
              2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7345>.

14.2.  Informative References

   [RFC5576]  Lennox, J., Ott, J., and T. Schierl, "Source-Specific
              Media Attributes in the Session Description Protocol
              (SDP)", RFC 5576, DOI 10.17487/RFC5576, June 2009,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5576>.

   [RFC6083]  Tuexen, M., Seggelmann, R., and E. Rescorla, "Datagram
              Transport Layer Security (DTLS) for Stream Control
              Transmission Protocol (SCTP)", RFC 6083,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6083, January 2011,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6083>.







Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 22]

Internet-DraftUsing the SDP Offer/Answer Mechanism for DTLS   March 2016


   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-mux-attributes]
              Nandakumar, S., "A Framework for SDP Attributes when
              Multiplexing", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-mux-attributes-12
              (work in progress), January 2016.

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation]
              Holmberg, C., Alvestrand, H., and C. Jennings,
              "Negotiating Media Multiplexing Using the Session
              Description Protocol (SDP)", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-
              negotiation-25 (work in progress), January 2016.

Authors' Addresses

   Christer Holmberg
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com


   Roman Shpount
   TurboBridge
   4905 Del Ray Avenue, Suite 300
   Bethesda, MD  20814
   USA

   Phone: +1 (240) 292-6632
   Email: rshpount@turbobridge.com





















Holmberg & Shpount     Expires September 22, 2016              [Page 23]
