Internet Engineering Task Force                                 S. Floyd
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 E. Kohler
draft-irtf-tmrg-tools-00.txt                                     Editors
Expires: March 2006                                    13 September 2005


      Tools for the Evaluation of Simulation and Testbed Scenarios




Status of this Memo

    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on March 2006.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

    This document describes tools for the evaluation of simulation and
    testbed scenarios used in research on Internet congestion control
    mechanisms.  We believe that research in congestion control



Floyd, Kohler                                                   [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    mechanisms has been seriously hampered by the lack of good models
    underpinning analysis, simulation, and testbed experiments, and that
    tools for the evaluation of simulation and testbed scenarios can
    help in the construction of better scenarios, based on better
    underlying models.  One use of the tools described in this document
    is in comparing key characteristics of test scenarios with known
    characteristics from the diverse and ever-changing real world.
    Tools characterizing the aggregate traffic on a link include the
    distribution of per-packet round-trip times, the distribution of
    packet sequence numbers, and the like.  Tools characterizing end-to-
    end paths include drop rates as a function of packet size and of
    burst size, the synchronization ratio between two end-to-end TCP
    flows, and the like.  For each characteristic, we describe what
    aspects of the scenario determine this characteristic, how the
    characteristic can affect the results of simulations and experiments
    for the evaluation of congestion control mechanisms, and what is
    known about this characteristic in the real world.  We also explain
    why the use of such tools can add considerable power to our
    understanding and evaluation of simulation and testbed scenarios.

1.  Conventions

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119].

2.  Introduction

    This document discusses tools for the evaluation of simulation and
    testbed scenarios used in research on Internet congestion control
    mechanisms.  These tools include but are not limited to measurement
    tools; the tools discussed in this document are largely ways of
    characterizing aggregate traffic on a link, or characterizing the
    end-to-end path.  One use of these tools is for understanding key
    characteristics of test scenarios; many characteristics, such as the
    distribution of per-packet round-trip times on the link, don't come
    from a single input parameter but are determined by a range of
    inputs.  A second use of the tools is to compare key characteristics
    of test scenarios with what is known of the same characteristics of
    the past and current Internet, and with what can be conjectured
    about these characteristics of future networks.  This paper follows
    the general approach from "Internet Research Needs Better Models"
    [FK02].

    As an example of the power of tools for characterizing scenarios, a
    great deal is known about the distribution of connection sizes on a
    link, or equivalently, the distribution of per-packet sequence
    numbers.  It has been conjectured that a heavy-tailed distribution



Floyd, Kohler                                       Section 2.  [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    of connection sizes is an invariant feature of Internet traffic.  A
    test scenario with mostly long-lived traffic, or with a mix with
    only long-lived and very short flows, does not have a realistic
    distribution of connection sizes, and can give unrealistic results
    in simulations or experiments evaluating congestion control
    mechanisms.  For instance, the distribution of packet sequence
    numbers makes clear the fraction of traffic on a link from medium-
    sized connections, e.g., with packet sequence numbers from 100 to
    1000.  These medium-sized connections can slow-start up to a large
    congestion window, possibly coming to an abrupt stop soon
    afterwards, contributing significantly to the burstiness of the
    aggregate traffic, and to the problems facing congestion control.

    In the sections below we will discuss a number of tools for
    describing and evaluating scenarios, show how these characteristics
    can affect the results of research on congestion control mechanisms,
    and summarize what is known about these characteristics in real-
    world networks.

3.  Tools

    The tools or characteristics that we discuss are the following.

3.1.  Characterizing Aggregate Traffic on a Link

    o  Distribution of per-packet round-trip times.

    o  Distribution of packet sequence numbers.

    o  Distribution of packet sizes.

    o  Distribution of peak flow rates.

    o  Distribution of transport protocols.

3.2.  Characterizing an End-to-End Path

    o  Synchronization ratio.

    o  Drop rates as a function of packet size.

    o  Drop rates as a function of burst size.

    o  Degree of packet drops.

    o  Range of queueing delay.





Floyd, Kohler                                     Section 3.2.  [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


3.3.  Other Characteristics

    o  Congestion control mechanisms for background or competing
       traffic.

    o  Characterization of congested links in terms of bandwidth and
       typical levels of congestion (in terms of packet drop rates).

    o  Characterization of challenging lower layers in terms of
       reordering, delay variation, packet corruption, and the like.

    o  Characterization of network changes affecting congestion, such as
       routing changes or link outages.

    Below we will discuss each characteristic in turn, giving the
    definition, the factors determining that characteristic, the effect
    on congestion control metrics, and what is known so far from
    measurement studies in the Internet.

4.  Distribution of per-packet round-trip times

    Definition: The distribution of per-packet round-trip times on a
    link is defined formally by assigning to each packet the most recent
    round trip time measured for that end-to-end connection.  In
    practice, coarse-grained information is generally sufficient, even
    though it has been shown that there is significant variability in
    round-trip times within a TCP connection [AKSJ03], and it is
    sufficient to assign to each packet the first round-trip time
    measurement for that connection, or to assign the current round-trip
    time estimate maintained by the TCP connection.


    Determining factors: The distribution of per-packet round-trip times
    on a link is determined by end-to-end propagation delays, by
    queueing delays along end-to-end paths, and by the congestion
    control mechanisms used by the traffic.  For example, for a scenario
    using TCP, TCP connections with smaller round-trip times will
    receive a proportionally larger fraction of traffic than competing
    TCP connections with larger round-trip times, all else being equal,
    due to the dynamics of TCP favoring flows with smaller round-trip
    times.  This will generally shift the distribution of per-packet
    RTTs lower relative to the distribution of per-connection RTTs,
    since short-RTT connections will have more packets.

    Effect on congestion control metrics: The distribution of per-packet
    round-trip times on a link affects the burstiness of the aggregate
    traffic, and therefore can affect congestion control performance in
    a range of areas such as delay/throughput tradeoffs.  The



Floyd, Kohler                                       Section 4.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    distribution of per-packet round-trip times can also affect metrics
    of fairness, degree of oscillations, and the like.  For example,
    long-term oscillations of queueing delay are more likely to occur in
    scenarios with a narrow range of round-trip times [FK02].

    Measurements: The distribution of per-packet round-trip times for
    TCP traffic on a link can be measured from a packet trace with the
    passive TCP round-trip time estimator from Jiang and Dovrolis
    [JD02].  [Add pointers to other estimators, such as ones mentioned
    in JD02.  Add a pointer to Mark Allman's loss detection tool.]
    Their paper shows the distribution of per-packet round-trip times
    for TCP packets for a number of different links.  For the links
    measured, the percent of packets with round-trip times at most
    100 ms ranged from 30% to 80%, and the percent of packets with
    round-trip times at most 200 ms ranged from 55% to 90%, depending on
    the link.

    In the NS simulator, the distribution of per-packet round-trip times
    for TCP packets on a link can be reported by the queue monitor,
    using TCP's estimated round-trip time added to packet headers.  This
    is illustrated in the validation test "./test-all-simple stats3" in
    the directory tcl/test.

    Scenarios: [FK02] shows a relatively simple scenario, with a
    dumbbell topology with four access links on each end, that gives a
    fairly realistic range of round-trip times.  [Look for the other
    citations to add.]

5.  Distribution of packet sequence numbers

    Definition: The distribution of packet sequence numbers on a link is
    defined by giving each packet a sequence number, where the first
    packet in a connection has sequence number 1, the second packet has
    sequence number 2, and so on.  The distribution of packet sequence
    numbers can be derived in a straightforward manner from the
    distribution of connection sizes, and vice versa;  however, the
    distribution of connection sizes is more suited for traffic
    generators, and the distribution of packet sequence numbers is more
    suited for measuring and illustrating the packets actually seen on a
    link over a fixed interval of time.  There has been a considerably
    body of research over the last ten years on the heavy-tailed
    distribution of connection sizes for traffic on the Internet.
    [CBC95] [Add citations.]

    Determining factors: The distribution of connection sizes is largely
    determined by the traffic generators used in a scenario.  For
    example, is there a single traffic generator characterized by a
    distribution of connection sizes?  A mix of long-lived and web



Floyd, Kohler                                       Section 5.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    traffic, with the web traffic characterized by a distribution of
    connection sizes?  Or something else?

    Effect on congestion control metrics: The distribution of packet
    sequence numbers affects the burstiness of aggregate traffic on a
    link, thereby affecting all congestion control metrics for which
    this is a factor.  As an example, [FK02] illustrates that the
    traffic mix can affect the queue dynamics on a congested link.
    [Find more to cite, about the effect of the distribution of packet
    sequence numbers on congestion control metrics.]

    [Add a paragraph about the impact of medium-size flows.]

    [Add a paragraph about the impact of flows starting and stopping.]

    [Add a warning about scenarios that use only long-lived flows, or a
    mix of long-lived and very short flows.]

    Measurements: [Cite some of the literature.]

    Traffic generators: Some of the available traffic generators are
    listed on the web site for "Traffic Generators for Internet Traffic"
    [TG].  This includes pointers to traffic generators for peer-to-peer
    traffic, traffic from online games, and traffic from Distributed
    Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks.

    In the NS simulator, the distribution of packet sequence numbers for
    TCP packets on a link can be reported by the queue monitor at a
    router.  This is illustrated in the validation test "./test-all-
    simple stats3" in the directory tcl/test.

6.  The Distribution of Packet Sizes

    Definition: The distribution of packet sizes is defined in a
    straightforward way, using packet sizes in bytes.

    Determining factors: The distribution of packet sizes is determined
    by the traffic mix, the path MTUs, and by the packet sizes used by
    the transport-level senders.

    The distribution of packet sizes on a link is also determined by the
    mix of forward-path TCP traffic and reverse-path TCP traffic in that
    scenario, for a scenario characterized by a `forward path' (e.g.,
    left to right on a particular link) and a `reverse path' (e.g.,
    right to left on the same link).  For such a scenario, the forward-
    path TCP traffic contributes data packets to the forward link and
    acknowledgment packets to the reverse link, while the reverse-path
    TCP traffic contributes small acknowledgment packets to the forward



Floyd, Kohler                                       Section 6.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    link.  The ratio between TCP data and TCP ACK packets on a link can
    be used as some indication of the ratio between forward-path and
    reverse-path TCP traffic.

    Effect on congestion control metrics: The distribution of packet
    sizes on a link is an indicator of the ratio of forward-path and
    reverse-path TCP traffic in that network.  The amount of reverse-
    path traffic determines the loss and queueing delay experienced by
    acknowledgement packets on the reverse path, significantly affecting
    the burstiness of the aggregate traffic on the forward path.  [Add
    citations.]  [In what other ways does the distribution of packet
    sizes affect congestion control metrics?]

    Measurements: There has been a wealth of measurements over time on
    the packet size distribution of traffic [A00], [HMTG01].  These
    measurements are generally consistent with a model of roughly 10% of
    the TCP connections using an MSS of roughly 500 bytes, and with the
    other 90% of TCP connections using an MSS of 1460 bytes.

7.  The Distribution of Per-Packet Peak Flow Rates

    Definition: The distribution of peak flow rates is defined by
    assigning to each packet the peak sending rate in bytes per second
    of that connection, where the peak sending rate is defined over
    0.1-second intervals.  The distribution of peak flow rates gives
    some indication of the ratio of "alpha" and "beta" traffic on a
    link, where alpha traffic on a congested link is defined as traffic
    with that link at the main bottleneck, while the beta traffic on the
    link has a primary bottleneck elsewhere along its path [RSB01].

    Determining factors: The distribution of peak flow rates is
    determined by flows with bottlenecks elsewhere along their end-to-
    end path, e.g., flows with low-bandwidth access links.  The
    distribution of peak flow rates is also affected by applications
    with limited sending rates.

    Effect on congestion control metrics: The distribution of peak flow
    rates affects the burstiness of aggregate traffic, with low-peak-
    rate traffic decreasing the aggregate burstiness, and adding to the
    traffic's tractability.

    Measurements: [RSB01].  The distribution of peak rates can be
    expected to change over time, as there is an increasing number of
    high-bandwidth access links to the home, and of high-bandwidth
    Ethernet links at work and at other institutions.

    Simulators: [For NS, add a pointer to the DelayBox,
    "http://dirt.cs.unc.edu/delaybox/", for more easily simulating low-



Floyd, Kohler                                       Section 7.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    bandwidth access links for flows.]

8.  The Distribution of Transport Protocols.

    Definition: The distribution of transport protocols on a congested
    link is straightforward, with each packet given its associated
    transport protocol (e.g., TCP, UDP).  The distribution is often
    given both in terms of packets and in terms of bytes.

    For UDP packets, it might be more helpful to classify them in terms
    of the port number, or the assumed application (e.g., DNS, RIP,
    games, Windows Media, RealAudio, RealVideo, etc.)  [MAWI]).  Other
    traffic includes ICMP, IPSEC, and the like.  In the future there
    could be traffic from SCTP, DCCP, or from other transport protocols.

    Effect on congestion control metrics: The distribution of transport
    protocols affects metrics relating to the effectiveness of AQM
    mechanisms on a link.

    Measurements: In the past, TCP traffic has typically consisted of
    90% to 95% of the bytes on a link [UW02], [UA01].  [Get updated
    citations for this.]  Measurement studies show that TCP traffic from
    web servers almost always uses conformant TCP congestion control
    procedures [MAF05].

9.  The Synchronization Ratio

    Definition: The synchronization ratio is defined as the degree of
    synchronization of loss events between two TCP flows on the same
    path.  Thus, the synchronization ratio is defined as a
    characteristic of an end-to-end path.  When one TCP flow of a pair
    has a loss event, the synchronization ratio is given by the fraction
    of those loss events for which the second flow has a loss event
    within one round-trip time.  Each connection in a flow pair has a
    separate synchronization ratio, and the overall synchronization
    ratio of the pair of flows is the higher of the two ratios.  When
    measuring the synchronization ratio, it is preferable to start the
    two TCP flows at slightly different times, with large receive
    windows.

    Determining factors: The synchronization ratio is determined largely
    by the traffic mix on the congested link, and by the AQM mechanism
    (or lack of AQM mechanism).

    Different types of TCP flows are also likely to have different
    synchronization measures.  E.g., Two HighSpeed TCP flows might have
    higher synchronization measures that two Standard TCP flows on the
    same path, because of their more aggressive window increase rates.



Floyd, Kohler                                       Section 9.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    Effect on congestion control metrics: The synchronization ratio
    affects convergence times for high-bandwidth TCPs.  Convergence
    times are known to be poor for some high-bandwidth protocols in
    environments with high levels of synchronization.  [Cite the papers
    by Leith and Shorten.]  However, it is not clear if these
    environments with high levels of synchronization are realistic.

    Measurements: Grenville Armitage and Qiang Fu have performed initial
    experiments of synchronization in the Internet, using Standard TCP
    flows, and have found very low levels of synchronization.

    [Appenzeller et al, Sizing Router Buffers, reports that
    synchronization is rare as the number of competing flows increases.
    Kevin Jeffay has some results on synchronization also.]

    Needed: We need measurements of the synchronization ratio for flows
    that use high-bandwidth protocols over high-bandwidth paths, given
    typical levels of competing traffic and with typical queuing
    mechanisms at routers (whatever these are), to see if there are
    higher levels of synchronization with high-bandwidth protocols such
    as HighSpeed TCP, Fast TCP, and the like, which are more aggressive
    than Standard TCP.  The assumption would be that in many
    environments, high-bandwidth protocols have higher levels of
    synchronization than flows using Standard TCP.

10.  Drop or Mark Rates as a Function of Packet Size

    Definition: Drop rates as a function of packet size are defined by
    the actual drop rates for different packets on an end-to-end path or
    on a congested link over a particular time interval.  In some cases,
    e.g., Drop-Tail queues in units of packets, general statements can
    be made; e.g., that large and small packets will experience the same
    packet drop rates.  However, in other cases, e.g., Drop-Tail queues
    in units of bytes, no such general statement can be made, and the
    drop rate as a function of packet size will be determined in part by
    the traffic mix at the congested link at that point of time.

    Determining factors: The drop rate as a function of packet size is
    determined in part by the queue architecture.  E.g., is the Drop-
    Tail queue in units of packets, of bytes, of 60-byte buffers, or of
    a mix of buffer sizes?  Is the AQM mechanism in packet mode,
    dropping each packet with the same probability, or in byte mode,
    with the probability of dropping or marking a packet being
    proportional to the packet size in bytes.

    The effect of packet size on drop rate would also be affected by the
    presence of preferential scheduling for small packets, or by
    differential scheduling for packets from different flows (e.g., per-



Floyd, Kohler                                      Section 10.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    flow scheduling, or differential scheduling for UDP and TCP
    traffic).

    In many environments, the drop rate as a function of packet size
    will be heavily affected by the traffic mix at a particular time.
    For example, is the traffic mix dominated by large packets, or by
    smaller ones?  In some cases, the overall packet drop rate could
    also affect the relative drop rates for different packet sizes.

    Effect on congestion control metrics: The drop rate as a function of
    packet size has a significant effect on the performance of
    congestion control for VoIP and other small-packet flows.
    [Citation: "TFRC for Voice: the VoIP Variant", draft-ietf-dccp-tfrc-
    voip-02.txt, and earlier papers.]  The drop rate as a function of
    packet size also has an effect on TCP performance, as it affects the
    drop rates for TCP's SYN and ACK packets.  [Citation: Jeffay and
    others.]

    Measurements: We need measurements of the drop rate as a function of
    packet size over a wide range of paths, or for a wide range of
    congested links.  For tests of relative drop rates on end-to-end
    packets, one possibility would be to run successive TCP connections
    with 200-byte, 512-byte, and 1460-byte packets, and to compare the
    packet drop rates.  The ideal test would include running TCP
    connections on the reverse path, to measure the drop rates for the
    small ACK packets on the forward path.  It would also be useful to
    characterize the difference in drop rates for 200-byte TCP packets
    and 200-byte UDP packets, even though some of this difference could
    be due to the relative burstiness of the different connections.

    Ping experiments could also be used to get measurements of drop
    rates as a function size, but it would be necessary to make sure
    that the ping sending rates were adjusted to be TCP-friendly.

    [Cite the known literature on drop rates as a function of packet
    size.]

    Our conjecture is that there is a wide range of behaviors for this
    characteristic in the real world.  Routers include Drop-Tail queues
    in packets, bytes, and buffer sizes in between; these will have
    quite different drop rates as a function of packet size.  Some
    routers include RED in byte mode (the default for RED in Linux) and
    some have RED in packet mode (Cisco, I believe).  This also affects
    drop rates as a function of packet size.

    Some routers on congested access links use per-flow scheduling.  In
    this case, does the per-flow scheduling have the goal of fairness in
    *bytes* per second or in *packets* per second?  What effect does the



Floyd, Kohler                                     Section 10.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    per-flow scheduling have on the drop rate as a function of packet
    size, for packets in different flows (e.g., a small-packet VoIP flow
    competing against a large-packet TCP flow) or for packets within the
    same flow (small ACK packets and large data packets on a two-way TCP
    connection).

11.  Drop Rates as a Function of Burst Size.

    Definition: Burst-tolerance, or drop rates as a function of burst
    size, can be defined in terms of an end-to-end path, or in terms of
    aggregate traffic on a congested link.

    The burst-tolerance of an end-to-end path is defined in terms of
    connections with different degrees of burstiness within a round-trip
    time.  When packets are sent in bursts of N packets, does the drop
    rate vary as a function of N?  For example, if the TCP sender sends
    small bursts of K packets, for K less than the congestion window,
    how does the size of K affect the loss rate?  Similarly, for a ping
    tool sending pings at a certain rate in packets per second, one
    could see how the clustering of the ping packets in clusters of size
    K affects the packet drop rate.  As always with such ping
    experiments, it would be important to adjust the sending rate to
    maintain a longer-term sending rate that was TCP-friendly.

    Determining factors: The burst-tolerance is determined largely by
    the AQM mechanisms for the congested routers on a path, and by the
    traffic mix.  For a Drop-Tail queue with only a small number of
    competing flows, the burst-tolerance is likely to be low, and for
    AQM mechanisms where the packet drop rate is a function of the
    average queue size rather than the instantaneous queue size, the
    burst tolerance should be quite high.

    Effect on conjestion control metrics: The burst-tolerance of the
    path or congested link can affect fairness between competing flows
    with different round-trip times; for example, Standard TCP flows
    with longer round-trip times are likely to have a more bursty
    arrival pattern at the congested link that that of Standard TCP
    flows with shorter round-trip times.  As a result, in environment
    with low burst tolerance (e.g., scenarios with Drop-Tail queues),
    longer-round-trip-time TCP connections can see higher packet drop
    rates than other TCP connections, and receive an even smaller
    fraction of the link bandwidth than they would otherwise.
    [FJ92](Section 3.2).  We note that some TCP traffic is inherently
    bursty, e.g., Standard TCP without rate-based pacing, particularly
    in the presence of dropped ACK packets or of ACK compression.  The
    burst-tolerance of a router can also affect the delay-throughput
    tradeoffs and packet drop rates of the path or of the congested
    link.



Floyd, Kohler                                     Section 11.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    Measurements: One could measure the burst-tolerance of an end-to-end
    path by running successive TCP connections, forcing bursts of size
    at least K by dropping an appropriate fraction of the ACK packets to
    the TCP receiver.  Alternately, if one had control of the TCP
    sender, one could modify the TCP sender to send bursts of K packets
    when the congestion window was K or more segments.

    [Look at Crovella's paper on loss pairs.]

    [Look at: M. Allman and E. Blanton, "Notes on Burst Mitigation for
    Transport Protocols", ACM Computer Communication Review, vol. 35(2),
    (2005).]

    Making inferences about the AQM mechanism for the congested router
    on an end-to-end path: One potential use of measurement tools for
    determining the burst-tolerance of an end-to-end path would be to
    make inferences about the presence or absence of an AQM mechanism at
    the congested link or links.  As a simple test, one could run a TCP
    connection until the connection comes out of slow-start.  If the
    receive window of the TCP connection was sufficiently high that the
    connection exited slow-start with packet drops or marks instead of
    because of the limitation of the receive window, one could record
    the congestion window at the end of slow-start, and the number of
    packets dropped from this window.  A high packet drop rate might be
    more typical of a Drop-Tail queue with small-scale statistical
    multiplexing on the congested link, and a single packet drop coming
    out of slow-start would suggest an AQM mechanism at the congested
    link.

    The synchronization measure could also add information about the
    likely presence or absence of AQM on the congested link(s) of an
    end-to-end path, with paths with higher levels of synchronization
    being more likely to have Drop-Tail queues with small-scale
    statistical multiplexing on the congested link(s).

    [Cite the relevant literature about tools for determining the AQM
    mechanism on an end-to-end path.]

12.  Congestion Control Mechanisms for Background or Competing Traffic

    Effect on congestion control metrics: Please don't evaluate AQM
    mechanisms by using Reno TCP, or evaluate new transport protocols by
    comparing them with the performance of Reno TCP!  For an
    explanation, see [FK02](Section 3.4).

    Measurements:  See [MAF05].





Floyd, Kohler                                     Section 12.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


13.  Characterization of Congested Links in Terms of Bandwidth and
Typical Levels of Congestion

    [Pointers to the current state of our knowledge.]

14.  Characterization of Challenging Lower Layers.

    [This will just be a short set of pointers to the relevant
    literature, which is quite extensive.]

15.  Characterization of Network Changes Affecting Congestion

    [Pointers to the current state of our knowledge.]

16.  Using the Tools Presented in this Document

    [To be done.]

17.  Related Work

    [Cite "On the Effective Evaluation of TCP" by Allman and Falk.]

18.  Conclusions

    [To be done.]

19.  Security Considerations

    There are no security considerations in this document.

20.  IANA Considerations

    There are no IANA considerations in this document.

21.  Acknowledgements


Informative References

    [RFC 2119] S. Bradner. Key Words For Use in RFCs to Indicate
        Requirement Levels.  RFC 2119.

    [MAWI] M.W. Group, Mawi working group traffic archive, URL
        "http://tracer.csl.sony.jp/mawi/".

    [AKSJ03] J. Aikat, J. Kaur, F.D. Smith, and K. Jeffay, Variability
        in TCP Roundtrip Times, ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement
        Conference, Maimi, FL, October 2003, pp. 279-284.



Floyd, Kohler                                                  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    [A00] M. Allman, A Web Server's View of the Transport Layer,
        Computer Communication Review, 30(5), October 200.

    [CBC95] C. Cunha, A. Bestavros, and M. Crovella, "Characteristics of
        WWW Client-based Traces", BU Technical Report BUCS-95-010, 1995.

    [FJ92] S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, On Traffic Phase Effects in Packet-
        Switched Gateways, Internetworking: Research and Experience, V.3
        N.3, September 1992, p.115-156.

    [FK02] S. Floyd and E. Kohler, Internet Research Needs Better
        Models, Hotnets-I, October 2002.

    [HMTG01] C. Hollot, V. Misra, D. Towsley, and W. Gong, On Designing
        Improved Controllers for AQM Routers Supporting TCP Flows, IEEE
        Infocom, 2001.

    [JD02] H. Jiang and C. Dovrolis, Passive Estimation of TCP Round-
        trip Times, Computer Communication Review, 32(3), July 2002.

    [MAF05] A. Medina, M. Allman, and A. Floyd.  Measuring the Evolution
        of Transport Protocols in the Internet.  Computer Communication
        Review, April 2005.

    [RSB01] R. Riedi, S. Sarvotham, and R. Varaniuk, Connection-level
        Analysis and Modeling of Network Traffic, SIGCOMM Internet
        Measurement Workshop, 2001.

    [TG] Traffic Generators for Internet Traffic Web Page, URL
        "http://www.icir.org/models/trafficgenerators.html".

    [UA01] U. of Auckland, Auckland-vi trace data, June 2001.  URL
        "http://wans.cs.waikato.ac.nz/wand/wits/auck/6/".

    [UW02] UW-Madison, Network Performance Statistics, October 2002.
        URL "http://wwwstats.net.wisc.edu/".

Editors' Addresses

    Sally Floyd <floyd@icir.org>
    ICSI Center for Internet Research
    1947 Center Street, Suite 600
    Berkeley, CA 94704
    USA

    Eddie Kohler <kohler@cs.ucla.edu>
    4531C Boelter Hall
    UCLA Computer Science Department



Floyd, Kohler                                                  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: March 2006            September 2005


    Los Angeles, CA 90095
    USA

Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2005.  This document is subject
    to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
    except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on
    an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
    REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
    INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
    THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
    to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
    in this document or the extent to which any license under such
    rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
    it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
    Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
    documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
    of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
    at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
    ipr@ietf.org.











Floyd, Kohler                                                  [Page 15]
