 
 
   Networking Working Group                        Rich Bradford (Ed) 
   Internet-Draft                                         JP Vasseur 
                                                  Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                        Adrian Farrel 
                                                   Old Dog Consulting 
       
    
    
   Intended Status: Standards Track 
   Expires: March 12, 2008                                                
                                                  September 12, 2007 
    
    

                                    
                draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt 
    
    
        Preserving Topology Confidentiality in Inter-Domain Path 
                 Computation Using a Key-Based Mechanism 
    
   Status of this Memo 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 12, 2008. 
 
    
    




Bradford, Vasseur and Farrel                                         1 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).  All rights reserved. 
 
   Abstract 
    
   Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) 
   Traffic Engineering (TE) Label Switched Paths (LSPs) may be 
   computed by Path Computation Elements (PCEs). Where the TE LSP 
   crosses multiple domains, such as Autonomous Systems (ASes), the 
   path may be computed by multiple PCEs that cooperate, with each 
   responsible for computing a segment of the path. However, in some 
   cases (e.g. when ASes are administered by separate Service 
   Providers), it would break confidentiality rules for a PCE to 
   supply a path segment to a PCE in another domain, thus disclosing 
   internal topology information. This issue may be circumvented by 
   returning a loose hop and by invoking a new path computation from 
   the domain boundary LSR during TE LSP setup as the signaling 
   message enters the second domain, but this technique has several 
   issues including the problem of maintaining path diversity. 
    
   This document defines a mechanism to hide the contents of a 
   segment of a path, called the Confidential Path Segment (CPS). The 
   CPS may be replaced by a path-key that can be conveyed in the PCE 
   Communication Protocol (PCEP) and signaled within in a Resource 
   Reservation Protocol TE (RSVP-TE) explicit route object. 
    
    
    
   Table of contents 
   1.  Terminology..................................................3 
   2.  Introduction.................................................4 
   3.  Path-Key Solution............................................5 
   3.1. Mode of Operation...........................................6 
   4.  PCEP Protocol Extensions.....................................7 
   4.1. PATH-KEY Object.............................................7 
   4.2. PKS subobject...............................................7 
   4.3. Path Key Bit...............................................10 
   5.  PCEP Mode of Operation......................................10 
   6.  Security Considerations.....................................11 
   7.  Manageability Considerations................................12 
   7.1. Control of Function Through Configuration and Policy.......12 
   7.2. Information and Data Models................................13 
   7.3. Liveness Detection and Monitoring..........................13 
   7.4. Verifying Correct Operation................................14 
   7.5. Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional Components..14 
   7.6. Impact on Network Operation................................14 

 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        2 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   8.  IANA Considerations.........................................15 
   8.1. New Subobjects for the ERO Object..........................15 
   8.2. New PCEP Object............................................15 
   8.3. New RP Object Bit Flag.....................................16 
   9.  Intellectual Property Considerations........................16 
   10.  References.................................................17 
   10.1.  Normative References.....................................17 
   10.2.  Informational References.................................17 
   11.  Authors' Addresses:........................................18 
    
    
    
    
   Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and 
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
   RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

 
    

1.      Terminology 
     
   AS: Autonomous System. 
    
   ASBR: Autonomous System Border Routers used to connect to another 
   AS of a different or the same Service Provider via one or more 
   links inter-connecting between ASes. 
    
   CPS: Confidential Path Segment. A segment of a path that contains 
   nodes and links that the AS policy requires to not be disclosed 
   outside the AS. 
    
   Inter-AS TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an AS boundary. 
    
   LSR: Label Switching Router. 
    
   LSP: Label Switched Path. 
    
   PCC: Path Computation Client: Any client application requesting a 
   path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.  
     
   PCE: Path Computation Element: An entity (component, application 
   or network node) that is capable of computing a network path or 

 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        3 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   route based on a network graph and applying computational 
   constraints. 
    
   TE LSP: Traffic Engineering Label Switched Path 

2.      Introduction 
    
   Path computation techniques using the Path Computation Element 
   (PCE) are described in [RFC4655] and allow for path computation of 
   inter-domain Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Traffic 
   Engineering (TE) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Label Switched Paths 
   (LSPs).  
    
   An important element of inter-domain TE is that TE information is 
   not shared between domains for scalability and confidentiality 
   reasons ([RFC4105] and [RFC4216]). Therefore, a single PCE is 
   unlikely to be able to compute a full inter-domain path. 
    
   Two path computation scenarios can be used for inter-domain TE 
   LSPs: one using per-domain path computation (defined in [PD-PATH-
   COMP]), and the other using a PCE-based path computation technique 
   with cooperation between PCEs (as described in [RFC4655]). In this 
   second case, paths for inter-domain LSPs can be computed by 
   cooperation between PCEs each of which computes a segment of the 
   path across one domain. Such a path computation procedure is 
   described in [BRPC]. 
    
   If confidentiality is required between domains (such as would very 
   likely be the case between ASes belonging to different Service 
   Providers) then cooperating PCEs cannot exchange path segments or 
   else the receiving PCE and the Path Computation Client (PCC) will 
   be able to see the individual hops through another domain thus 
   breaking the confidentiality requirement stated in [RFC4105] and 
   [RFC4216]. We define the part of the path which we wish to keep 
   confidential as the Confidential Path Segment (CPS). 
    
   One mechanism for preserving the confidentiality of the CPS is for 
   the PCE to return a path containing a loose hop in place of the 
   segment that must be kept confidential. The concept of loose and 
   strict hops for the route of a TE LSP is described in [RFC3209]. 
   The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) defined 
   in [PCEP] supports the use of paths with loose hops, and it is a 
   local policy decision at a PCE whether it returns a full explicit 
   path with strict hops or uses loose hops. Note that a Path 
   computation Request may request an explicit path with strict hops 
   or may allow loose hops as detailed in [PCEP]. 
    
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        4 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   The option of returning a loose hop in place of the CPS can be 
   achieved without further extensions to PCEP or the signaling 
   protocol. If loose hops are used, the TE LSPs are signaled as 
   normal ([RFC3209]), and when a loose hop is encountered in the 
   explicit route it is resolved by performing a secondary path 
   computation to reach the resource or set of resources identified 
   by the loose hop. Given the nature of the cooperation between PCEs 
   in computing the original path, this secondary computation occurs 
   at or on behalf of a Label Switching Router (LSR) at a domain 
   boundary (i.e., an ABR or ASBR) and the path is expanded as 
   described in [PD-PATH-COMP]. 
    
   The PCE-based computation model is particularly useful for 
   determining mutually disjoint inter-domain paths such as might be 
   required for service protection [INTER-DOM-REC]. A single path 
   computation request is used. However, if loose hops are returned, 
   the path of each TE LSP must be recomputed at the domain 
   boundaries as the TE LSPs are signaled, and since the TE LSP 
   signaling proceeds independently for each TE LSP, disjoint paths 
   cannot be guaranteed since the LSRs in charge of expanding the 
   EROs are not synchronized. Therefore, if the loose hop technique 
   is used without further extensions, path segment confidentiality 
   and path diversity are mutually incompatible requirements. 
 
   This document defines the notion of a Path Key that is a token 
   that replaces a path segment in an explicit route. The Path Key is 
   encoded as a Path Key Subobject (PKS) returned in the PCEP Path 
   Computation Reply message (PCRep) ([PCEP]). Upon receiving the 
   computed path, the PKS will be carried in an RSVP-TE Path message 
   (RSVP-TE [RFC3209] and [RSVP-PKS]) during signaling. 
    
    

3.      Path-Key Solution 
    
   The Path-Key solution may be applied in the PCE-based path 
   computation context as follows. A PCE computes a path segment 
   related to a particular domain and replaces any CPS in the path 
   reported to the requesting PCC (or another PCE) by one or more 
   subobjects referred to as PKSes. The entry boundary LSR of each 
   CPS SHOULD be specified as a hop in the returned path immediately 
   preceding the CPS, but where two PKSes are supplied in sequence 
   with no intervening nodes, the entry node to the second CPS MAY be 
   part of the first CPS and does not need to be explicitly present 
   in the returned path. The exit node of a CPS MAY be present as a 
   strict hop immediately following the PKS. 
 
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        5 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
3.1.   Mode of Operation 
 
   During path computation, when local policy dictates that 
   confidentiality must be preserved for all or part of the path 
   segment being computed or if explicitly requested by the Path 
   Computation Request, the PCE associates a path-key with the 
   computed path for the CPS, places its own identifier (its PCE ID 
   as defined in section 4.2. ) along with the path-key in a PKS, and 
   inserts the PKS object in the path returned to the requesting PCC 
   or PCE immediately after the IPv4 subobject defined in [RFC3209] 
   subobject that identifies the LSR that will expand the PKS into a 
   explicit path hops. This will usually be the LSR that is the start 
   point of the CPS. The PCE that generates a PKS SHOULD store the 
   computed path segment and the path-key for later retrieval. A 
   local policy SHOULD be used to determine for how long to retain 
   such stored information, and whether to discard the information 
   after it has been queried using the procedures described below. It 
   is RECOMMENDED for a PCE to store the PKS for a period of 10 
   minutes. 
    
   A path-key value is scoped to the PCE that computed it as 
   identified by the PCE-ID carried in the PKS. A PCE MUST NOT re-use 
   a path-key value to represent a new CPS for at least 30 minutes 
   after discarding the previous use of the same path-key. A PCE that 
   is unable to retain information about previously used path-key 
   values over a restart SHOULD use some other mechanism to guarantee 
   uniqueness of path-key values such as embedding a timestamp or 
   version number in the path-key. 
    
   A head-end LSR that is a PCC converts the path returned by a PCE 
   into an explicit route object (ERO) that it includes in the 
   Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) Path message. If the path 
   returned by the PCE contains a PKS, this is included in the ERO. 
   Like any other subobjects, the PKS is passed transparently from 
   hop to hop, until it becomes the first subobject in the ERO. This 
   will occur at the start of the CPS which will usually be the 
   domain boundary. The PKS MUST be preceded by an ERO subobject that 
   identifies the LSR that must expand the PKS, so the PKS will not 
   be encountered in ERO processing until the LSR that can process 
   it. 
 
   An LSR that encounters a PKS when trying to identify the next-hop 
   retrieves the PCE-ID from the PKS and sends a Path Computation 
   Request (PCReq) message as defined in [PCEP] to the PCE identified 
   by the PCE-ID that contains the path-key object . 
    

 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        6 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   Upon receiving the PCReq message, the PCE identifies the computed 
   path segment using the supplied path-key, and returns the 
   previously computed path segment in the form of explicit hops 
   using an ERO object contained in the Path Computation Reply 
   (PCReqp) to the requesting node as defined in [PCEP]. The 
   requesting node inserts the explicit hops into the ERO and 
   continues to process the TE LSP setup as per [RFC3209]. 
    
    
    

4.      PCEP Protocol Extensions 
    
    

4.1.   PATH-KEY Object 
   When a PCC needs to expand a path-key in order to expand a CPS it 
issues a path computation request (PCReq) to the PCE identified in the 
PKS in the RSVP-TE ERO that it is processing. The PCC supplies the PKS 
to be expanded in a PATH-KEY Object in the PCReq message. 
 
   The PATH-KEY Object is defined as follows. 
 
   PATH-KEY Object-Class is to be assigned by IANA (recommended 
value=16) 
 
   Path Key Object-Type is to be assigned by IANA (recommended value=1) 
 
   The PATH-KEY Object MUST contain at least one Path Key Subobject 
(see Section 4.2). The first PKS MUST be processed by the PCE. 
Subsequent subobjects SHOULD be ignored. 

 

4.2.   PKS subobject 
    
   The PKS is identical in format to that defined for RSVP-TE 
   signaling in [RSVP-PKS], but is redefined in the context of this 
   document since a PCEP codepoint is required. 
    
   The PKS is a fixed-length subobject containing a Path-Key and a 
   PCE-ID. The Path Key is an identifier, or token used to represent 
   the CPS within the context of the PCE identified by the PCE-ID. 
   The PCE-ID identifies the PCE that can decode the Path Key using 
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        7 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   an identifier that is unique within the domain that the PCE 
   serves. The PCE-ID has to be mapped to a reachable IPv4 or IPv6 
   address of the PCE by the first node of the CPS (usually a domain 
   border router) and a PCE MAY use one of its reachable IP addresses 
   as its PCE-ID. Alternatively and to provide greater security (see 
   Section 6), according to domain-local policy, the PCE MAY use some 
   other identifier that is scoped only within the domain.  
    
   To allow IPv4 and IPv6 addresses to be carried, two subobjects are 
   defined as follows. 
    
   The Path Key Subobject may be present in the PCEP ERO or the PCEP 
PATH-KEY object. 
    
   PKS with 32-bit PCE ID 
    
    
    
   The PKS with 32-bit PCE ID Type is to be assigned by IANA 
   (recommended value 64) 
    
     0                   1                   2                   3 
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |L|    Type     |     Length    |           Path Key            | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |                         PCE ID (4 bytes)                      | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
         L 
    
           The L bit SHOULD NOT be set, so that the subobject 
           represents a strict hop in the explicit route. 
    
         Type 
    
           TBD Path Key with 32-bit PCE ID 
    
         Length 
    
           The Length contains the total length of the subobject in 
           bytes, including the Type and Length fields.  The Length 
           is always 8. 
    
         PCE ID 
    

 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        8 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
           A 32-bit identifier of the PCE that can decode this key. The 
           identifier MUST be unique within the scope of the domain 
           that the CPS crosses, and MUST be understood by the LSR that 
           will act as PCC for the expansion of the PKS. The 
           interpretation of the PCE-ID is subject to domain-local 
           policy. It MAY be an IPv4 address of the PCE that is always 
           reachable, and MAY be an address that is restricted to the 
           domain in which the LSR that is called upon to expand the 
           CPS lies. Other values that have no meaning outside the 
           domain (for example, the Router ID) MAY be used to increase 
           security (see Section 6). 
    
   PKS with 128-bit PCE ID 
    
    
   The PKS with 128-bit PCE ID Type is to be assigned by IANA 
   (recommended value 65) 
    
    
     0                   1                   2                   3 
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |L|    Type     |     Length    |           Path Key            | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |                        PCE ID (16 bytes)                      | 
    |                                                               | 
    |                                                               | 
    |                                                               | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
       L 
    
           As above. 
    
       Type 
    
          TBD Path Key with 128-bit PCE ID 
    
       Length 
    
           The Length contains the total length of the subobject in 
           bytes, including the Type and Length fields.  The Length 
           is always 20. 
    
       PCE ID 
    
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                        9 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
           A 128-bit identifier of the PCE that can decode this key. 
           The identifier MUST be unique within the scope of the 
           domain that the CPS crosses, and MUST be understood by the 
           LSR that will act as PCC for the expansion of the PKS. The 
           interpretation of the PCE-ID is subject to domain-local 
           policy. It MAY be an IPv6 address of the PCE that is 
           always reachable, but MAY be an address that is restricted 
           to the domain in which the LSR that is called upon to 
           expand the CPS lies. Other values that have no meaning 
           outside the domain (for example, the IPv6 TE Router ID) 
           MAY be used to increase security (see Section 6). 
    

4.3.   Path Key Bit 
   [PCEP] defines the Request Parameters (RP) object that is used to 
   specify various characteristics of the path computation request. 
    
   In this document we define a new bit named the Path Key bit 
   defined as follow: 
    
   Path Key (P-bit - 1 bit - Value=0x80): When set, the requesting 
   PCC requires the retrieval of a strict path segment that 
   corresponds to a PKS carried in a PATH_KEY object in the path 
   computation request. The Path Key bit MUST be cleared when the 
   path computation request is not related to a CPS retrieval. 
     
    

5.      PCEP Mode of Operation 
    
   The retrieval of the explicit path (the CPS) associated with a PKS 
   by a PCC is no different than any other path computation request 
   with the exception that the PCReq message MUST contain a PATH_KEY 
   object and the Path Key bit of the RP object MUST the set.  
    
   If the receiving PCE does not recognize itself as identified by the 
   PCE ID carried in the PKS it MAY forward the PCReq message to 
   another PCE according to local policy. If the PCE does not forward 
   such a PCReq, it MUST respond with a PCRep message containing a NO-
   PATH object.  
    
   If the receiving PCE recognizes itself, but cannot find the 
   related CPS, or if the retrieval of the CPS is not allowed by 
   policy, the PCE MUST send a PCRep message that contains a NO-PATH 
   object. 
    
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       10 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   Upon receipt of a negative reply, the requesting LSR MUST fail the 
   LSP setup and SHOULD use the procedures associated with loose hop 
   expansion failure [RFC3209]. 
    
    
    

6.      Security Considerations 
    
   This document describes tunneling confidential path information 
   across an untrusted domain (such as an AS). There are many 
   security considerations that apply to PCEP and RSVP-TE. 
    
   Issues include: 
  - Confidentiality of the CPS (can other network elements probe for 
     expansion of path-keys, possibly at random?). 
  
  - Authenticity of the path-key (resilience to alteration by 
     intermediaries, resilience to fake expansion of path-keys). 
  
  - Resilience from DNS attacks (insertion of spurious path-keys; 
     flooding of bogus path-key expansion requests). 
 
     Most of the interactions required by this extension are point to 
     point, can be authenticated and made secure. These interactions 
     include the: 
       - PCC->PCE request 
       - PCE->PCE request(s) 
       - PCE->PCE response(s) 
       - PCE->PCC response 
       - LSR->LSR request and response (Note that a rogue LSR could 
          modify the ERO and insert or modify Path Keys. This would 
          result in an LSR (which is downstream in the ERO) sending 
          decode requests to a PCE. This is actually a larger problem 
          with RSVP.  The rogue LSR is an existing issue with RSVP and 
          will not be addressed here. 
       - LSR->PCE request. Note that the PCE can check that the LSR 
          requesting the decode is the LSR at the head of the Path Key. 
          This largely contains the previous problem to DoS rather than 
          a security issue. A rogue LSR can issue random decode 
          requests, but these will amount only to DoS. 
       - PCE->LSR response. 
      

 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       11 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
     Thus, the major security issues can be dealt with using standard 
     techniques for securing and authenticating point-to-point 
     communications. In addition, it is recommended that the PCE 
     providing a decode response should check that the LSR that issued 
     the decode request is the head end of the decoded ERO segment. 
      
   Further protection can be provided by using a PCE ID to identify the 
decoding PCE that is only meaningful within the domain that contains 
the LSR at the head of the CPS. This may be an IP address that is only 
reachable from within the domain, or some not-address value. The former 
requires configuration of policy on the PCEs, the latter requires 
domain-wide policy. 
 
    

7.      Manageability Considerations 

7.1.   Control of Function Through Configuration and Policy 
 
   The treatment of a path segment as a CPS, and its substitution in 
   a PCReq ERO with a PKS, is a function that MUST be under operator 
   and policy control where a PCE supports the function. The operator 
   MUST be given the ability to specify which path segments are to be 
   replaced and under what circumstances. For example, an operator 
   might set a policy that states that every path segment for the 
   operator's domain will be replaced by a PKS when the PCReq has 
   been issued from outside the domain.  
 
   The operation of the PKS extensions require that path-keys are 
   retained by the issuing PCE to be available for retrieval by an 
   LSR (acting as a PCC) at a later date. But it is possible that the 
   retrieval request will never be made, so good housekeeping 
   requires that a timer is run to discard unwanted path-keys. A 
   default value for this timer is suggested in the body of this 
   document. Implementations SHOULD provide the ability for this 
   value to be over-ridden through operator configuration or policy.  
 
   After a PKS has been expanded in response to a retrieval request, 
   it may be valuable to retain the path-key and CPS for debug 
   purposes. Such retention SHOULD NOT be the default behavior of an 
   implementation, but MAY be available in response to operator 
   request.  
 
   Once a path-key has been discarded, the path-key value SHOULD not 
   be immediately available for re-use for a new CPS since this might 
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       12 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   lead to accidental misuse. A default timer value is suggested in 
   the body of this document. Implementations SHOULD provide the 
   ability for this value to be over-ridden through operator 
   configuration or policy.  
 
   A PCE must set a PCE-ID value in each PKS it creates so that PCCs 
   can correctly identify it and send PCReq messages to expand the 
   PKS to a path segment. A PCE implementation SHOULD allow operator 
   or policy control of the value to use as the PCE-ID. If the PCE 
   allows PCE-ID values that are not routable addresses to be used, 
   the PCCs MUST be configurable (by the operator or through policy) 
   to allow them to map from the PCE-ID to a routable address of the 
   PCE. Such mapping may be algorithmic, procedural (for example, 
   mapping a PCE-ID equal to the IGP Router ID into a routable 
   address), or configured through a local or remote mapping table.  
    

7.2.   Information and Data Models 
 
   A MIB module for PCEP is already defined in [PCEP-MIB]. The 
   configurable items listed in Section 7.1 MUST be added as readable 
   objects in the module and SHOULD be added as writable objects.  
 
   A new MIB module MUST be created to allow inspection of path-keys. 
   For a given PCE, this MIB module MUST provide a mapping from path-
   key to path segment (that is, a list of hops), and MUST supply 
   other information including:  
 
   - The identity of the PCC that issued the original request that 
   led to the creation of the path-key.  
   - The request ID of the original PCReq.  
   - Whether the path-key has been retrieved yet, and if so, by which 
   PCC.  
   - How long until the path segment associated with the path-key 
   will be discarded.  
   - How long until the path-key will be available for re-use.  
 

7.3.   Liveness Detection and Monitoring 
 
   The procedures in this document extend PCEP, but do not introduce 
   new interactions between network entities. Thus, no new liveness 
   detection or monitoring is required.  
 
   It is possible that a head-end LSR that has be given a path 
   including PKSs replacing specific CPSs will want to know whether 
   the path-keys are still valid (or have timed out). However, rather 
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       13 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   than introduce a mechanism to poll the PCE that is responsible for 
   the PKS, it is considered pragmatic to simply signal the 
   associated LSP.  
    

7.4.   Verifying Correct Operation 
 
   The procedures in this document extend PCEP, but do not introduce 
   new interactions between network entities. Thus, no new tools for 
   verifying correct operation are required.  
    
   A PCE SHOULD maintain counters and logs of the following events 
   that might indicate incorrect operation (or might indicate 
   security issues).  
 
   - Attempts to expand an unknown path-key.  
   - Attempts to expand an expired path-key.  
   - Duplicate attempts to expand the same path-key.  
   - Expiry of path-key without attempt to expand it.  
    

7.5.   Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional Components 
 
   The procedures described in this document require that the LSRs 
   signal PKSs as defined in [RSVP-PKS]. Note that the only changes 
   to LSRs are at the PCCs. Specifically, changes are only needed at 
   the head-end LSRs that build RSVP-TE Path messages containing 
   Path-Key Subobjects in their EROs, and the LSRs that discover such 
   subobjects as next hops and must expand them. Other LSRs in the 
   network, even if they are on the path of the LSP, will not be 
   called upon to process the PKS.  
 
    

7.6.   Impact on Network Operation 
 
   As well as the security and confidentiality aspects addressed by 
   the use of the PKS, there may be some scaling benefits associated 
   with the procedures described in this document. For example, a 
   single PKS in an explicit route may substitute for many subobjects 
   and can reduce the overall message size correspondingly. In some 
   circumstances, such as when the explicit route contains multiple 
   subobjects for each hop (including node IDs, TE link IDs, 
   component link IDs for each direction of a bidirectional LSP, and 
   label IDs for each direction of a bidirectional LSP) or when the 
   LSP is a point-to-multipoint LSP, this scaling improvement may be 
   very significant.  
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       14 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
 
   Note that a PCE will not supply a PKS unless it is knows that the 
   LSR that will receive the PKS through signaling will be able to 
   handle it. Furthermore, as noted in Section 7.5, only those LSRs 
   specifically called upon to expand the PKS will be required to 
   process the subobjects during signaling. Thus, the only backward 
   compatibility issues associated with the procedures introduced in 
   this document arise when a head-end LSR receives a PCRep with an 
   ERO containing a PKS and does not know how to encode this into 
   signaling.  
 
 
   Since the PCE that inserted the PKS requires to keep the CPS 
   confidential, the legacy head-end LSR cannot be protected. It must 
   either fail the LSP setup, or request a new path computation 
   avoiding the domain that has supplied it with unknown subobjects. 
    

8.      IANA Considerations 
    
   IANA assigns value to PCEP parameters in registries defined in 
   [PCEP]. IANA is requested to make the following additional 
   assignments.  
    

8.1.   New Subobjects for the ERO Object 
 
   IANA has previously assigned an Object-Class and Object-Type to 
   the ERO carried in PCEP messages [PCEP]. IANA also maintains a 
   list of subobject types valid for inclusion in the ERO.  
 
   IANA is requested to assign two new subobject types for inclusion 
   in the ERO as follows:  
 
   7     ERO             1     Explicit route             [PCEP]  
    
   Subobject Type 
             64   Path Key with 32-bit PCE ID             [This.I-D]  
             65   Path Key with 128-bit PCE ID            [This.I-D]  
    
    

8.2.   New PCEP Object 
 
   IANA is requested to assign a new object class in the registry of 
   PCEP Objects as follows.  
 
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       15 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   Object  Name          Object  Name                       Reference 
   Class                 Type 
 
   16    PATH-KEY        1     Path Key                   [This.I-D]  
 
       Subobjects 
          This object may carry the following subobjects as defined  
          for the ERO object.  
 
                  64   Path Key with 32-bit PCE ID        [This.I-D]  
                  65   Path Key with 128-bit PCE ID       [This.I-D]  

8.3.   New RP Object Bit Flag 
 
   IANA maintains a registry of bit flags carried in the PCEP RP 
   object as defined in [PCEP]. IANA is requested to define a new bit 
   flag as follows:  
 
   Bit      Hex     Name                                 Reference 
   Number 
   09       0x0080  Path Key (P-bit)                     [This.I-D]  
    

9.      Intellectual Property Considerations 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in this document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights. Information on the procedures with respect to rights 
   in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
   to implement this standard. Please address the information to the 
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       16 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
10.     References 
    

10.1.  Normative References 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate  
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  
    
   [RFC3209] Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V. 
   and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 
   3209, December 2001. 
    
   [PCEP] Vasseur, J.P., Le Roux, J.L., Ayyangar, A., Oki, E., 
   Ikejiri, A., Atlas, A., Dolganow, A., "Path Computation Element  
   (PCE) communication Protocol (PCEP)", draft-ietf-pce-pcep, 
   work in progress.  
      
    

10.2.  Informational References 
   [RSVP-PKS] Bradford, R., Vasseur, J.P., Farrel, A., "RSVP 
   Extensions for Path Key Support", draft-bradford-ccamp-path-key-
   ero, work in progress. 
     
   [RFC4655] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation  
   Element (PCE) Architecture", RFC4655, September 2006.  
    
   [PD-PATH-COMP] Vasseur, J., et al "A Per-domain path computation 
   method for establishing Inter-domain Traffic Engineering (TE) 
   Label 
   Switched Paths (LSPs)", draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-
   comp, work in progress. 
    
   [BRPC] Vasseur, J., et al "A Backward Recursive PCE-based 
   Computation 
   (BRPC) procedure to compute shortest inter-domain Traffic 
   Engineering Label Switched Path", draft-ietf-pce-brpc, work in 
   progress. 
    
   [RFC4105]    Le Roux, J., Vasseur, JP, Boyle, J., "Requirements 
   for Support of Inter-Area and Inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering", 
   RFC 4105, June 2005. 
    
   [RFC4216]    Zhang, R., Vasseur, JP., et. al., "MPLS Inter-AS 
   Traffic Engineering requirements", RFC 4216, November 2005. 
    
    
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       17 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
   [INTER-DOM-REC] Takeda, T., et al, "Analysis of Inter-domain Label 
   Switched Path (LSP) Recovery", draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-
   recovery-analysis, work in progress. 
    
   [PCEP-MIB] Kiran Koushik, A., and Stephan, E., "PCE communication 
   protocol (PCEP) Management Information Base", draft-kkoushik-pce-
   pcep-mib, work in progress.  
 
    

11.                              Authors' Addresses: 
    
   Rich Bradford (Editor) 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue 
   Boxborough, MA - 01719 
   USA 
   EMail: rbradfor@cisco.com 
    
   J.-P Vasseur 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue 
   Boxborough, MA - 01719 
   USA 
   EMail: jpv@cisco.com 
    
   Adrian Farrel 
   Old Dog Consulting 
   EMail:  adrian@olddog.co.uk 
    
    
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       18 
 
 

Draft-ietf-pce-path-key-01.txt                 September 2007 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
 
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
 
Intellectual Property 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
 
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
 
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
            








 
Bradford, Vasseur, and Farrel                                       19 
 
