Audio/Video Transport WG                                       Nan.Wang
Internet Draft                                    Alcatel Shanghai Bell
Expires: January 26, 2010                                July 26,  2009                                  




                    Multi-Screen Application for SVC Video
                   draft-nanwang-avt-svc-multiscreen-00.txt




Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 26, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.





Wang                    Expires January 26, 2010               [Page 1]
 
Internet-Draft    Multi-Screen Application for SVC Video      July 2009


Abstract

   This memo proposes a supplement to existing draft, RTP payload 
   Format for SVC Video. One new application, Multi-Screen is added. 
   SVC is very suitable for Multi-Screen application, which has some 
   different characteristics from the existing applications in the 
   current draft. This proposal provides a paradigm and addresses 
   potential issues and consideration.


1. Introduction
   In this scenario, the term "Multi-Screen" and/or "Multi-Platform 
   Video" are synonymous as industry terms. In simple terms, they mean
   communicating and enjoying media on any screen, device and at any 
   time, within a very seamless and compelling consumer experience. 
   Multi-Screen is more than TV, PC and Mobile. 
   
2. Multi-Screen application   
   In multi-screen application, whether the video content are played 
   simultaneously in different screens will be decided according to the
   user's requirements. This is the most difference between multi-
   screen and the existing applications in the current draft[SVC].
   Here is a typical multi-screen application scenario: one user 
   watches a live football game in his mobile-phone at afternoon,
   and he requests a stored HD video of this game to his TV at night, 
   thus he and his family can view the HD(High definition) video of 
   this game using TV.
   
   In multi-screen service, it is obviously that different media or 
   content being deployed to each of the appropriate screens will 
   occupy huge system resources. Currently the same content is 
   stored multiple times in different formats; this is expensive in
   terms of storage and operations. Converting or trans-coding that
   master video source into the various forms that are required to 
   realize multi-screen delivery by service providers is extremely 
   time consuming, and expensive for content creators/owners. 
   
   SVC can be used to solve the above problems. Screen matching for
   a particular terminal device can be performed by selecting an 
   appropriate subset of the incoming SVC layers to transmit to the
   particular device. For example, a system that uses spatial 
   scalability with three layers, base layer, enhancement layer one, 
   enhancement layer two. Decoding the base layer can support QCIF 
   size video which can be shown in the screen of mobile-phone; 
   decoding the base layer and enhancement layer one can support CIF 
   size video which can be shown in the screen of laptop or PC, 
   decoding the base layer and all enhancement layers can support 4CIF


Wang                    Expires January 26, 2010               [Page 2]
 
Internet-Draft    Multi-Screen Application for SVC Video      July 2009


   size video which can be shown in the TV screen. In fact, the 
   payload format can also be designed to allow for screen-adaptability
   in the mentioned senses. Thus, the converting or trans-coding 
   operations required to realize multi-screen delivery can be removed. 
   Moreover, it is not necessary that the same content is stored 
   multiple times in different formats.

   As to the video transmission method, on one hand, if there is only
   a single multi-screen user who requests video transmission to 
   his/her mobile phone, PC and TV, then IP multicast can be used to 
   transmit the base layer to his/her mobile phone, PC and TV. And 
   point to point transmission can be used to transmit the enhancement
   layers to PC and TV. On the other hand, if there are many users of 
   multi-screen service, to save system resources, more flexible IP 
   multicast method can be performed to transmit the base layer and the
   enhancement layers to the different screens. 
   
   When the transmissions to different screens are performed will be 
   decided according to the user's requirements. i.e., user can send 
   playing time requirements of different screens by using the OMA 
   interactivityMediaDocument, SIP message or SMS. Here should have 
   uniform input format of the playing time requirements.  

3. References

   [SVC]     S.Wenger, et al, Internet-Draft, RTP Payload Format for 
             SVC Video-18, March, 2009.

4. Authors' Addresses

   Nan Wang
   Alcatel Shanghai Bell Co., Ltd.
   388#, NingQiao Road, Pudong Jinqiao
   Shanghai 201206 P.R. China
   Phone: +86 (21) 5854-1240, ext.: 3415
   Email: Nan.A.Wang@alcatel-sbell.com.cn













Wang                    Expires January 26, 2010               [Page 3]
 
Internet-Draft    Multi-Screen Application for SVC Video      July 2009