



TMRID                                                            S. Card
Internet-Draft                                           A. Wiethuechter
Intended status: Informational                             AX Enterprize
Expires: 1 August 2020                                      R. Moskowitz
                                                          HTT Consulting
                                                         29 January 2020


                             UAS Remote ID
                        draft-card-tmrid-uas-01

Abstract

   This document is an Applicability Statement for various IETF
   Technical Specifications, complementing emerging external standards
   and regulations to meet needs for Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS)
   remote identification (RID).  The objectives are: to facilitate use
   of existing Internet services to support UAS RID and to enable
   enhanced RID related services; and to enable verification that UAS
   RID information is trustworthy (to some extent, even in the absence
   of Internet connectivity at the receiving node).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 1 August 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights



Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terms and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Requirements Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  UAS RID Problem Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Network RID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.  Broadcast RID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  TM-RID Focus Problem Space  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Alternatives for IETF work on Trustworthy IDs . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Requirements of Trustworthy IDs . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Currently selected IDs by ASTM  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Options for Trustworthy IDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Emerging Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) regulations worldwide,
   exemplified by current United States (US) Federal Aviation
   Administration (FAA) rulemaking, will soon mandate, and many safety
   and other considerations dictate (even absent regulations), that
   Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) be remotely identifiable.  CAAs are
   expected and FAA has stated its intent to require compliance with
   industry consensus standards.

   ASTM International, Technical Committee F38 (UAS), Subcommittee
   F38.02 (Aircraft Operations), Work Item WK65041 (UAS Remote ID and
   Tracking), is a Proposed New Standard [WK65041].  It defines 2 means
   of UAS remote identification (RID): Network RID via the Internet; and
   Broadcast RID via a one-way data link direct from the Unmanned
   Aircraft (UA) to the observer's device.  Network RID depends upon
   Internet connectivity between the observer and either the UA itself
   or any of various proxies.  Broadcast RID should need Internet (or
   other Wide Area Network) connectivity only for UAS registry
   information lookup using the directly locally received UAS ID as a
   key.



Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


   The need for near-universal deployment of UAS RID is pressing.  This
   implies the need to support use by observers of already ubiquitous
   mobile devices (smartphones and tablets).  UA onboard RID devices are
   severely constrained in Size, Weight and Power (SWaP).  Cost is a
   significant impediment to the necessary near-universal adoption of
   UAS send and observer receive RID capabilities.  To accomodate the
   most severely constrained cases, all these conspire to motivate
   system design decisions, especially for the Broadcast RID data link,
   which complicate the protocol design problem: one-way links;
   extremely short packets; and Internet-disconnected operation of UA
   onboard devices.  Internet-disconnected operation of observer devices
   has been deemed by ASTM F38.02 too infrequent to address, but for
   some users is important and presents further challenges.

   Heavyweight security protocols are infeasible, yet trustworthiness of
   UAS RID information is essential.  Even the most basic datum, the UAS
   ID string (typically number) itself, under [WK65041], can be merely
   an unsubstantiated claim.

   Further, an ID is not an end in itself; it exists to enable lookups
   and provision of services complementing mere identification, e.g.
   dynamic establishment of secure communications between the observer
   and the UAS pilot.  [WK65041] neither fully specifies nor appears to
   facilitate these functions, especially in the case where the observer
   lacks real time Internet access.

   Finally, [WK65041] proposes the use of plaintext and mostly static
   UAS ID strings.  Even if lookup from these to operator Personally
   Identifiable Information (PII) is successfully limited to strongly
   authenticated personnel, properly authorized per policy: static IDs
   enable trivial correlation of patterns of use, unacceptable in many
   applications, e.g. package delivery routes of competitors.

   IETF can help by providing expertise as well as mature and evolving
   standards.  Host Identity Protocol (HIPv2) [RFC7401] and its Domain
   Name System (DNS) extensions [RFC8005] can complement emerging
   external standards for UAS RID, to facilitate utilization of existing
   and provision of enhanced network services, and to enable
   verification that UAS RID information is trustworthy (to some extent,
   even in the absence of Internet connectivity at the receiving node).

2.  Terms and Definitions









Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


2.1.  Requirements Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.2.  Definitions

   CAA
      Civil Aviation Authority.  An example is the Federal Aviation
      Administration (FAA) in the United States of America.

   C2
      Command and Control.  A set of organizational and technical
      attributes and processes that employs human, physical, and
      information resources to solve problems and accomplish missions.
      Mainly used in military contexts.

   GCS
      Ground Control Station.  The part of the UAS that the remote pilot
      uses to exercise C2 over the UA, whether by remotely exercising UA
      flight controls to fly the UA, by setting GPS waypoints, or
      otherwise directing its flight.

   HI
      Host Identity.  The public key portion of an asymmetric keypair
      from HIP.  In this document it is assumed that the HI is based on
      a EdDSA25519 keypair.  This is supported by new crypto defined in
      [I-D.moskowitz-hip-new-crypto].

   HIT
      Host Identity Tag. A 128 bit handle on the HI.  Defined in HIPv2
      [RFC7401].

   HHIT
      Hierarchical Host Identity Tag. A HIT with extra information not
      found in a standard HIT.  Defined in
      [I-D.moskowitz-hip-hierarchical-hit].

   UA
      Unmanned Aircraft.  Typically a military or commercial "drone" but
      can include any and all aircraft that are unmanned.

   UAS
      Unmanned Aircraft System.  Composed of UA, all required on-board
      subsystems, payload, control station, other required off-board



Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


      subsystems, any required launch and recovery equipment, all
      required crew members, and C2 links between UA and control
      station.

   UTM
      UAS Traffic Management.  A "traffic management" ecosystem for
      "uncontrolled" UAS operations separate from, but complementary to,
      the FAA's Air Traffic Management (ATM) system for "controlled"
      operations of manned aircraft.

   USS
      UAS Service Supplier.  Provide UTM services to support the UAS
      community, to connect Operators and other entities to enable
      information flow across the USS network, and to promote shared
      situational awareness among UTM participants.  (From FAA UTM
      ConOps V1, May 2018).

   RID
      Remote ID.  System for identifying UA during flight by other
      parties.

   Observer
      Referred to in other UAS documents as a "user", but there are also
      other classes of RID users, so we prefer "observer" to denote an
      individual who has observed an UA and wishes to know something
      about it, starting with its ID.

   UAS ID
      Unique UAS identifier.  Per [WK65041], maximum length of 20 bytes.

   UAS ID Type
      Identifier type index.  Per [WK65041], 4 bits, values 0-3 already
      specified.

   RID SP
      UAS RID Service Provider.  System component that compiles
      information from various sources (and methods) in its given
      service area.

   RID DP
      UAS RID Display Provider.  System component that requests data
      from one or more RID SP and aggregates them to display to a user
      application on a device.

   UAS RID Verification Service
      System component designed to handle the authentication
      requirements of RID by offloading verification to a web hosted
      service.



Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


3.  UAS RID Problem Space

   UA may be fixed wing Short Take-Off and Landing (STOL), rotary wing
   (e.g. helicopter) Vertical Take-Off and Landing (VTOL), or hybrid.
   They may be single engine or multi engine.  The most common today are
   multicopters: rotary wing, multi engine.  The explosion in UAS was
   enabled by hobbyist development, for multicopters, of advanced flight
   stability algorithms, enabling even inexperienced pilots tp take off,
   fly to a location of interest, hover, and return to the take-off
   location or land at a distance.  UAS can be remotely piloted by a
   human (e.g. with a joystick) or programmed to proceed from Global
   Positioning System (GPS) waypoint to waypoint in a weak form of
   autonomy; stronger autonomy is coming.  UA are "low observable": they
   typically have a small radar cross section; they make noise quite
   noticeable at short range but difficult to detect at distances they
   can quickly close (500 meters in under 17 seconds at 60 knots); they
   typically fly at low altitudes (for the small UAS to which RID
   applies, under 400 feet Above Ground Level in the US); they are
   highly maneuverable so can fly under trees and between buildings.

   UA can carry payloads including sensors, cyber and kinetic weapons or
   can be used themselves as weapons by flying them into targets.  They
   can be flown by clueless, careless or criminal operators.  Thus the
   most basic function of UAS RID is "Identification Friend or Foe" to
   mitigate the significant threat they present.  Numerous other
   applications can be enabled or facilitated by RID: consider the
   importance of identifiers in many Internet protocols and services.

   Network RID from the UA itself (rather than from a proxy) and
   Broadcast RID require one or more wireless data links from the UA,
   but such communications are challenging due to $SWaP constraints and
   low altitude flight amidst structures and foliage over terrain.

3.1.  Network RID

   Network RID has several variants.  The UA may have persistent onboard
   Internet connectivity, in which case it can consistently source RID
   information directly over the Internet.  The UA may have intermittent
   onboard Internet connectivity, in which case a proxy must source RID
   information whenever the UA itself is offline.  The UA may not have
   Internet connectivity of its own, but have instead some other form of
   communications to a (typically ground) node that can relay RID
   information to the Internet; this would typically be the GCS (which
   to perform its function must know where the UA is) or USS (which in
   the UTM system is required to be kept informed by the UAS operator).
   The UA may have no means of sourcing RID information, in which case
   the GCS, USS or other proxy may source it.  In the extreme case, this
   would be the pilot using a web browser to designate, to a USS or



Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


   other UTM entity, a time-bounded airspace volume in which an
   operation will be conducted; this may impede disambiguation of ID if
   multiple UAS operate in the same or overlapping spatio-temporal
   volumes.

   In most cases in the near term, if the RID information is fed to the
   Internet directly by the UA or remote pilot, the first hop data links
   will be cellular Long Term Evolution (LTE) or WiFi, but provided the
   data link can support at least IP and ideally TCP, its type is
   generally immaterial to the higher layer protocols.  The ultimate
   source of Network RID information feeds a RID Service Provider (SP),
   which essentially proxies for that and other sources; the ultimate
   consumer of Network RID information obtains it from a RID Display
   Provider (DP).  Each DP aggregates information from all SPs that have
   UA currently operating in the airspace for which that DP is
   cognizant.

   Network RID is the more flexible and less constrained of the UAS RID
   means specified in [WK65041].  Any IETF work needed to support or
   leverage it is left for later efforts; it is not further addressed
   herein or in other initial tm-rid documents.

3.2.  Broadcast RID

   [WK65041] specifies 3 Broadcast RID data links: Bluetooth 4.X;
   Bluetooth 5.X Long Range; and Wifi with Neighbor Awareness Networking
   (NAN).  For compliance with this standard, an UA must broadcast
   (using advertisement mechanisms where no other option supports
   broadcast) on at least one of these; if broadcasting on Bluetooth
   5.x, it is also required concurrently to do so on 4.x (referred to in
   [WK65041] as Bluetooth Legacy).

   The selection of the Broadcast medium was driven by research into
   what is commonly available on 'ground' units (smartphones and
   tablets) and what was found as prevalent or 'affordable' in UA.
   Further, there must be an API for the UAS receiving application to
   have access to these messages.  At this time, only Bluetooth 4.X
   support is readily available, thus the current focus is on working
   within the 26 byte limit of the Bluetooth 4.X "Broadcast Frame" that
   goes out on the beacon channels.

   Finally, the 26 byte limit of the Bluetooth 4.1 "Broadcast Frame"
   strictly enforces the RID maximum length of 20 bytes.








Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


3.3.  TM-RID Focus Problem Space

   TM-RID will focus on adding immediate usability, thus trust to,
   Broadcast RID.  The one-way nature of Broadcast RID precludes any
   stateful security protocol.  Under [WK65041], any UA can announce a
   RID and an observer would be seriously challenged to validate it or
   any other information about the UA looked up from it.  Thus providing
   trust in the RID and related trust for all Broadcast messages is
   critical for the safe and secure operation of UAs.

   Three levels of functionality will be considered:

   1.  verify that HHIT is duly registered with a known registry AND
       that any messages signed with its key came from it;

   2.  look up not only static UAS registry and dynamic UTM information
       but also Intenet direct contact information for services relating
       to the UA, its current mission, etc., including communications
       with the remote pilot (or proxy) and USS;

   3.  dynamically establish strongly mutually authenticated, E2E
       strongly encrypted communications with the UAS RID sender and
       entities looked up via (2) above.

4.  Alternatives for IETF work on Trustworthy IDs

4.1.  Requirements of Trustworthy IDs

   Just a couple of requirements:

   1.  The ID MUST be 20 bytes or smaller.

   2.  It MUST be non-spoofable within the context of Remote ID
       broadcast messages (some collection of messages provides proof of
       UA ownership of ID).

   3.  In context (that is in a Remote ID Broadcast message), just the
       ID provides enough information on how at least the observer's USS
       (UAS Service Provider / Display Provider) can provide both public
       and private information on the UAS.

4.2.  Currently selected IDs by ASTM

   Now a little 'context' setting.  ASTM has already defined a set of
   textual Remote IDs:

   1  Serial Number [CTA2063A]




Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


   2  CAA Assigned ID

   3  UTM Assigned ID [RFC4122]

   The work here MUST surpass these in terms of Trustworthiness.

4.3.  Options for Trustworthy IDs

   The options found are:

   1.  X.509 certs where something like the cert sequenceNumber is the
       Remote ID.

   2.  Naming Things with Hashes, Section 8.2 of [RFC6920]

   3.  SSH keyID

   4.  HIT (Host Identity Tag) [RFC7401]

   Option 1 is no better than what ASTM/FAA is considering for any of
   the current proposed types.  Somehow, there will be a PKI and from
   that knowledge of the UAS is gained.  This REQUIRES Internet Access
   (think disaster or other non-Internet situations) and a GLOBAL PKI
   (the UA flew from Canada to the US or UK to France post Brexit).

   Option 2 meets requirements 1 and 2, but needs to be augmented so
   that the Hash provides context for 3.  Is it supported for IPsec and/
   or QUIC for UAS/observer secure communications (NetworkID).

5.  IANA Considerations

   It is likely that an IPv6 prefix will be needed for the HHIT (or
   other identifier) space; this will be specified in other drafts.

6.  Security Considerations

   UAS RID is all about safety and security, so content pertaining to
   such is not limited to this section.  UAS RID information must be
   divided into 2 classes: that which, to achieve the purpose, must be
   published openly in plaintext, for the benefit of any observer; and
   that which must be protected (e.g.  PII of pilots) but made available
   to properly authorized parties (e.g. public safety personnel who
   urgently need to contact pilots in emergencies).  Details of the
   protection mechanisms will be provided in other drafts.  Classifying
   the information will be addressed primarily in external standards but
   also herein as needed.





Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


7.  Acknowledgments

   The work of the FAA's UAS Identification and Tracking (UAS ID)
   Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC) is the foundation of later ASTM
   and proposed IETF efforts.  The work of ASTM F38.02 in balancing the
   interests of diverse stakeholders is essential to the necessary rapid
   and widespread deployment of UAS RID.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7401]  Moskowitz, R., Ed., Heer, T., Jokela, P., and T.
              Henderson, "Host Identity Protocol Version 2 (HIPv2)",
              RFC 7401, DOI 10.17487/RFC7401, April 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7401>.

   [RFC8005]  Laganier, J., "Host Identity Protocol (HIP) Domain Name
              System (DNS) Extension", RFC 8005, DOI 10.17487/RFC8005,
              October 2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8005>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [CTA2063A] ANSI, "Small Unmanned Aerial Systems Serial Numbers",
              September 2019.

   [I-D.moskowitz-hip-hierarchical-hit]
              Moskowitz, R., Card, S., and A. Wiethuechter,
              "Hierarchical HITs for HIPv2", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-moskowitz-hip-hierarchical-hit-03, 16
              December 2019, <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-
              moskowitz-hip-hierarchical-hit-03>.

   [I-D.moskowitz-hip-new-crypto]
              Moskowitz, R., Card, S., and A. Wiethuechter, "New
              Cryptographic Algorithms for HIP", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-moskowitz-hip-new-crypto-04, 23
              January 2020, <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-
              moskowitz-hip-new-crypto-04>.



Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                UAS Remote ID                 January 2020


   [RFC4122]  Leach, P., Mealling, M., and R. Salz, "A Universally
              Unique IDentifier (UUID) URN Namespace", RFC 4122,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4122, July 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4122>.

   [RFC6920]  Farrell, S., Kutscher, D., Dannewitz, C., Ohlman, B.,
              Keranen, A., and P. Hallam-Baker, "Naming Things with
              Hashes", RFC 6920, DOI 10.17487/RFC6920, April 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6920>.

   [WK65041]  ASTM, "Standard Specification for Remote ID and Tracking",
              September 2019.

Authors' Addresses

   Stuart W. Card
   AX Enterprize
   4947 Commercial Drive
   Yorkville, NY 13495
   United States of America

   Email: stu.card@axenterprize.com


   Adam Wiethuechter
   AX Enterprize
   4947 Commercial Drive
   Yorkville, NY 13495
   United States of America

   Email: adam.wiethuechter@axenterprize.com


   Robert Moskowitz
   HTT Consulting
   Oak Park, MI 48237
   United States of America

   Email: rgm@labs.htt-consult.com












Card, et al.              Expires 1 August 2020                [Page 11]
