

Network Working Group                                        W. Kruithof
Internet-Draft                             Unix-AG Universitaet Hannover
Expires: June 29, 2005                                 December 29, 2004


                         Spam reducing protocol
                  draft-kruithof-spam-reducing-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 29, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   Accepted emails do the sender not cost money, not accepted do.  The
   system, in which encryption naturally appears, can be used
   transparently aside of the existing email systems.  A central server
   for initiating the connection is needed.  There exists an
   implementation in which overtaking of the server only affects the
   communication channels which are made after the overtaking.





Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


Table of Contents

   1.   Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Introduction and overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.   Overview of the protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 8










































Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


2.  Introduction and overview

   Spam is nowadays handled by using white/blacklists and spam filters.
   It can be expected that the spam problem will not satisfactory be
   solved by these solutions.  Neither is guaranteed that receivers will
   not get spam, neither that sent emails always come through the
   anti-spam solutions.  This document proposes such a protocol that in
   the equilibrium state a minimum of spam will be sent.  The second
   advantage is that there always exists a way for a sender to be sure
   that a certain email is received and read or not by the receiver.
   The basic principle is that a sender has to pay for getting a way of
   communicating via encrypted communication with the receiver.  In case
   of accepting the message the money is booked back to the sender, if
   not, the money is booked to the central server company.

   The term 'spam' is used in this document to refer to unsolicited or
   unwanted email messages.  This document does not attempt to define
   what exactly constitutes spam.

































Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


3.  Overview of the protocol

   Alice wants to send an email to Bob, whose email address she knows.
   She can send directly an email, but she wants to be sure that it will
   not disappear in the spam folder, and thats why will be read to late
   or not.

   For successful communicating both Alice and Bob MUST deposit money to
   a (SHOULD be non-profit) company, which transfers it to virtual
   money.  In the database of the company's server for each email
   address SHALL be seen how many it cost to send a mail to the
   receiving party.  This SHOULD also be done by client software.
   OPTIONAL is searching in the database.  Alice MUST pay the amount of
   money is set by Bob for downloading from the server the public key of
   Bob.  Alice email address MUST be associated with this public key on
   the server by the database.  Alice SHOULD at the same time upload her
   public key, which is accessible if Bob accepts her email, and which
   is deleted if he dis-accepts the email.  This private-public key pair
   MAY be real time generated on the server and could be send encrypted
   to Bob if Alice pays, or the client SHOULD upload several public
   keys.

   If Alice sends her email to Bob, this MUST be encrypted with the
   public key of Bob for which she paid.  Bob's email client receives
   the email, and this MUST check whether the mail is encrypted, if so,
   his clients MUST connect to the server to get the public key, with
   which the mail is encrypted.  This SHOULD be done by matching the
   senders email address, otherwise Bob has to try every private key on
   the encrypted message.  If the email address matches, a public key of
   Alice SHOULD also be transferred to Bob, to complete the save
   communication.  If the email is not encrypted, it SHALL be lead
   further in the 'normal' mail processing (spam filters etc), which
   expresses the transparency of the new protocol aside of the normal
   mail protocol.

   Now Bob knows which private key he has to use to decrypt the email
   message.  If not, the mail can be lead further in the normal system,
   it could be a normal encrypted message if no matching email address
   is found in the database.  If the receiver doesn't explicitly reject
   the email, the cost MUST be booked back.  OPTIONAL is accepting email
   from Alice mail address n times.  The connection is now established,
   because Alice MAY setup her client software to accept always from
   email addresses for which she paid to get the public key.  If the
   receiver does not accept the message, which SHALL be done by the
   receiver explicitly, the money is neither booked back to the sender,
   neither booked to the receiver.  It SHALL be booked to the company's
   account.




Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


   For each new connection (new person or new email address) a new
   public-key/private key pair SHOULD be generated, in case a public key
   of Bob will be known to people for whom Bob does not want that they
   know this email address.  As soon a connection is made, the used
   private key with each email address SHOULD be saved by client
   software, so that in future the server is not needed for further
   communication.  In case of a 'one-time' key pair, the public key
   SHOULD be deleted from the server by the client.

   Bob can reject the mail, and that is why spam will not be send in the
   situation, that the sender cannot make benefit out of the extra cost
   anymore.  This will be reached of course in the equilibrium
   situation, Bob wants his 'to pay' to stay as low as possible, but not
   to low to get spam mail from company's which think they can earn that
   cost back.

   In practice, Bob MAY setup an email address for which he will
   exclusively use the new protocol.  Each mail which is not encrypted
   MAY be bounced with a message how to send an email which will be
   guaranteed be delivered.  Now Bob MAY freely distribute this email
   address in the Internet.






























Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


4.  Security Considerations

   This section handles the case a server has been compromised and why
   various SHOULD's lead to a system in which also compromising of this
   server does not affect all the communication, it only requires the
   resetting of the communication channels.  The weakness is the
   possibility of loosing money if the server is compromised.

   Essential is the central server, which is used for keeping track of
   the virtual money.  Public-private keys SHOULD be generated by the
   clients, because it avoids generating 'bad keys' in case of
   errors/misuse of the server software.  One-time key-pairs SHOULD be
   used, because if Alice accidentally or intentionally leaks the key to
   someone else, Bob can delete this key-pair.  Also SHOULD the key-pair
   be generated by the client, so that only the client has the private
   key.  This avoids when the server is compromised the spread of
   private keys to the public.  The public key SHOULD be in case of
   One-time-key-pair be deleted on the server if Alice has paid for the
   key.  Than a compromised server cannot spread this public key
   anymore.

   If it is discovered that the server is compromised, in case of all
   the SHOULD's in this section are followed, the communication channel
   can be reset by sending to each connection a new public key, with
   encrypting with the old key.  This communication cannot be read in
   each case, and after establishing the new connection, all the old
   keys, which MAY be in the hands of third party's, MUST thrown away.

   The weakness which is left is the book keeping data server.  In case
   of compromising this part, money can be lost.

5  References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Author's Address

   Wilbert Kruithof
   Unix AG Universitaet Hannover
   Welfengarten 1
   30167 Hannover
   Germany

   Phone: +495 11 7623226
   EMail: wilbert@stud.uni-hannover.de




Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol            December 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Kruithof                 Expires June 29, 2005                  [Page 8]


