INTERNET-DRAFT                                           Manjunath Iyer
Expires: December 18, 2006                      Celstream
                                                          June 18, 2006

 

 
      Abstraction for AV data transfers
               draft-manjunath-avt-data-abstraction-00.txt
                                        

Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents 
   that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or 
   she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which 
   he or she becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working  
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by 
   other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use 
   Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other 
   than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 18, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract


Meeting quality of service (QoS) in a network is 
challenging. DiffServe architecture, given in [RFC2474] has 
been proposed as a solution. However, it results in a 
kind of self-simlalarity in the network traffic. The method 
results in the reduction of bit rates and discard of 
cells during congestion. It requires re transmission of 
the same data. Alternatively, the information input can be 
reduced with hierarchical arrangement of data in to different 
levels of abstraction. With the increased load on the network, 
the complexity of meeting QoS and the issues of congestion 
are to be transferred to the receiver from the network. 



Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  1] 

 
Internet-Draft  Abstraction for AV data transfers        June 2006

1.  Introduction

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.2  Overview

    
One of the techniques to assure the agreed quality of service 
during the transfer of the data is to provide a feed back signal 
to the source about the congestion. The [RFC2581] provides a method 
to generate the feedback information. The signal adjusts the data 
transfer rate so that the network is not over-loaded. An error in 
the signal soon results in the loss of packets to reduce the delay. 
In addition, the lost packets need to be re transmitted on the 
underlying TCP resulting in the loss of time and wastage of 
resources. The real time voice or video cannot afford to lose 
packets or increase the delay. Any skip in the packet results 
in total loss of information of the corresponding data.


1.3  Abstraction of information

As a solution what MAY be done here is, the information content 
of the signal may be uniformly degraded or lowered rather than 
losing some packets permanently. With the congestion notification 
signal at the data source, the source can start transferring the 
data with a variable degree of abstraction proportional to the 
congestion. In audio or video data transfers, though the 
quantisation step can be adaptively increased, it results in 
increased and irreparable information loss. The process is 
equivalent to sampling the video or audio at an abstract level. 
The modified technique is to arrange the data as a collection 
of different abstractions.


Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  2] 

Internet-Draft        Abstraction for AV data transfers    June 2006





2.  Impact of data abstraction on the QoS

Based on the congestion feedback and the service agreement, an 
abstract view of the data will be selected for transmission. 
Though any abstract level can be used, the penalty for abstraction 
would be in terms of increased processing at decoder and a probable 
and affordable degradation in the quality.  For the multimedia data, 
incase the real time transfer is not required, the lowest abstract 
levels may be selected.Each abstract level of the data is the 
replica of the original data but for some abstraction. It is 
generated with a known technique, such as averaging convolution 
with Gaussian pulse etc that is totally reversible. However it 
requires computation power. The tradeoff is now between the 
computation at the receiver and the network resources.The attractive 
part of this scheme is that the retransmissions would be 
totally reduced.If the abstraction methods are well organized, 
in the most optimistic case, it provides an opportunity for 
the receiver to synthesize the full data from the abstraction 
without being over loading the network in retransmission.
 


Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  3] 

Internet-Draft      Abstraction for AV data transfers     June 2006


3.  Security Considerations 


  While cteating the content in abstract form, the security 
and content distribution information may be included. The 
data MAY be encrypted before getting processed in to abstract 
levels.

 
 



4.  IANA Considerations 

This document has no actions for IANA.

 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  4] 
 


Internet-Draft     Abstraction for AV data transfers      June 2006
 


5.  References

5.1 Normative References 


     [RFC2119] Bradner, S. "Key Words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  

  

5.2 Informative References 


  
   

   [RFC2474] K. Nichols, R., S. Blake., F. Baker and  D. Black, 
   "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field  (DS Field)  
 in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers ", RFC 2474,  December 1998.

   [RFC2581] M.Allman, V. Paxson and W. Stevens, "TCP Congestion 
  Control", RFC 2581, April 1999.  



 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  5] 
 


Internet-Draft     Abstraction for AV data transfers       June 2006
 


6.  Author's Address 

   Manjunath.R
   Celstream.
   9,Prestige bluechip
   Opp.Christ college
   Bangalore-560029
   INDIA
   Phone: 80-41191919
   E-mail: manju_r_99@yahoo.com
           
      





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  6] 


Internet-Draft     Abstraction for AV data transfers     June 2006

7.  Acknowledgements 

   The author acknowledges the creators of the RFCs referred in this
 draft for the valuable information and the extensions based on 
 which this draft has been created   

   The following individuals directly contributed for encouragement,
   identifying   Issues,  suggesting resolutions to the issues found in 
   this document: Srinivas Rao, Rangaraj. This document benefited
   from all these contributions. 

   The author acknowledges the encouragement and services rendered
   by his family members and colleagues during the preparation of the 
   document.   





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  7] 


Internet-Draft    Abstraction for AV data transfers      June 2006
 
8.  Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is 
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in 
   BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain 
   all their rights.  

   This document and the information contained herein are 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE 
   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), 
   THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
   DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
   OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  8] 
 

Internet-Draft   Abstraction for AV data transfers       June 2006
 
9.  Intellectual Property Statement  

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of    
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might 
   be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document or the extent to which 
   any license under such rights might or might not be 
   available; nor does it represent that it has made any 
   independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can 
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and 
   any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the 
   result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by 
   implementers or users of this specification can be obtained 
   from the IETF on-line IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its 
   attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, 
   or other proprietary rights that may cover technology that 
   may be required to implement this standard.  Please address 
   the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
 
Manjunath              Expires December 18, 2006          [Page 9] 












