

Network Working Group                                       Mike McBride
Internet Draft
Intended Status: Informational
Expires:  May 2008






                                                            November 2007


                 PIM Refresh Reduction Problem Statement


             draft-mmcbride-pim-refresh-problem-statement-00

Status of this Memo

     By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
     applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
     have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
     aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
     and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
     material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).







McBride                                                         [Page 1]

Internet Draft       PIM Refresh Problem Statement         November 2007


Abstract

     The PIM Working Group has a charter item to provide solutions to
     reduce the effects of periodic join/prune processing in PIM. The
     L3VPN Working Group identified the periodic messaging of PIM as a
     potential future scaling problem for PIM based MVPNs. This document
     identifies the issues we are trying to solve with PIM refresh
     reduction.



Table of Contents

      1          Introduction  .......................................   2
      2          History  ............................................   3
      3          Problem  ............................................   3
      4          Solutions  ..........................................   4
      5          Security Considerations  ............................   4
      6          Iana Considerations  ................................   5
      7          Acknowledgments  ....................................   5
      8          Normative References  ...............................   5
      9          Informative References  .............................   5
     10          Authors' Addresses  .................................   5
     11          Full Copyright Statement  ...........................   6
     12          Intellectual Property  ..............................   6




1. Introduction

     PIM Joins are refreshed every 60 seconds by a downstream router to
     keep multicast state alive at the upstream router. The more number of
     states, the more control traffic required for refresh.

     The PIM Working Group has a charter item to provide solutions to
     reduce the effects of periodic join/prune processing in PIM. The
     L3VPN Working Group identified the periodic messaging of PIM as a
     potential future scaling problem for PIM based MVPNs. This document
     identifies the issues we are trying to solve with PIM refresh
     reduction.










McBride                                                         [Page 2]

Internet Draft       PIM Refresh Problem Statement         November 2007


2. History

     At the November 2004 IETF, the L3VPN WG identified the effects of
     periodic Join/Prune processing in PIM as a potential scalability
     problem for PIM based MVPNs and asked that the PIM WG provide a
     solution. The PIM WG subsequently created a pim refresh design team
     to understand the problem area and provide a solution.

     Although there were disagreements on certain details, the design team
     had rough agreement on a Join/Prune acknowledgement solution.  But
     then the team decided to step back and ask the L3VPN WG for a
     requirements document to see if this is really an area for which we
     should provide a solution.

     The PIM WG discussed the future efforts we wanted to make to PIM. The
     primary focus, of the working group, at the time was in getting the
     PIMv2 draft completed. There are many enhancements we could make to
     PIM. Should we refrain from such future PIM enhancements or should we
     leave PIM alone and close the working group? Or should we start going
     down the path of PIMv3?

     The L3VPN did produce an MVPN requirements document which did help to
     understand the future scalability requirements of MVPN. But it didn't
     help in understanding at what point PIM scalability would cause a
     problem for PIM based MVPNs.

     In 2007, with the PIMv2 draft complete and the PIM WG tasked with a
     new Charter, it was decided it would be of benefit to provide
     enhancements to PIM. The WG has determined there is additional work
     to be accomplished and is chartered to standardize extensions to RFC
     4601 - Protocol Independent Multicast Version 2 - Sparse Mode. These
     PIM extensions will include PIM refresh reduction.



3. Problem

     As previously listed, the PIM WG has decided to discover ways to
     reduce the effects of the periodic Join/Prune processing in PIM. This
     could specifically help in the future scalability of PIM based MVPN,
     but is certainly not limited to that solution.

     PIM Joins are refreshed every 60 seconds by a downstream router to
     keep multicast state alive at the upstream router. The more number of
     states, the more control traffic is required for refresh. Scaling
     could become an issue, especially with VPNs where there could be 1000
     MVPNs with 100 mroute entries each and 10 downstream interfaces (1
     million state refreshes every minute in steady state).



McBride                                                         [Page 3]

Internet Draft       PIM Refresh Problem Statement         November 2007


     Route changes cause Joins to be sent to the new RPF neighbor. If the
     Join is lost, the disruption of traffic is for at least 60 seconds.
     There is no reliability in the Join/Prune exchange between downstream
     and upstream routers. Larger values of holdtime in the Join/Prune PDU
     will reduce the frequency of refreshes, but can cause larger
     convergence delays.



4. Solutions

     This is not a solutions draft. Subsequent to this draft, there will
     be drafts which outline solutions to this problem. The following
     ideas have been discussed as possible solutions to be further
     specified:

      + Join/Prune Ack extension to PIM.

      + Hard state (TCP) solution.

       + A PIMv3 containing strong RPF from forwarding plane, explicit
         tracking of all neighbors and hard state

       + Include checksums in Hello messages rather than sending periodic
         JPs.

      + Use long holdtimes.




5. Security Considerations

     This document is a problem statement, which describes the reduction
     of PIM messaging, and does not introduce security considerations by
     itself.  Any potential solution must protect against exploiting PIM
     as specified in RFC 4601.














McBride                                                         [Page 4]

Internet Draft       PIM Refresh Problem Statement         November 2007


6. Iana Considerations

    This document does not require any action on the part of IANA.



7. Acknowledgments

     We'd like to thank Dino Farinacci, Suresh Boddapati, Tom Pusateri,
     Marshall Eubanks, Robert Kebler, Venu Hemige, Yiqun Cai, Yakov
     Rekhter, Yetik Serbest, Albert Tian, for their work on the pim
     refresh design team and helping the PIM WG to understand a few
     possible solutions.



8. Normative References

     [Fenner] B. Fenner, "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode
     (PIM-SM)". RFC 4601

     [MVPN] "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", Rosen, Aggarwal, July 2007,
     draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-05.txt


9. Informative References

     [MORIN] T. Morin, "Requirements for Multicast in L3 Provider-
     Provisioned VPNs", RFC 4834



10. Authors' Addresses

     Mike McBride
     mmcbride@cisco.com















McBride                                                         [Page 5]

Internet Draft       PIM Refresh Problem Statement         November 2007


11. Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

     This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
     contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
     retain all their rights.

     This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
     "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
     OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
     THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
     OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
     THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
     WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




12. Intellectual Property

     By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
     applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
     have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
     aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
     pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
     this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
     might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
     made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
     on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
     found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
     such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
     http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
     ipr@ietf.org.




McBride                                                         [Page 6]

Internet Draft       PIM Refresh Problem Statement         November 2007

