



Network Working Group                                            R. Bush
Internet-Draft                                 Internet Initiative Japan
Intended status: Standards Track                                 J. Haas
Expires: January 7, 2016                                      J. Scudder
                                                  Juniper Networks, Inc.
                                                               A. Nipper
                                                            T. King, Ed.
                                                  DE-CIX Management GmbH
                                                            July 6, 2015


        Making Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures at IXPs
                        draft-ietf-idr-rs-bfd-01

Abstract

   When route servers are used, the data plane is not congruent with the
   control plane.  Therefore, the peers on the Internet exchange can
   lose data connectivity without the control plane being aware of it,
   and packets are dropped on the floor.  This document proposes the use
   of BFD between the two peering routers to detect a data plane
   failure, and then uses BGP next hop cost to signal the state of the
   data link to the route server(s).

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to
   be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] only when they appear in all
   upper case.  They may also appear in lower or mixed case as English
   words, without normative meaning.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2016.



Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Mutual Discovery of Route Server Client Routers . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Tracking Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Advertising Client Router Connectivity to the Route Server  .   5
   4.  Modelling the IXP Network using BGP Link-State  . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Utilizing Next Hop Unreachability Information at Client
       Routers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Recommendations for Using BFD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Bootstrapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Capability Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Other Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   10. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   11. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   In configurations (typically Internet Exchange Points (IXP)) where
   EBGP routing information is exchanged between client routers through
   the agency of a route server [I-D.ietf-idr-ix-bgp-route-server], but
   traffic is exchanged directly, operational issues can arise when
   partial data plane connectivity exists among the route server client
   routers.  This is because, as the data plane is not congruent with
   the control plane, the client routers on the IXP can lose data
   connectivity without the control plane - the route server - being
   aware of it, and packets are dropped on the floor.

   To remedy this, two basic problems need to be solved:





Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   1.  Client routers must have a means of verifying connectivity
   amongst themselves, and

   2.  Client routers must have a means of communicating the knowledge
   so gained back to the route server.

   The first can be solved by application of Bidirectional Forwarding
   Detection [RFC5880].  The second can be solved by use of BGP Link-
   State [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution].  There is a subsidiary problem
   that must also be solved.  Since one of the key value propositions
   offered by a route server is that client routers need not be
   configured to peer with each other:

   3.  Client routers must have a means (other than configuration) to
   know of one another's existence.

   This can also be solved by an application of BGP Link-State.

   Throughout this document, we generally assume that the route server
   being discussed is able to represent different RIBs towards different
   clients, as discussed in section 2.3.2.1.
   [I-D.ietf-idr-ix-bgp-route-server].  These procedures (other than the
   use of BFD to track next hop reachability) have limited value if this
   is not the case.

2.  Operation

   Below, we detail procedures where a route server tells its client
   routers about other client routers (by sending it their next hops
   using BGP Link-State), the client router verifies connectivity to
   those other client routers (using BFD) and communicates its findings
   back to the route server (again using BGP Link-State).  The route
   server uses the received BGP Link-State routes as input to the route
   selection process it performs on behalf of the client.

2.1.  Mutual Discovery of Route Server Client Routers

   Strictly speaking, what is needed is not for a route server client
   router to know of other (control-plane) client routers, but rather to
   know (so that it can validate) all the next hops the route server
   might choose to send the client router, i.e. to know of potential
   forwarding plane relationships.

   In effect, this requirement amounts to knowing the BGP next hops the
   route server is aware of for the particular per-client Loc-RIB (see
   section 2.3.2.1.  [I-D.ietf-idr-ix-bgp-route-server]).  We introduce
   a new table for each client to store known next hops, their
   compatibility with this proposed solution and their learned



Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   reachability.  We call these tables per-client Next Hop Information
   Base (NHIB).  BGP Link-State is used to transfer the NHIBs from the
   route server to route server clients.

   At the route server, the NHIB for each client is populated with the
   next hops from its Loc-RIB.  If the BGP capabilities learned during
   BGP session setup identify a next hop as compatible with this
   proposal, this is reflected in the NHIB.  Initially, it is assumed
   that the client router is able to reach its next hops which is stored
   in the NHIB.

   If a next hop is added to the NHIB for a particular client, a route
   SHOULD be added to the router server's Adj-NHIB-Out.  This route
   contains a BGP Link-State SAFI and models the next hop as node (see
   section 3.2.1 [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution]) and the connectivity
   between the route server and the next hop as link (see section 3.2.2
   [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution]).  If a next hop is removed from a
   NHIB, the corresponding route in the Adj-NHIB-Out SHOULD be removed.

   A route server client SHOULD use BFD [RFC5880] (or other means beyond
   the scope of this document) to track forwarding plane connectivity to
   each next hop depicted in the received BGP Link-State information.

2.2.  Tracking Connectivity

   For each next hop in the NHIB received from the route server (called
   Adj-NHIB-In), the client router SHOULD use some means to confirm that
   data plane connectivity does exist to that next hop.

   The client router maintains its own NHIB in order to keep track of
   its (potential) next hops, their capabilities as learned from the
   route server, and their reachability.  The NHIB is updated according
   to the Adj-NHIB-In and client routers own tests to verify
   connectivity to next hops.

   For each next hop in the Adj-NHIB-In received from the route server,
   the client router SHOULD evaluate the next hop's compatibility with
   this proposal.  If the next hop supports this proposed mechanism the
   client router SHOULD setup a BFD session to it if one is not already
   available and track the reachability of this next hop.

   For each next hop in the Adj-NHIB-In, a corresponding BGP Link-State
   SAFI containing a node NLRI route SHOULD be placed in the client
   router's own Adj-NHIB-Out to be advertised to the route server.  If
   the next hop is not compatible with this proposal a route containing
   a BGP Link-State SAFI and a link NLRI SHOULD be placed in the client
   router's own Adj-NHIB-Out. The link NLRI is configured as follows:
   the local node is set to the client router, the remote node if set to



Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   the particular next hop.  Any next hop that is compatible with this
   proposal and for which connectivity is in the process of verification
   (in other words a BFD session is initiated) or is already verified a
   route containing a BGP Link-State SAFI and a link NLRI as described
   above SHOULD be placed to the client router's own Adj-NHIB-Out.  For
   any next hop for which connectivity has failed a route SHOULD be
   placed in the client router's own Adj-NHIB-Out to withdraw the
   previously advertised link from the route server.  (This may also be
   done as a result of policy even if connectivity exists.)

   If the test of connectivity between one client router and another
   client router has failed the client router that detected this failure
   should perform connectivity test for a configurable amount of time
   (preferable 24 hours) on a regular basis (e.g. every 5 minutes).  If
   during this time no connectivity can be restored no more testing is
   performed until manually changed or the client router is rebooted.

3.  Advertising Client Router Connectivity to the Route Server

   As discussed above, a client router will advertise its Adj-NHIB-Out
   to the route server.  The route server SHOULD update the reachability
   information of next hops in the client's NHIB table accordingly.
   Furthermore, the route server SHOULD use reachability information
   from the NHIB as input to its own decision process when computing the
   Adj-RIB-Out for this peer.  This peer-dependent Adj-RIB-Out is then
   advertised to this peer.  In particular, the route server MUST
   exclude any routes whose next hops the client has declared to be not
   reachable.

4.  Modelling the IXP Network using BGP Link-State

   This section describes how BGP Link-State is used to a) transfer the
   per-client NHIB form the route server to the route server clients and
   b) transfer the reachability information about next hops from the
   route server client to the route server.

   Each route server client and the route server are modeled as nodes
   (see section 3.2.1 [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution]).  As node ID the
   BGP identifier (see section 1.1 [RFC4271]) is used.

   BGP Link-State defines as link a so-called half-way link (see section
   3.2.2 [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution]).  To cover the bidirectional
   connectivity between two nodes two link definitions are required.  In
   order to model the connectivity between two route server clients a
   link is used.






Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   For both nodes and links the Protocol-ID is set to 5 to reflect the
   virtual modeling.  The instance identifier for nodes and links is set
   to 0 as the default layer 3 routing topology is utilized.

   The link descriptor TLV code points 259-262 are applied depending on
   the IP protocol version used.  Prefix descriptors are not applied.

   A way is needed to model whether a client router is compatible the
   mechanisms described in this document or not.  For this, a new node
   descriptor Sub-TVLs (see section 3.2.1.4
   [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution]) is introduced.

       +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------+
       | Sub-TLV Code Point | Description                 | Length |
       +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------+
       |        516         | Compatible to this document |      1 |
       +--------------------+-----------------------------+--------+

                     Table 1: Node Descriptor Sub-TLV

   The value of this Sub-TVL is set to 0 if a client router does not
   support the mechanisms described in this document (of if the support
   is administratively disabled).  Otherwise the value is set to 1.

5.  Utilizing Next Hop Unreachability Information at Client Routers

   A client router detecting an unreachable next hop signals this
   information to the route server as described above.  Also, it treats
   the routes as unresolvable as per section 9.1.2.1 [RFC4271] and
   proceeds with route selection as normal.

   Changes in nexthop reachability via these mechanisms should receive
   some amount of consideration toward avoiding unnecessary route
   flapping.  Similar mechanisms exist in IGP implementations and should
   be applied to this scenario.

6.  Recommendations for Using BFD

   The RECOMMENDED way a client router can confirm the data plane
   connectivity to its next hops is available, is the use of BFD in
   asynchronous mode.  Echo mode MAY be used if both client routers
   running a BFD session support this.  The use of authentication in BFD
   is OPTIONAL as there is a certain level of trust between the
   operators of the client routers at a particular IXP.  If trust cannot
   be assumed, it is recommended to use pair-wise keys (how this can be
   achieved is outside the scope of this document).  The ttl/hop limit
   values as described in section 5 [RFC5881] MUST be obeyed in order to
   secure BFD sessions from packets coming from outside the IXP.



Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   There is interdependence between the functionality described in this
   document and BFD from an administrative point of view.  To streamline
   behaviour of different implementations the following is RECOMMENDED:

   o  If BFD is administratively shut down by the administrator of a
      client router then the functionality described in this document
      MUST also be administratively shut down.
   o  If the administrator enables the functionality described in this
      document on a client router then BFD MUST be automatically
      enabled.

   The following values of the BFD configuration of client routers (see
   section 6.8.1 [RFC5880]) are RECOMMENDED in order to allow a fast
   detection of lost data plane connectivity:

   o  DesiredMinTxInterval: 1,000,000 (microseconds)
   o  RequiredMinRxInterval: 1,000,000 (microseconds)
   o  DetectMult: 3

   The configuration values above are a trade-off between fast detection
   of data plane connectivity and the load client routers must handle
   keeping up the BFD communication.  Selecting smaller
   DesiredMinTxInterval and RequiredMinRxInterval values generates lots
   of BFD packets, especially at larger IXPs with many hundreds of
   client routers.

   The configuration values above are selected in order to handle brief
   interrupts on the data plane.  Otherwise, if a BFD session detects a
   brief data plane interrupt to a particular client router, it will
   cause to signal the route server that it should remove routes from
   this client router and tell it shortly afterwards to add the routes
   again.  This is disruptive and computational expensive on the route
   server.

   The configuration values above are also partially impacted by BGP
   advertisement time in reaction to events from BFD.  If the
   configuration values are selected so that BFD detects data plane
   interrupts a lot faster than the BGP advertisement time, a data plane
   connectivity flapping could be detected by BFD but the route server
   is not informed about them because BGP is not able to transport this
   information fast enough.

   As discussed, finding good configuration values is hard so a client
   router administrator MAY select better suited values depending on the
   special needs of the particular deployment.






Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


7.  Bootstrapping

   If the route server starts it does not know anything about
   connectivity states between client routers.  So, the route server
   assumes optimistically that all client routers are able to reach each
   other unless told otherwise.

8.  Capability Detection

   In order for two BGP speakers to follow the mechanism defined in this
   document, they MUST use BGP Capabilities Advertisements [RFC5492].
   This is done as specified in [RFC4760], by using capability code 1
   (multiprotocol BGP), with an AFI XXX and SAFI XXX.

9.  Other Considerations

   For purposes of routing stability, implementations may wish to apply
   hysteresis ("holddown") to next hops that have transitioned from
   reachable to unreachable and back.

10.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the authors of
   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost] for their work as it was a basis for this
   proposal.

11.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost]
              Varlashkin, I., Raszuk, R., Patel, K., Bhardwaj, M., and
              S. Bayraktar, "Carrying next-hop cost information in BGP",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost-02 (work in progress), May
              2015.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-ix-bgp-route-server]
              Jasinska, E., Hilliard, N., Raszuk, R., and N. Bakker,
              "Internet Exchange BGP Route Server", draft-ietf-idr-ix-
              bgp-route-server-07 (work in progress), June 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-distribution]
              Gredler, H., Medved, J., Previdi, S., Farrel, A., and S.
              Ray, "North-Bound Distribution of Link-State and TE
              Information using BGP", draft-ietf-idr-ls-distribution-11
              (work in progress), June 2015.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4760]  Bates, T., Chandra, R., Katz, D., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, January
              2007.

   [RFC5492]  Scudder, J. and R. Chandra, "Capabilities Advertisement
              with BGP-4", RFC 5492, February 2009.

   [RFC5880]  Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
              (BFD)", RFC 5880, June 2010.

   [RFC5881]  Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
              (BFD) for IPv4 and IPv6 (Single Hop)", RFC 5881, June
              2010.

Authors' Addresses

   Randy Bush
   Internet Initiative Japan
   5147 Crystal Springs
   Bainbridge Island, Washington  98110
   US

   Email: randy@psg.com


   Jeffrey Haas
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   US

   Email: jhaas@juniper.net


   John G. Scudder
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   US

   Email: jgs@juniper.net







Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-DraMaking Route Servers Aware of Data Link Failures   July 2015


   Arnold Nipper
   DE-CIX Management GmbH
   Lichtstrasse 43i
   Cologne  50825
   Germany

   Email: arnold.nipper@de-cix.net


   Thomas King (editor)
   DE-CIX Management GmbH
   Lichtstrasse 43i
   Cologne  50825
   Germany

   Email: thomas.king@de-cix.net



































Bush, et al.             Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 10]
