


Network Working Group                                          R. Natale
Internet-Draft                                                     MITRE
Intended status: Standards Track                       February 26, 2007
Expires: August 30, 2007


     Converting SNMP MIBs to SOA/Web Services Management Artifacts
                 draft-natale-snmp-mibs-to-ontology-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


Abstract

   This memo provides an overview of the rationale, objectives, and
   technical alternatives associated with a proposal to develop a
   standard methodology for converting SNMP MIBs to one or more
   artifacts more readily usable by SOA/Web Services management tools.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Expected Product(s)/Impacts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  To Do (as of -00)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Technical Approach/Methodology/Activities  . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13






























Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


2.  Introduction

   This document proposes an industry effort, via an IETF Working Group
   in the Operations & Management Area, to define a standard methodology
   for the conversion (and post-conversion validation) of SNMP MIBs into
   a format more naturally usable by emergent SOA/Web Services
   management tools.  This document uses the term "ontology" a bit
   loosely at this time to refer to the output(s) of the target
   conversion process.  Using the OASIS Web Services Distributed
   Management (WSDM) specifications (v1.1 approved as an OASIS Standard
   as of August 2006), the DMTF-led WS-Management specifications (still
   in "Preliminary Release" state), and the on-going industry effort to
   evolve those two into a single harmonized specification set, it is
   likely that the necessary output artifacts will consist of some set
   of the following (and possibly others yet to be identified):

   o  XML (eXtensible Markup Language)

   o  RDF (Resource Description Framework)

   o  WSDL (Web Services Description Language)

   o  WS-Policy (Web Services set of policy specifications)

   o  SML(Service Modeling Language)

   o  CML (Common Model Library)

   o  OWL-S (Ontology Web Language - Services)

   A key objective of the proposed WG will be to define the necessary
   output artifacts, taking into consideration the state of the industry
   with respect to SOA/Web Services management tools and standards.

   The underlying predicates of this proposal are that:

   o  The body of SNMP MIBs comprises management knowledge and artifacts
      of incalculable value to the industry, irrespective of
      instrumentation mechanisms, access methods, and protocol(s) used
      to manipulate MIB data.

   o  The nascent "SOA Management" industry could be relatively quickly
      enriched, even if via WS-"whatever"-to/from-SNMP proxies, via more
      SOA-friendly management data models.  The expectation here is that
      ontology-based management data models will be more accessible to
      and usable by "SOA Management" tools than ASN.1 MIBs are.

   Problem: A paucity of managed element data models (and associated



Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


   management instrumentation) exists in a form that can be used
   directly by SOA/Web Services management tools.

   Opportunity: A large body of SNMP MIBs (and associated management
   instrumentation) exists - particularly in the system and network
   realms -- and can be made more directly accessible to SOA/Web
   Services management tools if industry agrees on a standard conversion
   and validation methodology, including standardized output formats.

   Explanation: A substantial body of management data models exists in
   the marketplace, in the form of SNMP MIBs, with concrete realization
   in the form of managed object instrumentation which is used by
   numerous independently developed SNMP management frameworks and
   applications (HP OpenView, IBM Tivoli, CiscoWorks, etc.).  As SNMP
   MIBs, these data models are written using an adapted subset of ANS.1,
   in accordance with the rules and guidelines published in RFC 2578 ,
   Structure of Management Information Version 2 (SMIv2), and associated
   RFCs , and with de facto industry conventions best documented in RFC
   4181, Guidelines for Authors and Reviewers of MIB Documents .  It is
   highly unlikely that modern/future SOA-based service management
   applications will directly support ASN.1; and SNMP is not a natural
   fit for the current breed of nascent "SOA Management" products on the
   market.

   Bringing this body of data models and the instrumentation behind them
   into native SOA operational environments will yield substantial
   benefits to numerous industry stakeholders by:

   o  Reducing the number of management protocol instances to be
      supported.

   o  Reducing the number of management applications required.

   o  Reducing the number of and normalizing management interfaces (UIs,
      APIs, M2Ms, etc.) required to provide integrated management of
      services, networks, and systems.

   o  Enabling the use of native "SOA Management" tools for the above-
      mentioned converged management activities.

   Numerous IETF standard and vendor proprietary ("enterprise") MIBs are
   instrumented at the application, network, and device (node) level.
   Making these entities manageable via modern SOA-based service
   management applications will serve to extend the useful life of those
   investments, benefiting suppliers, customers, and users.  Likewise,
   such a development could be an accelerant for the new breed of "SOA
   Management" developers and vendors who might not be well-versed in
   IETF network management protocols, mechanisms, and tools, and might



Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


   not be able to make the learning curve and development investments in
   that pre-SOA technology.

2.1.  Objectives

   This proposed effort has three major objectives:

   o  To make the existing (and future) body of SNMP management data
      models (MIBs) more readily accessible to SOA-based management
      applications.

   o  To facilitate the development and use of converged and "end-to-
      end" SOA-based management applications.

   o  To achieve published industry consensus on how to achieve the
      foregoing objectives, in the form of one or more industry standard
      specifications and/or informational "best practices" documents.

2.2.  Expected Product(s)/Impacts

   The intended primary outputs of this effort include:

   o  Standard SNMP MIB to ontology conversion tool(s).

   o  Standard validation tools corresponding to those conversion tools.

   Secondary outputs might include extensions to existing IETF
   management protocols that already have an XML orientation (e.g.,
   NETCONF, XCAP).

   The expected major impacts of this effort include:

   o  Extension of the enormous industry investment in existing SNMP MIB
      data models and management instrumentation to the nascent "SOA
      Management" industry (suppliers, customers, and users).

   o  Extension of the useful life-span and service scope of existing
      SNMP-managed network entities into SOA-based/web services
      operational environments.

   o  Facilitation of the development of converged "next-generation"
      management applications, reducing complexity and operational
      expenses for network operators and other service providers.








Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


2.3.  To Do (as of -00)

      Add references in numerous places.

      Consider possible Security section content.

      Change document perspective from one of BOF socialization to WG
      foundation.

      Identify any MUST, SHOULD, OPTIONAL type requirements.









































Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


3.  Technical Approach/Methodology/Activities

   The intent is to conduct the bulk of this work via formation of an
   IETF Working Group (WG) in the Operations & Management (O&M) Area to
   define standard methods for converting the body of existing SNMP MIBs
   to ontologies and associated artifacts more readily usable by SOA-
   based service management applications, and standard methods for
   validating the results of such conversions.

   While additional constraints might be placed on the WG during its
   formal chartering process, it is anticipated that the following will
   be among them:

   o  IETF standard MIBs are the prime target; compliant vendor-specific
      enterprise MIBs would naturally follow.

   o  This WG would examine the viability of starting from or building
      off the existing (but non-standard) methods of converting SNMP
      MIBs to XML schema and documents.

   o  This WG would examine the viability of extending the NETCONF
      protocol to work with such ontologies.

   o  This WG would examine the viability of build-time extensibility
      and run-time composability mechanisms associated with compliant
      ontologies.

   o  At the end of this process, compliant ontologies developed
      independently of pre-existing SNMP MIBs would be indistinguishable
      from those developed from such MIBs, enabling a more modern and
      SOA-aware method (e.g., OWL-S) of managed object data model
      construction.

   o  At the end of this process, compliant ontologies might be
      extensible in ways that are incompatible with reverse translation
      back into SNMP MIBs.  However, such reverse translation is not a
      goal of this effort.

   o  Nothing that is inconsistent with management entity support for
      SNMPv3 security and access control mechanisms will be introduced
      into the solution(s) standardized by this effort.

   Given the prior MIB-to-XML work that has been done in the IETF and
   the IRTF, and which this proposed effect will reuse and extend as
   much as feasible, it is anticipated that the above work plan can be
   completed between the Spring 2007 and Spring 2008 IETF meetings,
   inclusive.




Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


4.  Security Considerations

   None (at this time).
















































Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA (as of -00).
















































Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.















































Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


Author's Address

   Bob Natale
   The MITRE Corporation
   7515 Colshire Dr
   MS H405
   McLean, VA  22102

   Phone: +1 703-983-2505
   Email: rnatale@mitre.org
   URI:   www.mitre.org








































Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Converting SNMP MIBS             February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Natale                   Expires August 30, 2007               [Page 13]


