
                                                               J. Schoch
Internet Draft                                                    Sprint
Document:  draft-schoch-dns-ssm-00.txt                         S. Schoch
Expires:  August 2001                                   Juniper Networks
                                                          February, 2001
 
 
        Using Domain Name Services for Source Specific Multicast 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
 
   One of the obstacles in implementing any version of Multicast is 
   creating a method of advertising what is being "broadcast" on any 
   particular "channel".  This document defines a method for using the 
   existing Domain Name Service (DNS)[RFC1034, RFC1035] infrastructure 
   to assist in advertising Source-Specific Multicast [SSM] "channels" 
   (S,G pairs). 
 
 
1. Overview and Rationale 
 
   Although there are many arguments about whether the "killer app" of 
   the Internet is the World Wide Web (web browsing) or email, the 
   popularity of either of these applications is very dependent upon 
   DNS.  Most Internet applications can technically run without DNS, 
   but realistically humans find it much easier to remember names and 
 words rather than the string of numbers that the Internet is really 
 
                                DNS for SSM                 February 2001 
 
   based upon.  Source-Specific Multicast (SSM) is a protocol which 
   allows a receiver to use the pairing of a Unicast Source address (S) 
   and a Multicast Group address (G) in the 232/8 range to receive a 
   unique "channel" in a one-to-many delivery application.  This is an 
   improvement over previous PIM-SM protocol in that an RP is no longer 
   required to retrieve the Source information.  It is very probable 
   that using DNS to resolve SSM "channels" to the building blocks of 
   the (S,G) would assist in the welcoming of the new technology.  Such 
   an implementation would be most practical if: 
     -It requires very little or no changes in existing technologies. 
     -It uses easily understandable algorithms. 
     -It allows average people to remember their favorite SSM-enabled  
     "channels" as easily as they remember favorite web sites. 
     -It fits into a niche not filled by an existing implementation. 
    
   This document proposes an implementation that should meet the above 
   requirements in the following ways: 
     -This implementation requires no changes in existing DNS, and    
     only requires acceptance and changes in end user software. 
     -The algorithms proposed are very similar to current DNS records 
     used for WWW and email applications. 
     -The use of DNS will implicitly allow for the ease of use by the  
     general public. 
     -Although DNS is being used by some well-known multicast sources, 
     the authors are unaware of anyone using the following algorithm 
     intended for SSM. 
 
1.1.  Assumptions 
 
   The authors do not rule out the possibility of using this method for 
   applications other than Source-Specific Multicast, however this 
   document is meant to address issues solely related to SSM.  Most of 
   the implementation of this method will need to be done in the end-
   user software.  This method generally assumes one source per content 
   provider, but multiple source machines are also possible.  This 
   document will not make any changes to the way SSM works as a 
   transport, or the way DNS works to resolve names to IP addresses, 
   and therefore will not go into much detail of the inner working of 
   SSM or DNS.  This document will not address any issues of reverse 
   DNS resolution for multicast address space. 
    
    
2.  Naming a Channel 
 
   Calling a channel in SSM requires two pieces of information; the 
   unicast IP address of the Source and the Multicast address of the 
   Group to which the receiver wants to "listen".  These two pieces are 
Schoch & Schoch       Draft-Expires August 2001                              DNS for SSM                 February 2001 
 
   usually joined as one expression in the form of (S,G) for Subscribe 
   and Unsubscribe requests.  Therefore, a DNS representation of this 
   information must have one expression that contains both the Source 
   and Group information.  DNS is ideal for this because it routinely 
   uses recursion to provide multiple pieces of information, and it can 
   be used to provide clues about the services provided by a particular 
   host.  The host name www.example.com tells you that there is 
   probably a web server that belongs to the owners of example.com, and 
   through the magic of DNS you can find the IP address of 
   www.example.com.  Also, www.example.com can be on a totally 
   different machine and IP address than ftp.example.com or 
   mail.example.com, or even foo.www.example.com.  An SSM channel might 
   similarly be represented as radio.mcast.example.com.  The format of 
   this representation should be <Group name>.<Source name>.<provider's 
   domain name> 
    
2.1.  A Convention for Naming SSM Sources 
 
   The Source machine name MUST follow a specific convention.  In this 
   document, we will use a Source name of MCAST, although another 
   string may be decided upon later.  The Source MUST follow this 
   convention because the string used to identify the Source (whatever 
   it is finally decided to be), will become a delimiter for the end-
   user software.  In our above model, the Source name would be 
   mcast.example.com, and the Unicast IP address of the Source would be 
   found by looking up the associated A record. 
    
   In the case of multiple Sources, providers can use multiple sub 
   domains to name their multiple servers.  In this case, 
   mcast.res.example.com is a different Source than 
   mcast.atl.example.com, and therefore has a different Unicast IP 
   address. 
    
   Reverse DNS information can be stored using PTR records as in normal 
   Unicast reverse lookups. 
    
 
2.2.  A Proposal for Naming SSM Groups 
 
   There is no hard rule for naming the Group.  However, in the 
   interest of common sense, it is better to name the Group something 
   relevant to the Channel content.  In the above channel example of 
   radio.mcast.example.com, "radio" is the name of the Group and 
   probably is some form of streaming audio, and would resolve to the 
   Multicast IP address of that Group.  This document proposes no 
   method of implementing reverse lookups on Multicast address space. 
 
Schoch & Schoch       Draft-Expires August 2001                              DNS for SSM                 February 2001 
 
 
3.  Resolving an SSM Channel 
 
   The following steps are used to resolve a Channel name into the 
   Source and Group that make it up.   
    
     1.  Assuming a user wants to go to radio.mcast.example.com, he 
     enters radio.mcast.example.com in his SSM-enabled software. 
     2.  The software parses the name for the first instance of the 
     string ".mcast.", and resolves mcast.example.com to the unicast 
     address of the Source.  Searching for the beginning and trailing 
     periods in the string will help differentiate the Source from 
     second or third level domain names.     
     3.  The software stores this as the "S" of the (S,G) pair. 
     4.  The software resolves the entire Channel name, 
     radio.mcast.example.com, to the multicast Group address.   
     5.  The software stores this as the "G" of the (S,G) pair. 
     6.  Finally, the software Subscribes to the (S,G) pair that makes 
     up the Channel using the methods normally used in SSM. 
      
 
4.  An Example Zone File 
 
   The following illustrates how the above examples may be put into a 
   DNS zone file for the example.com domain using BIND.  These are 
   meant to be illustrations only.  Other formats may be used to enter 
   the info into zone files, as long as they follow the guidelines set 
   forth in section 2 above. 
    
   ;SOA record information would be above this line 
   ; 
   ;First, define the Source address (S) of our server. 
   mcast.example.com.    IN   A    10.10.10.42 
   ; 
   ;Then, define the Group (G) addresses available on this server. 
   radio.mcast.example.com.   IN   A    232.10.10.42   ;streaming audio 
   tv.mcast.example.com       IN   A    232.20.20.42   ;streaming video 
   stocks.mcast.example.com.  IN   A    232.30.30.42   ;stock updates 
   weather.mcast.example.com. IN   A    232.40.40.42   ;weather updates 
   sports.mcast.example.com.  IN   A    232.50.50.42   ;sports updates 
    
    
5.  Security Considerations 
 
   This document introduces no security considerations other than any 
   already associated with DNS and SSM. 
    
Schoch & Schoch       Draft-Expires August 2001                              DNS for SSM                 February 2001 
 
    
6.  References 
    
   [SSM]  Holbrook, H., and Cain, B. "Source-Specific Multicast for 
   IP," Internet Draft, November 2000. 
 
   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and 
   Facilities," RFC 1034, November 1987. 
    
   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Implementation and 
   Specification," RFC 1035, November 1987. 
    
    
7.  Author's Addresses 
 
   Jeff Schoch 
   Sprint 
   12490 Sunrise Valley Drive      Phone:  1-703-689-7716 
   Reston, VA  USA                 Email:  jschoch@sprint.net 
    
   Sunny Schoch 
   Juniper Networks 
   11400 Commerce Park Drive       Phone:  1-703-390-6816 
   Reston, VA  USA                 Email:  sunny@juniper.net 
Schoch & Schoch       Draft-Expires August 2001 