BTNS WG                                     J. Touch, D. Black, Y. Wang 
Internet Draft                                          USC/ISI and EMC 
Expires: January 2006                                      July 1, 2005 
                                    
 
                                      
                    Problem and Applicability Statement  
                  for Better Than Nothing Security (BTNS) 
                  draft-ietf-btns-prob-and-applic-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2006. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  All Rights Reserved. 

Abstract 

   The Internet network security protocol suite, IPsec, consisting of 
   IKE, ESP, and AH, currently requires authentication via IKE of 
   network layer entities to bootstrap security. This authentication can 
   be based on mechanisms such as pre-shared symmetric keys, pre-shared 
   certificates and associated asymmetric keys, or the use of Kerberos.  
 
 
 
Touch, Wang, Black     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   The need for authentication information and its associated identities 
   between network layer entities can be a significant obstacle to 
   deploying network security.  This document explains the rationale for 
   extending to the Internet network security suite to enable use of 
   IPsec security mechanisms without full IKE authentication. These 
   extensions are intended to protect communication "better than 
   nothing" (BTNS) on their own (Stand Alone BTNS, or SAB), and may be 
   useful in providing network layer security that can be authenticated 
   by higher layers in the protocol stack, called Channel Bound BTNS 
   (CBB). This document also explains situations in which use of SAB and 
   CBB extensions are appropriate and can achieve their intended 
   benefit. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
      1.1. Assumptions...............................................4 
   2. Problem Statement..............................................5 
      2.1. Transport Protection From Packet Spoofing.................5 
      2.2. Authentication at Multiple Layers.........................6 
      2.3. Example - Secure Socket Layer.............................7 
      2.4. Threat Models.............................................8 
   3. Applicability Statement........................................9 
      3.1. Uses......................................................9 
         3.1.1. Symmetric SAB.......................................10 
         3.1.2. Asymmetric SAB......................................11 
         3.1.3. Symmetric CBB.......................................11 
         3.1.4. Asymmetric CBB......................................12 
      3.2. Vulnerabilities..........................................12 
      3.3. Benefits.................................................13 
   4. Security Considerations.......................................13 
      4.1. Evaluation of Threat Models..............................14 
      4.2. Protections..............................................15 
   5. Related Work and Other Issues.................................15 
      5.1. Not Considered...........................................15 
      5.2. Other IETF Efforts.......................................15 
      5.3. Extensions and Other Issues..............................16 
   6. Acknowledgments...............................................16 
   7. References....................................................16 
      7.1. Normative References.....................................16 
      7.2. Informative References...................................16 
   Author's Addresses...............................................18 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................19 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................19 
   Copyright Statement..............................................19 
   Acknowledgment...................................................20 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

    
1. Introduction 

   Internet security is provided by a variety of protocols at different 
   layers of the protocol stack. Security at the network layer, IP, is 
   critical to protecting both network and transport protocols, the 
   latter because most include network identifiers in their 
   pseudoheaders, e.g., in TCP and UDP [2][12]. The current Internet 
   network security suite, IPsec, uses IKE, which currently relies on 
   pre-shared or pre-deployed information to authenticate identity 
   [3][6][9]. This pre-shared/pre-deployed state is a significant 
   impediment to its ubiquitous use. 

   This document describes a number of practical problems caused by the 
   Internet security suite that depend on pre-shared or pre-deployed 
   information for authentication, and describes "better than nothing 
   security" (BTNS), an extension of the Internet security suite that 
   secures communication between two parties. BTNS allows IPsec security 
   configured by IKE in which one or both parties avoid the need to be 
   authenticated either by a shared private key, certificate signed by a 
   mutually-known certificate authority, or other, pre-deployed 
   authentication infrastructure (e.g., Kerberos) [6][10]. 

   Consider the case of transport protocols. Increases in network 
   performance and the use of long-lived connections have resulted in 
   increased vulnerability of connection-oriented transport protocols to 
   attack. Such attacks can be resisted to some extent within the 
   transport layer by performing additional validity checks, requiring 
   additional mechanisms added to each transport protocol. More direct 
   security can be provided, either at the transport or network layer. 
   This security currently requires a predetermined way to authenticate 
   the endpoints, e.g., a pre-shared secret, a certificate hierarchy 
   with pre-shared public keys, or an external key coordination system 
   such as Kerberos. In all cases, security can be established only 
   after ensuring that the endpoints are definitively identified before 
   their traffic is trusted. 

   Also consider the case where upper layers provide authentication. Web 
   transactions secure the server using HTTPS and SSL, where the server 
   has a certificate authenticated by a well-known certificate authority 
   (i.e., whose public keys are predeployed on many browsers) [3][14]. 
   Clients typically lack such certificates, as they are prohibitively 
   expensive either in price or effort to obtain. Current secure web 
   transactions authenticate the client via application information, 
   such as passwords or credit card information. Web transaction 
   security protects the application information, but does not protect 
   the transport layer, where connections can be interrupted by spoofed 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   traffic. The network layer lacks authentication and thus cannot use 
   the IPsec suite, even though authentication is available at upper 
   layers. 

   This document suggests the need for an alternate approach to security 
   that avoids the need for authentication at the network layer. The 
   purpose is to protect a connection only after it has been 
   established. In this case, BTNS allows cryptographic protection for 
   the network and transport layers without requiring the endpoints to 
   be strongly authenticated at the network layer, possibly coupling 
   network layer security to higher layer protocols where strong 
   authentication is supported.  

   The goal of this approach to security is to protect established 
   connections but not to protect connection establishment, while 
   avoiding the need to deploy network layer secrets, keys, and/or 
   identities in advance. The resulting protection is not as complete, 
   but it would be "better than nothing security", thus the name BTNS. 

   This document presents the overall goal that BTNS is intended to 
   address: the desire to deploy security which avoids the need for pre-
   deployed authentication identities and associated secrets or keys at 
   the network layer to achieve network layer protection which is 
   "better than nothing." It also presents discusses the intended 
   application of BTNS solutions, including Stand-Alone BTNS (SAB), as 
   well as integration with authentication at higher layers of the 
   protocol stack that still protect network and transport layer 
   traffic, called Channel Bound BTNS (CBB). 

1.1. Assumptions 

   The problem and applicability statement for BTNS assume the use of 
   the IP network security protocol suite, i.e., IPsec, consisting of 
   IKE, ESP, and AH, as a reasonable platform for these extensions 
   because they are widely deployed, comparatively modular, and are 
   currently experiencing deployment challenges due to their dependence 
   on mutual pre-deployed shared authentication identities and 
   associated secrets or keys.  

   This document considers two variants of BTNS: one which supports 
   network protection without relying on mutual pre-deployed shared 
   authentication identities and associated secrets or keys, and one 
   which can be coupled with authentication higher in the protocol 
   stack. The differences in the problem statement and applicability of 
   both variants are addressed. 


 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   This document does not address what components of the IP network 
   security protocol suite may need modification or configuration to 
   support BTNS. Example scenarios are provided as design motivations 
   and are not intended to be a comprehensive list.  

2. Problem Statement 

   BTNS removes the need for conventional authentication in providing 
   network security. There are two primary motivations for doing so: to 
   remove the need to deploy authentication information altogether 
   (Stand Alone BTNS, or SAB), and to remove the need for redundant 
   authentication at multiple layers (Channel Bound BTNS, or CBB). The 
   first is further motivated by the prevalence of proposed 
   modifications to transport layer protocols to provide protections 
   similar to a secure network layer. 

2.1. Transport Protection From Packet Spoofing 

   TCP, like many other protocols, has been susceptible to off-path 
   third-party attacks [14]. Such attacks rely on the increase of 
   commodity platforms supporting public access to previously privileged 
   resources, such as root-level access. Given such access, it is 
   trivial for anyone to generate a packet with any header desired. 
   This, coupled with the lack of sufficient ingress filtering to drop 
   such spoofed traffic, has resulted in an increase in off-path third-
   party spoofing attacks. As a result, a number of proposed solutions 
   have been developed, some of which modify TCP processing to defeat 
   off-path third-party spoofs by performing additional, security checks 
   inside the transport layer. 

   Some of these modifications augment the transport protocol with its 
   own security, e.g., TCP/MD5 [2]. Others modify the core TCP 
   processing rules to make it harder for off-path attackers to inject 
   meaningful packets, either during the initial handshake (e.g. 
   SYNcookies) or after a connection is established (e.g., TCPsecure) 
   [2][14]. Some of these modifications are new to TCP, but have already 
   been incorporated into other transport protocols (e.g., SCTP) or 
   intermediate (so-called L3.5) protocols (e.g., HIP) [10][14]. 

   Such modifications are, at best, temporary patches to the ubiquitous 
   vulnerability to spoofing attacks. The obvious solution to spoofing 
   is to validate the segments of a connection, either at the transport 
   layer (which the patch provides, weakly) or the network layer. The 
   IPsec suite already intends to provide authentication of a network 
   layer packet and its contents, but its deployment overhead can be 
   prohibitive. 

 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   Protecting the network from spoofed packets is ultimately an issue of 
   authentication, ensuring that a receiver's interpretation of the 
   source of a packet is accurate. Authentication validates the identity 
   of the source of the packet. The current IPsec suite assumes that 
   identity is validated either by a trusted third party - e.g., the 
   certificate authority - or by a pre-deployed shared secret. Such an 
   identity is unique and invariant across associations (pairwise 
   security configuration), and can be used to reject packets that are 
   not authentic. 

   There is weaker notion of identity, one which is bootstrapped from 
   the session association itself. The identity doesn't mean "Bill 
   Smith" or "owner of shared secret X2YQ", but means something more 
   like "the end with whom I have been talking on connection #23". Such 
   identity is not invariant across associations, but because it is 
   invariant within an association it can still be used to provide 
   protection for that association.  

   BTNS thus provides a kind of intra-association integrity, a kind of 
   relative authentication, where the identity is not authenticated 
   across separate associations or out-of-band, but does not change 
   during the association. This kind of BTNS is known as Stand Alone 
   BTNS (SAB), because the protection is afforded solely by the use of 
   BTNS extensions, without authentication from higher layers in the 
   protocol stack. 

2.2. Authentication at Multiple Layers 

   Some protocols used on the Internet provide authentication at a layer 
   above the transport, but rely on the IPsec suite for packet-by-packet 
   cryptographic integrity and confidentiality services.  Examples of 
   such protocols include iSCSI and a proposed security mode for NFSv4 
   security <need better explanation> [16].  With the current IPsec 
   suite, the result is two authentications; one at the IPsec layer, 
   using an identity for IKE and an associated secret or key, and once 
   at the higher layer protocol using a higher layer identity and secret 
   or key.  End-node software is then responsible for making sure that 
   the identities used for these two authentications are consistent in 
   some fashion, an authorization policy decision.  In principle a 
   single authentication should suffice, removing the need for: 

   o  the second authentication 

   o  configuration and management of the identities and secrets or keys 
      for the second authentication 


 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   o  determining in some fashion that the two authentications are 
      consistent (and potential vulnerabilities if this is not done) 

   IPsec is not always present for these higher layer protocols, and 
   even when present, will not always be used.  Hence, if there is a 
   choice, the higher layer protocol authentication is preferable as it 
   will always be available for use independent of IPsec.  This is 
   complicated by the fact that IPsec must set up its security 
   association before the higher layer protocol can send any traffic. 

   A "better than nothing" security approach to IPsec can address this 
   problem by setting up IPsec without an authentication and then 
   extending the higher layer authentication to check that the two ends 
   of the higher layer protocol session are on two ends of the same 
   security association, via some sort of check of the identity of the 
   security association. This check is referred to as "channel binding", 
   thus the name Channel Bound BTNS (CBB) [21]. Channel binding must be 
   done in a fashion that prevents a man-in-the-middle from changing the 
   security association identity when it is checked and from causing two 
   different security associations to have the same identity.  Adding 
   the security association identifier to authentication mechanisms 
   based on one-way hashes, key exchanges, or (public key) cryptographic 
   signatures are three means by which channel binding can be 
   accomplished with man-in-the-middle resistance.  This requires that 
   the security association identifier be the same at both ends of the 
   security association [21]. 

2.3. Example - Secure Socket Layer 

   HTTPS is a good example of an ubiquitous Internet security mechanism, 
   providing application-layer security for web client/server 
   communication. It consists of HTTP over SSL/TLS, which, like IKE, 
   relies on X.509 certificates and associated certificate authorities 
   (CAs) to identify parties [3][14]. In contrast to IKE, SSL can be 
   used where one or both parties use certificates which are not 
   authenticated by CAs preshared by those parties. Security may remain 
   unauthenticated, or may be further authenticated at the application 
   layer. 

   Consider the case of an individual accessing a corporate website to 
   purchase a product. Communication to the website is encrypted, based 
   on certificates on both the corporate and individual sides. The 
   corporate certificate is typically signed by a well-known CA, one of 
   a set whose public keys are predeployed with most modern web 
   browsers. The individual's certificate is only self-signed, to avoid 
   the expense of registering with a CA. 

 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   The corporate website agrees to communicate with the individual's web 
   browser even though the individual's identity has not yet been 
   established. In some cases, the individual's identity is later 
   verified at the application layer by confirming mutually shared 
   information (mother's maiden name, an account number), or by using a 
   protected preshared secret (password, PIN, etc.). In some cases, the 
   individual's identity is never confirmed. 

   Regardless of whether identity is confirmed later (by analogue, as in 
   CBB) or not at all (by analogue, as in SAB), the communication is 
   protected because of the use of unauthenticated security. The 
   protection is persistent within a connection, but not necessarily 
   between connections - which is why passwords are used to access 
   recently visited sites. Such systems are widely deployed 
   asymmetrically for the web, and symmetrically for e-mail. The kind of 
   protections afforded by these examples of SSL are the inspiration for 
   BTNS. BTNS differs from SSL in that it protects the network and 
   transport layer, whereas SSL protects the application layer. BTNS can 
   thus protect TCP connections from spoofed packets that are low-effort 
   attacks that interfere with the connection itself, which SSL cannot. 

2.4. Threat Models 

   The following is a brief summary of the threat models of BTNS. A more 
   detailed assessment is provided in the Security Considerations 
   section of this document. 

   BTNS is intended to protect sessions from a variety of threats, 
   including man-in-the-middle after key exchange, other on-path attacks 
   after key exchange, and off-path attacks. It is intended to protect 
   the contents of a session once established using a "leap of faith" 
   during session establishment, but does not protect session 
   establishment itself. 

   BTNS is not intended to protect the key exchange itself, so this 
   presents an opportunity for a man-in-the-middle attack or a well-
   timed attack from other sources. Stand-alone BTNS is not intended to 
   protect the endpoint from nodes masquerading as legitimate clients 
   but rather to raise the level of effort of an attack to that of 
   emulating a client. BTNS together with authentication from higher 
   layers in the stack can protect from such masquerading, depending on 
   how the authentication is coupled with the BTNS associations, and at 
   a later point in the protocol exchange. 

   BTNS is also not intended to protect from DOS overload of the CPU 
   load of verification, nor is it intended to protect from user 
   misconfiguration. These final assumptions are the same as that of the 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   IP network protocol security suite. Finally, manual keying is not 
   considered in this document. 

3. Applicability Statement 

   BTNS is intended to provide network and transport protection in the 
   absence of network layer authentication, whether alone (stand-alone) 
   or in conjunction with application authentication. Recall that the 
   former is called Stand Alone BTNS (SAB), and the latter Channel Bound 
   BTNS (CBB). 

   BTNS protects associations once established, but does not itself 
   limit with whom associations are made. It is generally appropriate 
   for services open to the public but for which protected associations 
   are desired, or for services that can be authenticated at higher 
   layers in the protocol stack. 

   BTNS reduces vulnerability to attacks after associations have been 
   established by parties not participating in the association. This 
   helps protect systems from low-effort attacks on sessions or 
   connections involving higher levels of resources. 

   BTNS increases vulnerability to overloading, which can be the result 
   of legitimate flash crowds or from zombies posing as clients. 
   Although BTNS should be used only for public services, it can provide 
   some level of protection for private services if the alternative is 
   no protection at all. 

3.1. Uses 

   BTNS is intended for use for public services (SAB) or for private 
   services that can be authenticated by higher layer protocols (CBB). 
   It can also be used either symmetrically, where both parties lack 
   network layer authentication information, or asymmetrically, where 
   only one party is lacking. There a number of cases to consider, based 
   on the matrix of SAB, CBB, and conventional authentication (denoted 
   as IKE below); note that these are classified by the weaker side of 
   the authentication, where SAB is the weakest, CBB is less weak, and 
   IKE is the strongest: 








 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

                 |    IKE    |    SAB    |    CBB    | 
             ----+-----------+-----------+-----------+ 
                 |           |           |           | 
             IKE |    IKE    |   A-SAB   |  AI-CBB   | 
                 |           |           |           | 
             ----+-----------+-----------+-----------+  
                 |           |           |           | 
             SAB |   A-SAB   |   S-SAB   |  AS-CBB   | 
                 |           |           |           | 
             ----+-----------+-----------+-----------+  
                 |           |           |           |  
             CBB |  AI-CBB   |  AS-CBB   |   S-CBB   | 
                 |           |           |           |  
             ----+-----------+-----------+-----------+ 
    
    
   1. IKE: both sides possess conventional, IKE-supported authentication 

   2. Symmetric SAB (S-SAB): both sides lack network layer 
      authentication information (and lack or do not use higher layer 
      authentication) 

   3. Asymmetric SAB (A-SAB): one side lacks network layer 
      authentication information (and lacks or does not use higher layer 
      authentication), but the other possesses it 

   4. Symmetric CBB (S-CBB): both sides lack network layer 
      authentication information, and both possess authentication at a 
      higher layer in the protocol stack 

   5. Asymmetric CBB (A-CBB): one side lacks network layer 
      authentication information and possesses authentication at a 
      higher layer in the protocol stack; there are two variants, 
      Asymmetric IKE CBB(AI-CBB) where the other side possesses 
      conventional IKE-supported authentication, and asymmetric stand-
      alone CBB (AS-CBB), where the other side lacks network layer 
      authentication information and lacks authentication at higher 
      layers 

   The following is a discussion of each of these use cases. 
   Vulnerabilities and benefits are discussed in later subsections of 
   this section separately. 

3.1.1. Symmetric SAB 

   Symmetric SAB (S-SAB) assumes that both parties lack network layer 
   authentication information and that authentication is not available 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   from higher layer protocols. S-SAB can still protect network and 
   transport protocols, but does not provide authentication at all. It 
   is useful where large files or long connections would benefit from 
   not being interrupted by DOS attacks, but where the particular 
   endpoint identities are not important. 

   Peer-to-peer networks could utilize S-SAB because no peer need be 
   privileged and preregistered at any layer in the stack. S-SAB 
   protects all transport protocols between two peers, which is 
   convenient because peer nets may test a variety of transport 
   protocols in order to traverse NATs and firewalls.   

   Public services, such as web servers, may also use S-SAB when their 
   identity need not be authenticated to clients, but where the 
   communication would benefit from protection. Such servers might 
   provide large files, either unvalidated or validated by other means 
   (e.g., published MD5 hashes). Downloads of these large files present 
   a target for off-path attacks, which could be reduced by the use of 
   S-SAB. S-SAB may also be useful for protecting the transport of 
   voice-over-IP (VoIP) between peers, such as direct calls between VoIP 
   clients. 

3.1.2. Asymmetric SAB 

   Asymmetric SAB (A-SAB) allows one party lacking network layer 
   authentication information to establish associations with another 
   which possesses authentication, the latter by any means supported by 
   existing IKE.  

   Asymmetric SAB is useful for protecting the transport connections for 
   public services on the Internet, e.g., commercial web servers, DNS, 
   etc. In these cases, the server is typically authenticated by a 
   widely known CA, as is done with SSL, but the clients need not be 
   authenticated. 

   A-SAB also secures transport for streaming media as would be used 
   between a VoIP client and the commercial VoIP provider, or to view 
   broadcast streaming such as webcasts for remote education and 
   entertainment. 

3.1.3. Symmetric CBB 

   Symmetric CCB (S-CCB) allows hosts lacking network layer 
   authentication information to utilize authentication at higher layers 
   in the protocol stack. 


 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   Such authentication already occurs during web transactions to sites 
   whose certificates are self-signed or signed by untrusted CAs; web 
   clients ask "do you want to trust this certificate for this session," 
   e.g. S-CCB could support challenge/response PINs, such as used by 
   S/Key in software or copy protection dongles.  

3.1.4. Asymmetric CBB 

   Asymmetric CBB (A-CBB) allows one host lacking network layer 
   authentication information to later authenticate itself using higher 
   layers in the protocol stack. A-CBB has variants depending on whether 
   the other side is authenticated at the network layer using 
   conventional IKE-supported means (AI-CBB), authenticated at higher 
   layers using CBB (symmetric CBB, or S-CBB), or protected but not 
   authenticated using SAB (AS-CBB). 

   Most of the A-CBB variants are useful for securing remote access with 
   unidirectional passwords, such as for FTP and email, to avoid sending 
   cleartext passwords prior to login, but where application security is 
   not available - e.g., for legacy applications. Which variant is 
   appropriate depends on the sensitivity of the passwords; most would 
   tend to be used with S-CBB or AI-CBB, where the server is 
   authenticated before the client presents the password. 

   AS-CBB is useful for obtaining authenticated data from a public 
   source, where client identity is irrelevant but server identity is. 

3.2. Vulnerabilities 

   The vulnerabilities presented by BTNS depends on which variant is 
   supported on the two ends of an association. Hosts connecting to BTNS 
   hosts are vulnerable to communicating to a masquerader throughout the 
   association for SAB, or until higher layers provide additional 
   authentication for CBB. This is a deliberate design tradeoff; in 
   BTNS, network and transport layer access is no longer gated by the 
   network identity of the other host, so this opens hosts to 
   masquerading and flash crowd attacks. Conversely, BTNS secures 
   connections to hosts that cannot authenticate at the network layer, 
   so the network and transport layers are more protected. 

   Lacking network layer authentication information, other means must be 
   used to protect local resources. Filters can be used to limit which 
   interfaces, address ranges, and port ranges can access BTNS-enabled 
   services. Rate limiting can further restrict resource usage. For SAB, 
   these protections need to be considered throughout associations, 
   whereas for CBB they need be present only until higher layer 
   protocols provide the missing authentication. CCB also relies on the 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   effectiveness of the binding of higher layer authentication to the 
   BTNS network association.  

3.3. Benefits 

   BTNS protects network and transport layers without requiring network 
   layer authentication information. It can be deployed without 
   configuration or pre-shared information, and protects the entire 
   variety of transport protocols using a single mechanism.  

   BTNS raises the level of effort for a network or transport attack. 
   Casual, simple packet attacks need to be augmented to full 
   associations and connection establishment for SAB, so that an 
   attacker must perform as much work as regular host. SAB thus raises 
   the effort for a DDOS attack to that of emulating a flash crowd. For 
   public services, there may be no way to distinguish such a DDOS 
   attack from a legitimate flash crowd anyway. 

   BTNS also allows individual associations to be private without 
   requiring predeployed authentication. We anticipate that it will use 
   the original Diffie-Hellman exchange to establish pairwise private 
   keys between ends of an association, effectively omitting the 
   authentication phase currently used in IKE. As such, associations 
   will be private, as well as protected. 

4. Security Considerations 

   Although security considerations are discussed throughout this 
   document, there are several issues to be addressed regarding when and 
   where to use BTNS: 

   1. avoiding interference with conventional network layer 
      authentication 

   2. increased load on IPsec to reject spoofed traffic 

   3. integration with higher-layer authentication (for CBB) 

   4. exposure to anonymous access (for SAB) 

   As with any aspect of network security, the use of BTNS must not 
   interfere with conventional security services. It must be possible to 
   limit BTNS to specific interfaces, addresses, protocols, and/or ports 
   much the same way it is already possible to skip network security 
   based on these parameters. It is incumbent on the system 
   administrators to deploy BTNS only where safe, preferably as a 
   substitute to the use of "bypass" which avoids network security 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   altogether. In summary, BTNS should be used only as a substitute for 
   no security, rather than as a substitute for stronger security. 

   The use of BTNS means that more traffic will use cryptographic 
   transforms. Receivers will observe increased processing load in 
   verifying incoming traffic as a result. Although this may itself 
   present a substantial impediment to deployment, it is a challenge to 
   all cryptographically protected communication systems. The use of 
   crypto increases the load on those verifying it; we do not consider 
   the impact that BTNS has on such load simply by encouraging the use 
   of security. 

   Where BTNS is integrated with higher layer authentication, i.e., CBB, 
   special care must be taken to avoid undue resource use before higher 
   layer authentication is established. Further, the ways in which BTNS 
   is integrated with the higher layer protocol must take into 
   consideration vulnerabilities that could be introduced in the APIs 
   between these two systems or in the information that they share. 

   Finally, the use of SAB necessary implies that a service is being 
   offered for public access, since network layer authentication 
   information is not available. SAB must not be deployed on services 
   that are not intended to be publicly available. 

4.1. Evaluation of Threat Models 

   BTNS is intended to protect the network and transport layer between 
   two parties after an association is established. SAB is not intended 
   to protect to whom associations are established based on 
   authenticated identity. CBB does not protect with whom associations 
   are established initially, but allows higher layer protocols that 
   provide authentication to couple to network layer security after the 
   association is established, at which time the association can be 
   adjusted accordingly. 

   BTNS does not protect from man-in-the-middle attacks during key 
   exchange during association establishment.  

   SAB in particular is intended for use for publicly available 
   services, and CBB may also be used in that capacity. In those cases, 
   neither protects from overload due to flash crowds or DDOS attacks 
   posing as flash crowds. 

   BTNS does not address attacks to the association establishment key 
   exchange, which can be substantial for flash crowds of public 
   services of SAB or for CBB until higher layer authentication is 
   established.  
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   BTNS does not address the increased load on the system that the use 
   of IPsec security services will incur, either for processing 
   legitimate traffic or for rejecting attack traffic. 

   When channel binding is used with BTNS, a man-in-the-middle attack on 
   IPsec is discovered later than if IKE authentication were used.  A 
   man in the middle cannot subvert IKE authentication, and hence an 
   attempt to attack it via use of two separate security associations 
   will cause an IKE authentication failure.  In contrast, with BTNS and 
   channel binding, the IKE authentication will succeed, and the 
   security association will be set up, only to have the higher layer 
   authentication fail after more resources have been invested in this 
   session.  Nonetheless, this is an improvement over the alternative of 
   minimizing the configuration of IPsec by using a group pre-shared 
   key, which provides no defense against man-in-the-middle attacks 
   among the nodes sharing the key.  

4.2. Protections 

   BTNS does protect from man-in-the-middle attacks after the initial 
   association is established.  Man-in-the-middle during association 
   establishment for CBB can be detected via channel binding with higher 
   layer authentication. 

   BTNS protects the network and transport layer from on-path non-man-
   in-the-middle (i.e., snooping) and from off-path attacks. This helps 
   especially protect transport connections from attack. 

5. Related Work and Other Issues 

5.1. Not Considered 

   BTNS does not (at this time) consider the impact of mobility or 
   multihoming on the capabilities it intends to provide. 

   BTNS does not consider the impact of NAT or NAPT on the capabilities 
   it intends to provide, except as are already addressed by the current 
   Internet network security suite. 

5.2. Other IETF Efforts 

   There are a number of related efforts in the IETF and elsewhere to 
   reduce the configuration effort of deploying the Internet security 
   suite. 

   PKI4IPsec is an IETF WG focused on providing an automatic 
   infrastructure for the configuration of Internet security services, 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   e.g., to assist in deploying signed certificates and CA information 
   [6]. The IETF KINK WG is focused on adapting Kerberos for IKE, 
   enabling IKE to utilize the Kerberos key distribution infrastructure 
   rather than requiring certificates signed by CAs or shared private 
   keys [6]. KINK takes advantage of an existing architecture for 
   automatic key management in Kerberos. Opportunistic Encryption (OE) 
   is a system for automating authentication infrastructure by 
   leveraging the existing use of the DNS [14]. BTNS differs from all 
   three in that BTNS is intended to avoid the need for such 
   infrastructure altogether, rather than to automate it. 

   Finally, BTNS does not address a number of existing challenges to 
   using the Internet network security suite. DOS attacks that involve 
   overloading endpoints with invalid signatures are not addressed, as 
   they are a natural aspect of using security and BTNS does not create 
   or amplify that aspect per se, except to possibly encourage broader 
   use of security. BTNS does not address errors of configuration that 
   could result in increased vulnerability; such vulnerability is 
   already possible using "bypass". We presume that associations using 
   BTNS will be separated from associations with more conventional, 
   stronger security just as "bypass" is currently separated from those 
   associations. 

5.3. Extensions and Other Issues 

   One extension of particular interest is the ability to retain 
   association "identity" across multiple associations, i.e., to be able 
   to know when a host is communicating with a host it has had a 
   previous BTNS association with. Such capabilities are already used in 
   SSL applications, e.g., for web clients and email access. 

   <any other issues?> 

6. Acknowledgments 

   <placeholder> 

7. References 

7.1. Normative References 

   (none) 

7.2. Informative References 

   [1]   Arends, R., R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose, "DNS 
         Security Introduction and Requirements," RFC-4033, Mar. 2005. 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   [2]   Dalal, M., (ed.), "Improving TCP's Robustness to Blind In-
         Window Attacks," (work in progress), draft-ietf-tcpm-tcpsecure-
         03.txt, May 2005. 

   [3]   Frier, A., P. Karlton, P. Kocher, "The SSL 3.0 Protocol", 
         Netscape Communications Corp., Nov 18, 1996. 

   [4]   Harkins, D., D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)," RFC-
         2409, Nov. 1998. 

   [5]   Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5 
         Signature Option," RFC-2385, Aug. 1998. 

   [6]   IETF KINK WG web pages, http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/kink-
         charter.html 

   [7]   IETF PKI4IPSEC WG web pages, 
         http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/pki4ipsec-charter.html 

   [8]   Kent, S., R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
         Protocol," RFC-2401, Nov. 1998. 

   [9]   Kent, S., K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
         Protocol," (work in progress), draft-ietf-ipsec-rfc2401bis-06, 
         Mar. 2005. 

   [10]  Kohl, J., C. Neuman, "The Kerberos Network Authentication 
         Service (V5)," RFC-1510, Sep. 1993. 

   [11]  Mostkowitz, R., P. Nikander, P. Jokela (ed.), T. Henderson, 
         "Host Identity Protocol," draft-ietf-hip-base-03, June 2005. 

   [12]  Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol," RFC-768 / STD-6, Aug. 
         1980. 

   [13]  Postel, J., (ed.), "Transmission Control Protocol," RFC-793 / 
         STD-7, Sept. 1981. 

   [14]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS," RFC-2818, May 2000. 

   [15]  Richardson, M., "Opportunistic Encryption using The Internet 
         Key Exchange (IKE)," (work in progress), draft-richardson-
         ipsec-opportunistic-17.txt, Jan. 2005. 

   [16]  Satran, J., K. Meth, C. Sapuntzakis, M. Chadalapaka, E. 
         Zeidner, "Internet Small Computer Systems Interface (iSCSI)", 
         RFC 3720, April 2004. 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   [17]  Shepler, S., B. Callaghan, D. Robinson, R. Thurlow, C., Beame, 
         M. Eisler, D. Noveck, "Network File System (NFS) version 4 
         Protocol," RFC-3530, April, 2003. 

   [18]  Stewart, R., et al., "Stream Control Transmission Protocol," 
         RFC-2960, Oct. 2000. 

   [19]  TCP SYN-cookies, http://cr.yp.to/syncookies.html 

   [20]  Touch, J., "Defending TCP Against Spoofing Attacks," (work in 
         progress), draft-ietf-tcpm-tcp-antispoof-01.txt, Apr. 2005. 

   [21]  Williams, N., "On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure 
         Channels," (work in progress), draft-ietf-nfsv4-channel-
         bindings-03.txt, Feb. 2005. 

   [22]  Copy protection dongles <insert good ref here> 

   [23]  S/Key <insert good ref here> 

Author's Addresses 

   Joe Touch 
   USC/ISI 
   4676 Admiralty Way 
   Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695 
   U.S.A. 
       
   Phone: +1 (310) 448-9151 
   Email: touch@isi.edu 
    

   David Black 
   EMC Corporation 
   176 South Street 
   Hopkinton, MA 01748 
   USA 
       
   Phone: +1 (508) 293-7953 
   Email: black_david@emc.com 
    






 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   Yu-Shun Wang 
   USC/ISI 
   4676 Admiralty Way 
   Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695 
   U.S.A. 
       
   Phone: +1 (310) 448-8742 
   Email: yushunwa@isi.edu 
    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 
 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft      BTNS Problem and Applicability            July 2005 
    

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

 





































 
 
Touch, Black, Wang     Expires January 1, 2006                [Page 20] 

