

INTERNET-DRAFT                                   David Meyer
draft-ietf-mboned-ssm232-08.txt                  Rob Rockell
                                               Greg Shepherd
Category                               Best Current Practice
Expires: September 2004                           March 2004

        Source-Specific Protocol Independent Multicast in 232/8
                   <draft-ietf-mboned-ssm232-08.txt>



Status of this Document

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This document is a product of the MBONED WG.  Comments should be
   addressed to the authors, or the mailing list at
   mboned@ns.uoregon.edu.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.








Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                                    [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


                                Abstract


   IP Multicast group addresses in the 232/8 (232.0.0.0 to
   232.255.255.255) range are designated as source-specific multicast
   destination addresses and are reserved for use by source-specific
   multicast applications and protocols. This document defines
   operational recommendations to ensure source-specific behavior within
   the 232/8 range.










































Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                                    [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


                           Table of Contents


   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
    1.1. BCP, Experimental Protocols and Normative References. . . .   4
   2. Operational practices in 232/8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
    2.1. Preventing local sources from sending to shared tree. . . .   5
    2.2. Preventing remote sources from being learned/joined via MSDP. 6
    2.3. Preventing receivers from joining the shared tree . . . . .   6
    2.4. Preventing RP's as candidates for 232/8 . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3. Acknowledgments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4. Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5. IANA Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    6.1. Normative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    6.2. Informative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7. Author's Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8. Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9. Intellectual Property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11



1.  Introduction


   Current PIM Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) [PIM-SM] relies on the shared
   Rendezvous Point (RP) tree to learn about active sources for a group
   and to support group-generic (not source specific) data distribution.
   The IP Multicast group address range 232/8 has been designated for
   Source-Specific PIM [RFC3569] applications and protocols [IANA] and
   SHOULD support source-only trees only, precluding the requirement of
   an RP and a shared tree; active sources in the 232/8 range will be
   discovered out of band. PIM Sparse Mode Designated Routers (DR), with
   local membership, are capable of joining the shortest path tree for
   the source directly using Source-Specific PIM (also known as PIM-SSM
   or simply SSM).

   Operational best common practices in the 232/8 group address range
   are necessary to ensure shortest path source-only trees across
   multiple domains in the Internet [RFC3569], and to prevent data from
   sources sending to groups in the 232/8 range from arriving via shared
   trees. This avoids unwanted data arrival, and allows several sources
   to use the same group address without conflict at the receivers.



Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                        Section 1.  [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


   The operational practices SHOULD:

    o Prevent local sources from sending to shared tree

    o Prevent receivers from joining the shared tree

    o Prevent RP's as candidates for 232/8

    o Prevent remote sources from being learned/joined via MSDP
     [RFC3618]



1.1.  BCP, Experimental Protocols and Normative References


   This document describes the best current practice for a widely
   deployed Experimental protocol, MSDP. There is no plan to advance the
   MSDP's status (for example, to Proposed Standard). The reasons for
   this include:

    o MSDP was originally envisioned as a temporary protocol to be
      supplanted by whatever the IDMR working group produced as an
      inter-domain protocol. However, the IDMR WG (or subsequently,
      the BGMP WG) never produced a protocol that could be deployed
      to replace MSDP.

    o One of the primary reasons given for MSDP to be classified as
      Experimental was that the MSDP Working Group came up with
      modifications to the protocol that the WG thought made it
      better but that implementors didn't see any reasons to
      deploy. Without these modifications (e.g., UDP or GRE
      encapsulation), MSDP can have negative consequences to initial
      packets in datagram streams.

    o Scalability: Although we don't know what the hard limits might
      be, readvertising everything you know every 60 seconds clearly
      limits the amount of state you can advertise.

    o MSDP reached near ubiquitous deployment as the de-facto
      standard inter-domain multicast protocol in the IPv4 Internet.

    o No consensus could be reached regarding the reworking of MSDP
      to address the many concerns of various constituencies within
      the IETF. As a result, a decision was taken to document what is
      (ubiquitously) deployed and move that document to Experimental.
      While advancement of MSDP to Proposed Standard was considered,
      for the reasons mentioned above, it was immediately discarded.



Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                      Section 1.1.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


    o The advent of protocols such as source specific multicast and
      bi-directional PIM, as well as embedded RP techniques for
      IPv6, have further reduced consensus that a replacement
      protocol for MSDP for the IPv4 Internet is required.

   The RFC Editor's policy regarding references is that they be split
   into two categories known as "normative" and "informative". Normative
   references specify those documents which must be read to understand
   or implement the technology in an RFC (or whose technology must be
   present for the technology in the new RFC to work) [RFCED]. In order
   to understand this document, one must also understand both the PIM
   and MSDP documents. As a result, references to these documents are
   normative.

   The IETF has adopted the policy that BCPs must not have normative
   references to Experimental protocols.  However, this document is a
   special case in that the underlying Experimental document (MSDP) is
   not planned to be advanced to Proposed Standard.

   The MBONED Working Group requests approval under the Variance
   Procedure as documented in RFC 2026 [RFC2026].

   Note to RFC-Editor: If IETF/IESG approves this, please change the
   above sentence into: The MBONED Working Group has requested approval
   under the Variance Procedure as documented in RFC 2026 [RFC2026].
   The IESG followed the Variance Procedure, and after an additional 4
   week IETF Last Call evaluated the comments and status and has
   approved this document.

   The key words "MUST"", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].



2.  Operational practices in 232/8




2.1.  Preventing local sources from sending to shared tree


   Eliminating the use of shared trees for groups in 232/8, while
   maintaining coexistence with PIM-SM, behavior of the RP and/or the DR
   needs to be modified. This can be accomplished by

    - preventing data for 232/8 groups from being sent encapsulated to



Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                      Section 2.1.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


      the RP by the DR

    - preventing the RP from accepting registers for 232/8 groups from
      the DR

    - preventing the RP from forwarding accepted data down (*,G)
      tree for 232/8 groups



2.2.  Preventing remote sources from being learned/joined via MSDP


   PIM-SSM does not require active source announcements via MSDP. All
   source announcements are received out of band, the the last hop
   router being responsible for sending (S,G) joins directly to the
   source. To prevent propagation of SAs in the 232/8 range, an RP
   SHOULD

    - never originate an SA for any 232/8 groups

    - never accept or forward an SA for any 232/8 groups.




2.3.  Preventing receivers from joining the shared tree


   Local PIM domain practices need to be enforced to prevent local
   receivers from joining the shared tree for 232/8 groups. This can be
   accomplished by

    - preventing DR from sending (*,G) joins for 232/8 groups

    - preventing RP from accepting (*,G) join for 232/8 groups


   However, within a local PIM domain, any last-hop router NOT
   preventing (*,G) joins may trigger unwanted (*,G) state toward the RP
   which intersects an existing (S,G) tree, allowing the receiver on the
   shared tree to receive the data, breaking the source-specific
   [RFC3569] service model. It is therefore recommended that ALL routers
   in the domain MUST reject AND never originate (*,G) joins for 232/8
   groups.

   In those cases in which an ISP is offering its customers (or others)
   the use of the ISP's RP, the ISP SHOULD NOT allow (*,G) joins in the



Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                      Section 2.3.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


   232/8 range.



2.4.  Preventing RP's as candidates for 232/8


   Because PIM-SSM does not require an RP, all RPs SHOULD NOT offer
   themselves as candidates in the 232/8 range. This can be accomplished
   by

    - preventing RP/BSR from announcing in the 232/8 range

    - preventing ALL routers from accepting RP delegations in the
      232/8 range

    - precluding RP functionality on RP for the 232/8 range

   Note that in typical practice, RP's announce themselves as candidates
   for the 224/4 (which obviously includes 232/8). It is still
   acceptable to allow the advertisement of 224/4 (or any other superset
   of 232/8); however, this approach relies on the second point, above,
   namely, that routers silently just ignore the RP delegation in the
   232/8 range, and prevent sending or receiving using the shared tree,
   as described previously.  Finally, an RP SHOULD NOT be configured as
   a candidate RP for 232/8 (or more specific range).



3.  Acknowledgments


   This document is the work of many people in the multicast community,
   including (but not limited to) Dino Farinacci, John Meylor, John
   Zwiebel, Tom Pusateri, Dave Thaler, Toerless Eckert, Leonard
   Giuliano, Mike McBride, and Pekka Savola.



4.  Security Considerations


   This document describes operational practices that introduce no new
   security issues to either PIM-SM or PIM-SSM.

   However, in the event that the operational practices described in
   this document are not adhered to, some problems may surface.  In
   particular, section 2.3 describes the effects of non-compliance of



Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                        Section 4.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


   last-hop routers (or to some degree, rogue hosts sending PIM messages
   themselves) on the source-specific service model; creating the (*,G)
   state for source-specific (S,G) could enable a receiver to receive
   data it should not get. This can be mitigated by host-side multicast
   source filtering.



5.  IANA Considerations


   This document creates no new requirements on IANA namespaces
   [RFC2434].






































Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                        Section 5.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [PIM-SM]        Fenner, B., et. al, "Protocol Independent Multicast -
                   Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification
                   (Revised)", draft-ietf-pim-sm-v2-new-09.txt. Work
                   in progress.

   [RFC2119]       Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to
                   Indicate Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March,
                   1997.

   [RFC2026]       Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process --
                   Revision 3", RFC 2026/BCP 9, October, 1996.

   [RFC2028]       Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations
                   Involved in the IETF Standards Process", RFC
                   2028/BCP 11, October, 1996.

   [RFC2434]       Narten, T., and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for
                   Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs",
                   RFC 2434/BCP 26, October 1998.

   [RFC3569]       Bhattacharyya, S. Editor, "An Overview of
                   Source-Specific Multicast (SSM)" RFC 3569, July,
                   2003.

   [RFC3618]       Meyer, D. and B. Fenner (Editors), "The Multicast
                   Source Discovery Protocol (MSDP)", RFC 3618,
                   October, 2003.



6.2.  Informative References

   [IANA]          http://www.iana.org














Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                      Section 6.2.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


7.  Author's Addresses



   David Meyer
   Email: dmm@1-4-5.net

   Robert Rockell
   Sprint
   Email: rrockell@sprint.net

   Greg Shepherd
   Procket
   Email: shep@procket.com



8.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78 and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                       Section 8.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT           Expires: September 2004              March 2004


9.  Intellectual Property


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.


10.  Acknowledgement


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




















Meyer, Rockell, and Shepherd                      Section 10.  [Page 11]

