


Network Working Group                                            Y. Ohba
Internet-Draft                                                   Toshiba
Expires: October 3, 2006                                        A. Dutta
                                                               Telcordia
                                                         S. Sreemanthula
                                                                   Nokia
                                                                Apr 2006


                  Pre-authentication Problem Statement
                    draft-ohba-hokeyp-preauth-ps-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 3, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a pre-authentication problem statement.  This
   document is used as the basis of the pre-authentication part of the
   charter of a potential IETF working group on handover keying and pre-
   authentication.




Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Specification of Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Usage Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Direct Pre-authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Indirect Pre-authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  AAA Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Out-of-scope Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix A.  Performance Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21
































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


1.  Introduction

   When a mobile during an active communication session moves from one
   access network to another access network and changes its point of
   attachment it is subjected to disruption in the continuity of service
   because of the associated handover operation.  During the handover
   process, when the mobile changes its point-of-attachment in the
   network, it may end up communicating using its second interface in
   the new network, change its subnet or administrative domain it is
   connected to.  A complete description of the types of handover based
   on the movement type is documented in [I-D.ohba-mobopts-
   heterogeneous-requirement].  We provide in Appendix A some
   performance requirement that are needed to support an interactive
   real-time communication such as VoIP and thus can serve as the
   guidelines for handover optimization.

   Handover often requires authorization for acquisition or modification
   of resources assigned to a mobile and the authorization needs
   interaction with a central authority in a domain.  In many cases an
   authorization procedure during a handover procedure follows an
   authentication procedure that also requires interaction with a
   central authority in a domain.  If the handover involves inter-domain
   mobility without any roaming or trust relationship between the
   domains, then the delay introduced due to a full authentication and
   authorization procedure adds to the handover latency and consequently
   affects the ongoing multimedia sessions.  The authentication and
   authorization procedure may include EAP authentication [RFC3748]
   where an AAA server may be involved in EAP messaging during the
   handover.  Depending upon the type of architecture, in some cases the
   AAA signals traverse all the way to the AAA server in the home domain
   of the mobile as well before the network service is granted to the
   mobile in the new network.  As an example a combination of EAP-based
   authentication and authorization may take up to 5 sec [georgiades].
   Real-time communication and interactive traffic such as VoIP is very
   sensitive to the delay and thus cannot tolerate this amount of delay.
   Thus it is necessary to reduce the delay due to authentication,
   authorization and AAA related key transfer.  Thus it is desirable
   that interactions between the mobile and AAA servers must be avoided
   or be reduced during the handover.

   This draft discusses pre-authentication, a handover optimization
   method that is based on executing EAP between a mobile node and a
   target authenticator via the serving authenticator before the mobile
   node handovers to the target authenticator.

1.1.  Specification of Requirements

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements



Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.  The key
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document
   are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].















































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


2.  Problem Statement

   Basic mechanism of handover is a two step procedure involving i)
   network selection procedure to determine the appropriate candidate
   network point of attachment and ii) handover or setting up of L2 and
   L3 connectivity to the target network point of attachment.
   Currently, security mechanisms for authentication and authorization
   is performed as part of the second step directly with the target
   network.  Experimental studies with network handovers indicate that
   the latency introduced due to the security mechanisms is not
   acceptable for real time communications.  For example, in basic IEEE
   802.11b based wireless networks, the security mechanism involves
   performing a new IEEE 802.1x message exchange with the authenticator
   in the target AP to initiate an EAP exchange to the authentication
   server.  Following a successful authentication, a four-way handshake
   with the wireless station derives a new set of the session keys for
   use in data communications.  This mechanism is same as the initial
   setup to the AP with no particular optimizations for the handover
   scenario.  The handover latency component introduced by this security
   mechanism has proven to be larger than what is acceptable.  Hence,
   improvement in the handover latency performance due to security
   procedures is a necessary objective.

   There is relevant work undertaken by various standards organizations.
   But these efforts are scoped to a specific access technology.  IEEE
   802.11f has defined transfer of Security context from one AP to
   another.  IEEE 802.11i defines a pre-authentication mechanism for use
   in 802.11 variant wireless networks.  This mechanism allows mobile
   devices to make pre-authentication by establishing link-layer
   security associations with one or more target authenticators by
   sending 802.1X messages directly to the target authenticators bridged
   via the serving authenticator.  Presently, IEEE 802.11r WG has been
   working to define Fast BSS transition mechanisms involving a
   definition of key management hierarchy and mechanisms for link-layer
   pre-authentication and setup of session keys before the re-
   association to the target AP.  These mechanisms, as indicated before,
   are defined for IEEE 802.11 technologies and only applicable within a
   certain access domain and fall short when it comes to inter-access
   technology handovers.  They also require L2 (e.g.  Ethernet)
   connectivity for transfer of encapsulated signaling to the target AP.

   As various flavors of wireless technologies are increasingly
   available, there is a growing demand for seamless inter-access
   technology mobility and handovers.  This is particularly beneficial
   in the presence of high bandwidth wireless technologies (e.g.  IEEE
   802.11a/b/g) with only hotspot like coverages while the overlay
   licensed wireless/cellular coverages are expensive and relatively
   lower bandwidth.  There is a strong motivation to allow seamless



Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


   inter-technology handovers for all kinds of data communications.
   Hence, the security optimization mechanisms for better handover
   performance must be looked at from the IP level for being common over
   different access technologies.

   Solutions for mobility security optimizations can be largely seen as
   security context transfer, handover keying or pre-authentication.
   Security context transfer involves transfer of reusable key context
   in the new point of attachment.  However, the recent AAA key
   management requirement [I-D.housley-aaa-key-mgmt] does not recommend
   context transfer of reusable key context because of domino effect in
   which a compromise of an authenticator will lead to a compromise of
   another authenticator.  Nakhjiri et al [I-D.nakhjiri-aaa-hokey-ps]
   discusses handover keying.  Handover keying uses an existing EAP-
   generated key for deriving a key to be used for a target
   authenticator in order to reduce the handover delay, which eliminates
   the need for running EAP for each inter-authenticator handover.  On
   the other hand, there are certain cases where an EAP-generated key
   does not exist or is not usable for handover keying at the time of
   handover and an EAP run is not avoidable to generate a key for the
   target authenticator.  One case is an inter-domain handover without
   any trust relationship between domains.  Another case is a handover
   to an existing technology that does not support handover keying.

   Pre-authentication discussed in this document is based on executing
   EAP between a mobile node and a target authenticator via the serving
   authenticator prior to handover to the target authenticator, where
   the serving and target authenticators are in different subnets or of
   different link-layer technologies.  Pre-authentication would enable
   the mobile device to authenticate and setup keys prior to connecting
   to the target authenticator.  This framework has general
   applicability to various deployment scenarios.  Note that pre-
   authentication for intra-technology intra-subnet handover should be
   solved by each link-layer and thus out of the scope of this document.

   Figure 1 shows the functional elements that are related to pre-
   authentication.














Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


   +------+         +-------------+        +-------+
   |Mobile|---------|   Serving   |       /         \
   | Node |         |Authenticator|------/           \
   +------+         +-------------+     /             \
      .                                /               \     +----------+
      . Move                          +    Internet     +----|AAA Server|
      .                                \               /     +----------+
      v             +-------------+     \             /
                    |   Target    |------\           /
                    |Authenticator|       \         /
                    +-------------+        +-------+

             Figure 1: Pre-authentication Functional Elements

   A mobile node is attached to the serving access network.  Before the
   mobile node performs handover from the serving access network to a
   target access network, it performs pre-authentication with a target
   authenticator, an authenticator in the target access network, via the
   serving access network.  The mobile node may perform pre-
   authentication with one or more target authenticators.  It is assumed
   that each authenticator has an IP address.  Authenticators may be on
   different IP links.  It is assumed that there is at least one target
   authenticator in each target access network while the serving access
   network may or may not have a serving authenticator.  The serving and
   target access networks may use different link-layer technologies.

   Each authenticator has the functionality of EAP authenticator which
   is either standalone EAP authenticator or pass-through EAP
   authenticator.  When an authenticator acts as a standalone EAP
   authenticator, it also has the functionality of EAP server.  On the
   other hand, when an authenticator acts as a pass-through EAP
   authenticator, it communicates with EAP server typically implemented
   on a AAA server using a AAA protocol such as RADIUS and Diameter.

   If the target authenticator is of an existing link-layer technology
   that uses an MSK (Master Session Key) [I-D.ietf-eap-keying] for
   generating lower-layer ciphering keys, pre-authentication is used for
   proactively generating the MSK for the target authenticator.
   Otherwise, if the target authenticator supports handover keying, pre-
   authentication is used for proactively generating handover keys for
   multiple authenticators including the target authenticator.










Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


3.  Usage Scenarios

   There are two scenarios on how pre-authentication signaling can
   happen among a mobile node, a serving authenticator, a target
   authenticator and a AAA server, depending on how the serving
   authenticator is involved in the pre-authentication signaling.

3.1.  Direct Pre-authentication

   Direct pre-authentication signaling is shown in Figure 2.

   Mobile               Serving                   Target               AAA
    Node             Authenticator             Authenticator          Server
    (MN)                  (SA)                     (TA)
     |                     |                        |                   |
     |                     |                        |                   |
     |               MN-TA Signaling (L3)           |       AAA         |
     |<--------------------+----------------------->|<----------------->|
     |                     |                        |                   |
     |                     |                        |                   |

                    Figure 2: Direct Pre-authentication

   In this type of pre-authentication, pre-authentication signaling is
   transparent to the serving authenticator or there may be no serving
   authenticator at all in the serving access network.

   Direct pre-authentication is needed when the same authentication
   credentials are not used for network access authentication for the
   serving and target access networks, e.g., when different AAA servers
   are used for the serving and target access networks and no
   communication is allowed between the AAA servers.

   [I-D.ietf-pana-preauth] is identified as a protocol to realize direct
   pre-authentication.

3.2.  Indirect Pre-authentication

   Indirect pre-authentication signaling is shown in Figure 3.












Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


   Mobile               Serving                   Target               AAA
    Node              Authenticator            Authenticator          Server
    (MN)                  (SA)                     (TA)
     |                     |                        |                   |
     |                     |                        |                   |
     |   MN-SA Signaling   |   SA-TA Signaling      |       AAA         |
     |    (L2 or L3)       |       (L3)             |                   |
     |<------------------->|<---------------------->|<----------------->|
     |                     |                        |                   |
     |                     |                        |                   |

                   Figure 3: Indirect Pre-authentication

   With indirect pre-authentication, the serving authenticator is
   involved in pre-authentication signaling.  Indirect pre-
   authentication is needed if IP communication is not allowed between
   the target authenticator and unauthorized nodes for security reasons.
   Also, indirect pre-authentication allows the serving network to
   select an appropriate target authenticator.

   Indirect pre-authentication signaling is spliced into mobile node to
   serving authenticator signaling (MN-SA signaling) and serving
   authenticator to target authenticator signaling (SA-TA signaling).

   SA-TA signaling is performed over L3.  This is because it is not
   reasonable to assume that the serving authenticator and the target
   authenticator are on the same IP link.

   MN-SA signaling is performed over L2 or L3.  L2 signaling is needed
   if IP communication is not allowed between the serving authenticator
   and any node over the wireless interface of the serving authenticator
   even if the node is authorized for communicating with other nodes
   over IP.  On the other hand, L3 signaling is needed if the serving
   authenticator is not on the same IP link as the mobile node.

   The role of the serving authenticator in indirect pre-authentication
   is to bridge pre-authentication signaling between the mobile node and
   the target authenticator and not to act as an EAP authenticator,
   while it acts as an EAP authenticator for normal authentication
   signaling.  This is illustrated in Figure 4.











Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


        Mobile                   Serving                    Target
         Node                  Authenticator             Authenticator
         (MN)                     (SA)                       (TA)

     +-----------+                                       +-----------+
     |           |<- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ->|           |
     | EAP Peer  |    +-----------------------------+    | EAP Auth- |
     |           |    | Pre-authentication Bridging |    | enticator |
     +-----------+    +-----------+-----+-----------+    +-----------+
     | MN-SA     |    | MN-SA     |     | SA-TA     |    | SA-TA     |
     | Signaling |<-->| Signaling |     | Signaling |<-->| Signaling |
     | Layer     |    | Layer     |     | Layer     |    | Layer     |
     +-----------+    +-----------+     +-----------+    +-----------+

           Figure 4: Indirect Pre-authentication Layering Model




































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


4.  AAA Issues

   In pre-authentication, AAA authentication and authorization for a
   target authenticator while application sessions are in progress via
   the serving network.  The goal of pre-authentication is to avoid AAA
   signaling when or soon after the device moves.

   The AAA server needs to distinguish pre-authentication from normal
   authentication.  This is needed if users may only be allowed to have
   a single authorization session at the same time.  While there is a
   proprietary solution to distinguish pre-authentication and normal
   authentication for a particular link-layer technology (e.g., use of a
   null BSSID in Called-Station-Id RADIUS attribute for indicating IEEE
   802.11i pre-authentication), a standard solution needs to be
   developed to solve this problem as pre-authentication may be
   performed across multiple link-layer technologies.

   The AAA server also needs to know how long to hold the session before
   timing out.  Session timeout for pre-authentication may be different
   for a normal session.  If a pre-authentication session lifetime
   expires before the mobile node moves to the target network, the state
   for the session should be deleted even if normal session lifetime
   remains.  Although implementations can implement its own pre-
   authentication session lifetime [I-D.ietf-eap-keying], defining a
   pre-authentication session lifetime in AAA protocols is more useful
   to allow more explicit control on pre-authorized resources.

























Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


5.  Out-of-scope Issues

   The following issues are not discussed in the scope of pre-
   authentication problem.

   o  Pre-reserving resources using AAA protocols.  Although resource
      pre-reservation is an important aspect that is closely related to
      pre-authentication and needed for optimizing handover performance,
      it is recognized that the topic of resource reservation is best
      left to the policies of the AAA entities.  That is, regular AAA
      transactions will carry all the usual attributes about the
      requested session.  If the AAA entities wish to, say, decline a
      pre-authentication request due to resource depletion or cost, or
      charge extra, they can do so.

   o  Accounting, especially accounting for pre-reserved resources.
      There might be nothing special to do with accounting to support
      pre-authentication if time-limited resource holding is used.

   o  Context transfer.  From pre-authentication perspective, context
      transfer is not useful.  This is because pre-authentication needs
      AAA signaling with EAP authentication.  Resources can be assigned
      via this pre-authentication AAA exchange instead of using context
      transfer.



























Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   Since pre-authentication described in this document needs to work
   across multiple authenticators, any solution for this problem needs
   considerations on the following security threats.

   First, a possible resource consumption denial of service attack where
   an attacker that is not on the same IP link as the mobile node or the
   target authenticator may send unprotected pre-authentication messages
   to the mobile node or the target authenticator to let the legitimate
   mobile node and target authenticator spend their computational and
   bandwidth resources.

   Second, consideration for the Channel Binding problem described in
   [I-D.ietf-eap-keying] is needed as lack of Channel Binding may cause
   a man-in-the-middle attack on payload routing [I-D.ietf-eap-netsel-
   problem].  It should be noted that it would be easier to launch a
   Channel Binding attack for pre-authentication than normal
   authentication because an attacker does not need to be physically on
   the same link as the legitimate mobile node in the case of pre-
   authentication.






























Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


8.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Jari Arkko and Madjid Nakhjiri for
   their valuable input.















































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3748]  Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
              Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",
              RFC 3748, June 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-eap-keying]
              Aboba, B., "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Key
              Management Framework", draft-ietf-eap-keying-12 (work in
              progress), April 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-pana-preauth]
              Ohba, Y., "Pre-authentication Support for PANA",
              draft-ietf-pana-preauth-01 (work in progress), March 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-eap-netsel-problem]
              Arkko, J. and B. Aboba, "Network Discovery and Selection
              Problem", draft-ietf-eap-netsel-problem-03 (work in
              progress), October 2005.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ohba-mobopts-heterogeneous-requirement]
              Dutta, A., "Problem Statement for Heterogeneous Handover",
              draft-ohba-mobopts-heterogeneous-requirement-01 (work in
              progress), March 2006.

   [I-D.nakhjiri-aaa-hokey-ps]
              Nakhjiri, M., "AAA based Keying for Wireless Handovers:
              Problem Statement", draft-nakhjiri-aaa-hokey-ps-01 (work
              in progress), January 2006.

   [I-D.housley-aaa-key-mgmt]
              Housley, R. and B. Aboba, "Guidance for AAA Key
              Management", draft-housley-aaa-key-mgmt-02 (work in
              progress), March 2006.

   [ITU]      ITU-T, "General Characteristics of International Telephone
              Connections and International Telephone Circuits: One-Way
              Transmission Time", ITU-T Recommendation G.114 1998.

   [ETSI]     ETSI, "Telecommunications and Internet Protocol
              Harmonization Over Networks (TIPHON) Release 3: End-to-end



Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


              Quality of Service in TIPHON systems; Part 1: General
              aspects of Quality of Service.", ETSI TR 101 329-6 V2.1.1.

   [georgiades]
              Georgiades, M., "Context transfer support for IP-based
              mobility management", CCSR Awards for Research Excellence
              2004.












































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


Appendix A.  Performance Requirements

   In order to provide the desirable quality of service for interactive
   VoIP and streaming traffic during handoff, one needs to limit the
   value of end-to-end delay, jitter and packet loss to a certain
   threshold level.  ITU-T and ITU-R standards define the acceptable
   values for these parameters.  For example for one-way delay, ITU-T
   G.114 [ITU] recommends 150 ms as the upper limit for most of the
   applications, and 400 ms as generally unacceptable delay.  One way
   delay tolerance for video conferencing is in the range of 200 to 300
   ms.  Also if an out-of-order packet is received after a certain
   threshold, it is considered lost.  The performance requirement will
   vary based on the type of application and its characteristics such as
   delay tolerance and loss tolerance limit.  Interactive traffic such
   as VoIP and streaming traffic will have different tolerance for delay
   and packet loss.  For example, according to ETSI TR 101 [ETSI] a
   normal voice conversation can tolerate up to 2% packet loss.
   Similarly there are other factors such as Transmission Rating Factor
   (R) standardized within ITU-T G.107, End to End delay (one way mouth-
   to-ear) and call blocking ratio that determine the QoS metrics.  An R
   value of 50 is considered to be poor and a value of 90 can be
   considered as the best that provides most user satisfaction.  As an
   example, a class B QoS which is equivalent to cellular telephony has
   a R factor that is greater than 70, E2E delay of less than 150 ms and
   call blocking ratio which is less than or equal to 0.15.  Class A QoS
   that is the highest and is equivalent to fixed phone quality has an R
   value that is more than 80 and an end-to-end delay that is less than
   100 ms.  Similarly, 3GPP TS23.107 defines 4 application classes:
   conversational, streaming, interactive and background each with
   different set of end-to-end delay and QoS requirement.  The streaming
   class has the tolerable packet (SDU) error rates ranging from 0.1 to
   0.00001 and the transfer delay of less than 300ms.  In short, the
   delay and packet loss tolerance value will depend upon the type of
   application and different standard bodies and vendors provide
   different specification for each type of application and thus any
   optimized handoff mechanism will need to take these values into
   consideration.

   It is desirable to support a heterogeneous handover that is agnostic
   to link-layer technologies in an optimized and secure fashion without
   incurring unreasonable complexity while providing seamless handover
   experience to the user.  As a mobile goes through a handover process,
   it is subjected to handover delay because of the rebinding of
   properties at several layers of the protocol stack, such as layer 2,
   layer 3 and application layer.  There are several common properties
   that contribute to the re-establishment or modification of these
   layers during handover.  These properties can mostly be attributed to
   things such as access characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, channel



Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


   characteristics, channel scan, access point association), access
   mechanism (e.g.  CDMA, CSMA/CA, TDMA), configuration of layer 3
   parameters such as IP address acquisition, re-authentication, re-
   authorization, rebinding of security association at all layers,
   binding update etc.  Although each of the components during the
   handover process that contributes to the handover delay needs to be
   optimized, we focus our discussion on optimizing the delay due to
   authentication and authorization.











































Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Yoshihiro Ohba
   Toshiba America Research, Inc.
   1 Telcordia Drive
   Piscataway, NJ  08854
   USA

   Phone: +1 732 699 5365
   Email: yohba@tari.toshiba.com


   Ashutosh Dutta
   Telcordia
   1 Telcordia Drive
   Piscataway, NJ  08854
   USA

   Phone: +1 732 699 3130
   Email: adutta@research.telcordia.com


   Srivinas Sreemanthula
   Nokia Research Center
   6000 Connection Dr.
   Irving, TX  75028
   USA

   Email: srinivas.sreemanthula@nokia.com






















Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    Pre-authentication Problem Statement          Apr 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Ohba, et al.             Expires October 3, 2006               [Page 21]

