PCE Working Group                                             JL Le Roux 
                                                          France Telecom 
Internet Draft                                                Paul Mabey 
                                                                   Qwest 
                                                           Raymond Zhang 
                                                                 Infonet 
                                                                Eiji Oki 
                                                                     NTT 
                                                           Ting Wo Chung 
                                                             Bell Canada 
                                                                         
Category: Informational                                                  
Expires: August 2005                                       February 2005 
 
 
        Requirements for Path Computation Element (PCE) Discovery 
 
               draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   RFC 3668. 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                  [Page 1] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


Abstract 
    
   This document presents a set of requirements for a Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) discovery mechanism that would allow a Path Computation 
   Client (PCC) to discover dynamically and automatically a set of PCEs 
   along with their capabilities. It is intended that solutions that 
   specify procedures and protocol extensions for such PCE discovery 
   satisfy these requirements.  
 
 
 
Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Terminology.................................................3 
   2.      Introduction................................................3 
   3.      Problem Statement and Requirements overview.................4 
   3.1.    Problem Statement...........................................4 
   3.2.    Requirements overview.......................................5 
   4.      Examples of application scenarios...........................5 
   5.      Detailed Requirements.......................................5 
   5.1.    Discovery of PCE location...................................5 
   5.2.    Discovery of PCE capabilities...............................6 
   5.3.    Discovery of Backup PCEs....................................7 
   5.4.    Scope of PCE Discovery......................................7 
   5.5.    PCE Information Synchronization.............................7 
   5.6.    Detecting PCE Liveliness....................................8 
   5.7.    PCE Selection...............................................8 
   5.8.    Scalability.................................................8 
   6.      Security Considerations.....................................8 
   7.      Intellectual Property Statement.............................9 
   7.1.    IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement..............................9 
   8.      Acknowledgments.............................................9 
   9.      References..................................................9 
   10.     Authors' Addresses:.........................................9 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 2] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


 
 
1. Terminology 
 
   Terminology used in this document  
    
      LSR: Label Switch Router.  
        
      PCC: Path Computation Client: any client application requesting a  
      path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.     
       
      PCE: Path Computation Element: an entity (component, application,  
      or network node) that is capable of computing a network path or  
      route based on a network graph or topology, and applying    
      computational constraints. 
        
      IGP Area: OSPF Area or ISIS level  
       
      Intra-area TE LSP: TE LSP whose path does not cross area  
      boundaries.  
       
      Inter-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits at least through 
      two different IGP areas. 
        
      Inter-AS MPLS TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits at     
      least through two different ASes or sub-ASes (BGP confederations).  
    
      Domain: IGP Area or Autonomous System 
    
  
2. Introduction 
 
   The PCE Architecture [PCE-ARCH] defines a Path Computation Element 
   (PCE) as an entity capable of computing TE-LSPs paths satisfying a 
   set of constraints. The PCE function can be located on a router, a 
   LSR or a dedicated network server.  
   A PCE serves TE-LSP path computation requests sent by Path 
   Computation Clients (PCC).  
   A Path Computation Client (PCC) can be an LSR or a PCE.  
   Note that in this document the notion of PCC encompasses PCEs acting 
   as PCCs when requesting a TE-LSP path computation of another PCE.  
 
   The PCE architecture has various applications, such as CPU intensive 
   path computation, inter-domain path computation or backup path 
   computation. 
    
   The PCE architecture requires, of course, that PCCs be aware of the 
   location of one or more PCEs in its domain, and also potentially of 
   some relevant PCEs in other domains (in the context of inter-domain 
   path computation), along with their capabilities. 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 3] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


 
 
   In that context it would be highly desirable to define a mechanism 
   for automatic and dynamic PCE discovery, which would allow PCCs, to 
   automatically discover a set of PCEs along with their capabilities, 
   and to dynamically detect new PCEs or any modification of the PCE 
   capabilities.  
   This includes the discovery by a PCE of a set of PCEs in its domain 
   and in other domains, which is highly required for inter-domain path 
   computation implying inter-PCE communication.  
 
   This document lists a set of functional requirements for such an 
   automatic and dynamic PCE discovery mechanism. The problem statement 
   is pointed out in section 3. Section 4 illustrates several 
   applications scenarios. Finally detailed requirements are addressed 
   in section 5. 
    
   It is intended that solutions that specify procedures and protocol 
   extensions for such PCE discovery satisfy these requirements. There 
   is no intent neither to specify solution specific requirements nor to 
   make any assumption on the protocol(s) that could be used for the 
   discovery. 
   Note that requirements listed in this document apply equally to MPLS-
   TE and GMPLS capable PCEs. 
   Note that current version of this document does not make any 
   distinction between PCC-PCE discovery and PCE-PCE discovery. This may 
   be addressed in future revisions. 
    
 
3. Problem Statement and Requirements overview 
    
3.1. Problem Statement 
 
   A routing domain may in practice comprise of multiple PCEs: 
        -Path computation load may be balanced among a set of PCEs, for    
         scalability purposes; 
        -There can be several PCEs with distinct path computation  
         capabilities (P2P, P2MP, backupà) and distinct computation  
         scopes (intra-area, inter-area, inter-AS, inter-layer);  
        -For redundancy purpose primary and backup PCEs may be used. 
 
   In order to allow for efficient PCE selection by PCCs and efficient 
   load balancing of requests, a PCC must have knowledge of the location 
   of PCEs in its domain, along with their capabilities, and also 
   potentially of some relevant PCEs in other domains (for inter-domain 
   path computation purpose). 
 
   Such PCE information could be learnt manually by configuring, on each 
   PCC, a set of PCEs along with their capabilities and scopes. Such 
   manual configuration approach may be sufficient, and even desired in 
   some particular situations, but it obviously faces several 
   limitations: 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 4] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


        -This may imply a huge configuration overhead; 
        -This would not allow detecting that a new PCE is alive or     
         that an existing PCE disappears, or when there is a change in    
         PCE capabilities. 
         
   Furthermore, as with any manual configuration approach, this may lead 
   to undesirable configuration errors. 
    
   Hence, an automatic PCE discovery mechanism allowing a PCC to 
   automatically discover a set of PCEs and their capabilities is highly 
   required. 
    
    
3.2. Requirements overview 
     
   A PCE discovery mechanism compliant with this document MUST allow a 
   PCC to automatically discover a set of PCEs in its domain and also, 
   potentially, PCEs of other domains that are relevant for inter-domain 
   path computation purpose. The discovery procedure MUST also allow 
   learning information about a set of PCE capabilities. 
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism compliant with this draft MUST allow PCCs 
   to dynamically discover that a new PCE has been activated or that a 
   PCE capability has changed.  
    
   A PCE Discovery mechanism SHOULD also allow PCCs to dynamically 
   discover that a PCE is no longer alive.  
   Note that such PCE liveliness information can also be obtained thanks 
   to a PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
    
 
4. Examples of application scenarios 
    
   This section will be completed in next revisions of this document. 
 
 
5. Detailed Requirements 
 
5.1. Discovery of PCE location 
    
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow advertising, for a given PCE, 
   the IP address to be used to reach the PCE. This address will 
   typically be a loop-back address that is always reachable, (provided 
   that the PCE node is not isolated). 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 5] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


    
    
    
5.2. Discovery of PCE capabilities  
 
   In case there are several PCEs available, a PCC has to select an 
   appropriate PCE. 
   For that purpose the PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow advertising, 
   some PCE path computation capabilities, such as: 
 
   -The type of path than can be computed: P2P, P2MP, Primary, Backupà  
    
   -The capability to handle multiple path constraints. 
    
   -The capability to handle computation of multiple paths in a single    
    pass, i.e. when a PCE can compute more than one path obeying a set  
    of specified constraints, in a synchronized manner. 
    
   -The capability to support computation of diverse paths. 
    
   -The capability to support path computation request prioritization.  
    The notion of request priority allows a PCC to specify the degree of  
    urgency of a particular request. 
    
   -The capability to act as stateful PCE. 
 
   -GMPLS specific path computation capabilities such as 
        -The switching capabilities supported (PSC, L2SC, TDM, LSC,  
         FSC); 
        -The list of link and path constraints supported (delay,   
         polarization, optical powerà); 
        -The capability to support inter-layer path computation; 
        -The capability to support lower-layer path setup control; 
        -The capability to support path computation in a domain made of   
         MPLS and GMPLS capable nodes. 
    
   -Intra/Inter domain capabilities 
        -The supported path computation scopes: intra-area, inter- 
         area or Inter-AS. That is the capability to compute or    
         take part into the computation of intra area, inter area or   
         inter-AS TE LSPs. 
        -The identifiers of the domain(s) (area IDs, AS numbersà) where    
         the PCE can compute paths. 
 
   -The PCE capacity in terms of computation power.  
    This could be used to ensure weighted load balancing of requests in    
    case PCEs do not have the same capacity.  
 
   Such information regarding PCE capabilities could then be used by a 
   PCC to select an appropriate PCE among a list of candidate PCEs, and 
   to ensure efficient load balancing of path computation reqests among 
   PCEs. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 6] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


 
 
 
5.3. Discovery of Backup PCEs 
    
   In case of PCE failure, a PCC has to select another PCE. It could be 
   useful in various situations, to indicate a set of one or more backup 
   PCEs, to be selected in case a given PCE fails.  
   Hence the PCE Discovery mechanism SHOULD allow advertising, for a 
   given PCE, the location of one or more backup PCEs. 
    
    
5.4. Scope of PCE Discovery 
 
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow controlling the scope of PCE 
   information discovery (IGP Area, AS, set of AS) on a per PCE basis. 
   In other words it MUST allow controlling to which PCC or group of 
   PCCs the information related to a PCE will be advertised. 
    
   The choice for the discovery scope of a given PCE MUST include the 
   followings: 
 
        -All PCCs in a single IGP area 
    
        -All PCCs in a set of adjacent IGP areas 
    
        -All PCCs in a single AS 
    
        -All PCCs in a group of ASs 
 
        -A set of one or more PCCs in a set of one or more ASs 
 
   Particularly this also implies that the PCE Discovery mechanism MUST 
   allow for the discovery of PCE information across IGP areas and 
   across AS boundaries. 
    
   Note that it MUST be possible to deactivate PCE discovery on a per 
   PCE basis. 
 
    
5.5. PCE Information Synchronization 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to detect any change in 
   the information related to a PCE (e.g. capability modifications). 
    
   Also it MUST be possible to dynamically detect new PCEs. 
    
   The delay for such detection MUST be beyond 60s. 
    
   Note that PCE capabilities are expected to be quite stable and not to 
   change frequently.  

 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 7] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


    
 
5.6. Detecting PCE Liveliness  
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism SHOULD allow a PCC detecting when a PCE 
   is no longer alive. This allows a PCC to rapidily switch to another 
   PCE (for instance a pre defined backup PCE), and thus minimizes path 
   computation service disruption. 
    
   Note that such PCE liveliness information could also be obtained 
   thanks to a PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
    
   In case PCE discovery is used for PCE liveliness detection, the delay 
   for PCE failure detection SHOULD be of the order of several seconds, 
   and MUST not go beyond 60 seconds. 
    
    
5.7. PCE Selection 
 
   A PCC may have to select among a set of candidate PCEs having the 
   same capabilities. A specific PCE selection algorithm SHOULD be 
   defined in order to ensure consistency in load balancing behavior and 
   avoid all PCC sending all the requests to only one PCE. The precise 
   requirements and mechanisms for this function are out of the scope of 
   this document. It is expected that this requirement will be covered 
   in another document.  
    
 
5.8. Scalability 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be designed to scale well with an 
   increase of any of the following parameters: 
        -Number of PCCs; 
        -Number of PCEs; 
        -Number of IGP Areas in the discovery scope; 
        -Number of ASs in the discovery scope. 
    
   Particularly, in case routing protocols (IGP, BGP) are extended to 
   support PCE discovery, the extensions MUST not cause a degradation of 
   routing protocol performances. 
 
 
6. Security Considerations 
 
   PCE discovery and particularly inter-AS PCE discovery may raise new 
   security issues that will be addressed in future revisions of this 
   document. 
    
    
    
    
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 8] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


7. Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf- 
   ipr@ietf.org..  
    
7.1. IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement 
       
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   RFC 3668. 
    
    
8. Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to thank Benoit Fondeviole, Thomas Morin, Emile Stephan 
and Jean-Philippe Vasseur, for their useful comments and suggestions. 
 
9. References 
 
[PCE-ARCH] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation Element 
(PCE) Architecture", draft-ash-pce-architecture-00.txt, work in progress. 
 
 
10. Authors' Addresses:  
  
Jean-Louis Le Roux  
France Telecom  
2, avenue Pierre-Marzin  
22307 Lannion Cedex  
FRANCE 
Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
  
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 9] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt     February 2005 


Paul Mabey 
Qwest Communications 
950 17th Street, 
Denver, CO 80202, USA 
Email: pmabey@qwest.com 
 
Raymond Zhang 
Infonet Services Corporation 
2160 E. Grand Ave. 
El Segundo, CA 90025 
USA 
Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com 
 
Eiji Oki 
NTT 
Midori-cho 3-9-11 
Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
Ting Wo Chung 
Bell Canada 
181 Bay Street, Suite 350 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
Email: ting_wo.chung@bell.ca 
    
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject to 
the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as 
set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an   
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR 
IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    










 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 10] 