
    
    
    
   MPLS Working Group                     Vishal Sharma (Metanoia, Inc.)
   Informational Track                Fiffi Hellstrand (Nortel Networks)
   Expires: March 2003                                         (Editors)
    
    
                                                         September  2002
                                 
                    Framework for MPLS-based Recovery 
                <draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt> 
 
 
 

   Status of this memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   Abstract 
    
   Multi-protocol label switching (MPLS) integrates the label swapping 
   forwarding paradigm with network layer routing. To deliver reliable 
   service, MPLS requires a set of procedures to provide protection of 
   the traffic carried on different paths. This requires that the label 
   switched routers (LSRs) support fault detection, fault notification, 
   and fault recovery mechanisms, and that MPLS signaling, support the 
   configuration of recovery. With these objectives in mind, this 
   document specifies a framework for MPLS based recovery. 
    
   Table of Contents 
1.    Introduction ....................................................2 
1.1.  Background ......................................................3 
1.2.  Motivation for MPLS-Based Recovery ..............................3 
1.3.  Objectives/Goals ................................................4 
2.    Contributing Authors ............................................6 
3.    Overview ........................................................6 
3.1.  Recovery Models .................................................7 
3.1.1   Rerouting .....................................................7 
3.1.2   Protection Switching ..........................................8 
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.     Expires January 2003             [Page 1] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


3.2.  The Recovery Cycles .............................................8 
3.2.1   MPLS Recovery Cycle Model .....................................8 
3.2.2   MPLS Reversion Cycle Model ...................................10 
3.2.3   Dynamic Re-routing Cycle Model ...............................11 
3.3.  Definitions and Terminology ....................................13 
3.3.1   General Recovery Terminology .................................13 
3.3.2   Failure Terminology ..........................................16 
3.4.  Abbreviations ..................................................16 
4.    MPLS-based Recovery Principles .................................17 
4.1.  Configuration of Recovery ......................................17 
4.2.  Initiation of Path Setup .......................................17 
4.3.  Initiation of Resource Allocation ..............................18 
4.4.  Scope of Recovery ..............................................18 
4.4.1   Topology .....................................................19 
1.1.1.1   Local Repair................................................19 
1.1.1.2   Global Repair...............................................19 
1.1.1.3   Alternate Egress Repair.....................................20 
1.1.1.4   Multi-Layer Repair..........................................20 

1.1.1.5   Concatenated Protection Domains.............................20 
4.4.2   Path Mapping .................................................20 
4.4.3   Bypass Tunnels ...............................................21 
4.4.4   Recovery Granularity .........................................22 
1.1.1.6   Selective Traffic Recovery..................................22 
1.1.1.7   Bundling....................................................22 
4.4.5   Recovery Path Resource Use ...................................22 
4.5.  Fault Detection ................................................23 
4.6.  Fault Notification .............................................23 
4.7.  Switch-Over Operation ..........................................24 
4.7.1   Recovery Trigger .............................................24 
4.7.2   Recovery Action ..............................................25 
4.8.  Post Recovery Operation ........................................25 
4.8.1   Fixed Protection Counterparts ................................25 
1.1.1.8   Revertive Mode..............................................25 
1.1.1.9   Non-revertive Mode..........................................26 
4.8.2   Dynamic Protection Counterparts ..............................26 
4.8.3   Restoration and Notification .................................26 
4.8.4   Reverting to Preferred Path (or Controlled Rearrangement) ....27 
4.9.  Performance ....................................................27 
5.    MPLS Recovery Features .........................................28 
6.    Comparison Criteria ............................................28 
7.    Security Considerations ........................................30 
8.    Intellectual Property Considerations ...........................31 
9.    Acknowledgements ...............................................31 
10.   Editors' Addresses .............................................31 
11.   References .....................................................31 
    

1.   Introduction 
    
   This memo describes a framework for MPLS-based recovery. We provide a 
   detailed taxonomy of recovery terminology, and discuss the motivation 

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 2] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   for, the objectives of, and the requirements for MPLS-based recovery. 
   We outline principles for MPLS-based recovery, and also provide 
   comparison criteria that may serve as a basis for comparing and 
   evaluating different recovery schemes.  
    
   At points in the document, we provide some thoughts about the 
   operation or viability of certain recovery objectives. These should 
   be viewed as the opinions of the authors, and not the consolidated 
   views of the IETF. 
    
1.1. Background 
    
   Network routing deployed today is focused primarily on connectivity, 
   and typically supports only one class of service, the best effort 
   class. Multi-protocol label switching [1], on the other hand, by 
   integrating forwarding based on label-swapping of a link local label 
   with network layer routing allows flexibility in the delivery of new 
   routing services. MPLS allows for using such media specific 
   forwarding mechanisms as label swapping. This enables some 
   sophisticated features such as quality-of-service (QoS) and traffic 
   engineering [2] to be implemented more effectively. An important 
   component of providing QoS, however, is the ability to transport data 
   reliably and efficiently. Although the current routing algorithms are 
   robust and survivable, the amount of time they take to recover from a 
   fault can be significant, on the order of several seconds or minutes, 
   causing disruption of service for some applications in the interim. 
   This is unacceptable in situations where the aim to provide a highly 
   reliable service, with recovery times that are on the order of 
   seconds down to 10's of milliseconds. Examples of such applications 
   are Virtual Leased Line services, Stock Exchange data services, voice 
   traffic, video services etc, i.e., any application for which a 
   disruption in service due to a failure is long enough to not fulfill 
   service agreements or not guarantee the required level of quality. 
    
   MPLS recovery may be motivated by the notion that there are 
   limitations to improving the recovery times of current routing 
   algorithms. Additional improvement can be obtained by augmenting 
   these algorithms with MPLS recovery mechanisms [3]. Since MPLS is a 
   possible technology of choice in future IP-based transport networks, 
   it is useful that MPLS be able to provide protection and restoration 
   of traffic.  MPLS may facilitate the convergence of network 
   functionality on a common control and management plane. Further, a 
   protection priority could be used as a differentiating mechanism for 
   premium services that require high reliability, such as Virtual 
   Leased Line services, high priority voice and video traffic. The 
   remainder of this document provides a framework for MPLS based 
   recovery.  It is focused at a conceptual level and is meant to 
   address motivation, objectives and requirements.  Issues of 
   mechanism, policy, routing plans and characteristics of traffic 
   carried by recovery paths are beyond the scope of this document. 
    
1.2. Motivation for MPLS-Based Recovery 
    
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 3] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   MPLS based protection of traffic (called MPLS-based Recovery) is 
   useful for a number of reasons. The most important is its ability to 
   increase network reliability by enabling a faster response to faults 
   than is possible with traditional Layer 3 (or IP layer) approaches 
   alone while still providing the visibility of the network afforded by 
   Layer 3. Furthermore, a protection mechanism using MPLS could enable 
   IP traffic to be put directly over WDM optical channels and provide a 
   recovery option without an intervening SONET layer.  This would 
   facilitate the construction of IP-over-WDM networks that request a 
   fast recovery ability. 
    
   The need for MPLS-based recovery arises because of the following: 
    
   I. Layer 3 or IP rerouting may be too slow for a core MPLS network 
   that needs to support recovery times that are smaller than the 
   convergence times of IP routing protocols. 
    
   II. Layer 0 (for example, optical layer) or Layer 1 (for example, 
   SONET) mechanisms may be wasteful use of resources. 
    
   III. The granularity at which the lower layers may be able to protect 
   traffic may be too coarse for traffic that is switched using MPLS-
   based mechanisms. 
    
   IV. Layer 0 or Layer 1 mechanisms may have no visibility into higher 
   layer operations.  Thus, while they may provide, for example, link 
   protection, they cannot easily provide node protection or protection 
   of traffic transported at layer 3. Further, this may prevent the 
   lower layers from providing restoration based on the traffic's needs. 
   For example, fast restoration for traffic that needs it, and slower 
   restoration (with possibly more optimal use of resources) for traffic 
   that does not require fast restoration. In networks where the latter 
   class of traffic is dominant, providing fast restoration to all 
   classes of traffic may not be cost effective from a service 
   provider's perspective. 
    
   V. MPLS has desirable attributes when applied to the purpose of 
   recovery for connectionless networks. Specifically that an LSP is 
   source routed and a forwarding path for recovery can be "pinned" and 
   is not affected by transient instability in SPF routing brought on by 
   failure scenarios. 
    
   VI. Establishing interoperability of protection mechanisms between 
   routers/LSRs from different vendors in IP or MPLS networks is desired 
   to enable recovery mechanisms to work in a multivendor environment, 
   and to enable the transition of certain protected services to an MPLS 
   core. 
    
1.3. Objectives/Goals 
    
   The following are some important goals for MPLS-based recovery. 
    

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 4] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   Ia. MPLS-based recovery mechanisms may be subject to the traffic 
   engineering goal of optimal use of resources. 
    
   Ib. MPLS based recovery mechanisms should aim to facilitate 
   restoration times that are sufficiently fast for the end user 
   application. That is, that better match the end-user's application 
   requirements. In some cases, this may be as short as 10s of 
   milliseconds. 
    
   We observe that Ia and Ib are conflicting objectives, and a trade off 
   exists between them. The optimal choice depends on the end-user 
   application's sensitivity to restoration time and the cost impact of 
   introducing restoration in the network, as well as the end-user 
   application's sensitivity to cost. 
    
   II. MPLS-based recovery should aim to maximize network reliability 
   and availability. MPLS-based recovery of traffic should aim to 
   minimize the number of single points of failure in the MPLS protected 
   domain. 
    
   III. MPLS-based recovery should aim to enhance the reliability of the 
   protected traffic while minimally or predictably degrading the 
   traffic carried by the diverted resources.  
    
   IV. MPLS-based recovery techniques should aim to be applicable for 
   protection of traffic at various granularities. For example, it 
   should be possible to specify MPLS-based recovery for a portion of 
   the traffic on an individual path, for all traffic on an individual 
   path, or for all traffic on a group of paths. Note that a path is 
   used as a general term and includes the notion of a link, IP route or 
   LSP. 
    
   V. MPLS-based recovery techniques may be applicable for an entire 
   end-to-end path or for segments of an end-to-end path. 
 
   VI. MPLS-based recovery mechanisms should aim to take into 
   consideration the recovery actions of lower layers. MPLS-based 
   mechanisms should not trigger lower layer protection switching. 
 
   VII. MPLS-based recovery mechanisms should aim to minimize the loss 
   of data and packet reordering during recovery operations. (The 
   current MPLS specification itself has no explicit requirement on 
   reordering). 
    
   VIII. MPLS-based recovery mechanisms should aim to minimize the state 
   overhead incurred for each recovery path maintained. 
    
   IX. MPLS-based recovery mechanisms should aim to preserve the 
   constraints on traffic after switchover, if desired.  That is, if 
   desired, the recovery path should meet the resource requirements of, 
   and achieve the same performance characteristics as, the working 
   path. 
    
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 5] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   We observe that some of the above are conflicting goals, and real 
   deployment will often involve engineering compromises based on a 
   variety of factors such as cost, end-user application requirements, 
   network efficiency, and revenue considerations. Thus, these goals are 
   subject to tradeoffs based on the above considerations. 
    
2.   Contributing Authors 
    
   This document was the collective work of several individuals over a 
   period of two and a half years. The text and content of this document 
   was contributed by the editors and the co-authors listed below. (The 
   contact information for the editors appears in Section 10, and is not 
   repeated below.) 
    
   Ben Mack-Crane                       Srinivas Makam 
   Tellabs Operations, Inc.             Eshernet, Inc. 
   4951 Indiana Avenue                  1712 Ada Ct. 
   Lisle, IL 60532                      Naperville, IL 60540 
   Phone: (630) 512-7255                Phone: (630) 308-3213 
   Ben.Mack-Crane@tellabs.com           Smakam60540@yahoo.com 
                                         
   Ken Owens                            Changcheng Huang 
   Erlang Technology, Inc.              Carleton University 
   345 Marshall Ave., Suite 300         Minto Center, Rm. 3082 
   St. Louis, MO 63119                  1125 Colonial By Drive 
   Phone: (314) 918-1579                Ottawa, Ont. K1S 5B6 Canada 
   keno@erlangtech.com                  Phone: (613) 520-2600 x2477 
                                        Changcheng.Huang@sce.carleton.ca 
                                         
   Jon Weil                             Brad Cain 
   Nortel Networks                      Storigen Systems 
   Harlow Laboratories London Road      650 Suffolk Street 
   Harlow Essex CM17 9NA, UK            Lowell, MA 01854 
   Phone: +44 (0)1279 403935            Phone: (978) 323-4454 
   jonweil@nortelnetworks.com           bcain@storigen.com 
                                         
   Loa Andersson                        Bilel Jamoussi 
   Utfors AB                            Nortel Networks 
   Rasundavagen 12, Box 525             3 Federal Street, BL3-03 
   169 29 Solna, Sweden                 Billerica, MA 01821, USA 
   Phone: +46 8 5270 5038               Phone:(978) 288-4506 
   loa.andersson@utfors.se              jamoussi@nortelnetworks.com 
                                         
   Angela Chiu                          Seyhan Civanlar 
   Celion Networks, Inc.                Lemur Networks, Inc. 
   One Shiela Drive, Suite 2            135 West 20th Street, 5th Floor 
   Tinton Falls, NJ 07724               New York, NY 10011 
   Phone: (732) 345-3441                Phone: (212) 367-7676 
   angela.chiu@celion.com                   scivanlar@lemurnetworks.com 
    
    
3.   Overview 

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 6] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


    
   There are several options for providing protection of traffic. The 
   most generic requirement is the specification of whether recovery 
   should be via Layer 3 (or IP) rerouting or via MPLS protection 
   switching or rerouting actions. 
    
   Generally network operators aim to provide the fastest and the best 
   protection mechanism that can be provided at a reasonable cost. The 
   higher the levels of protection, the more the resources consumed.  
   Therefore it is expected that network operators will offer a spectrum 
   of service levels. MPLS-based recovery should give the flexibility to 
   select the recovery mechanism, choose the granularity at which 
   traffic is protected, and to also choose the specific types of 
   traffic that are protected in order to give operators more control 
   over that tradeoff.  With MPLS-based recovery, it can be possible to 
   provide different levels of protection for different classes of 
   service, based on their service requirements. For example, using 
   approaches outlined below, a Virtual Leased Line (VLL) service or 
   real-time applications like Voice over IP (VoIP) may be supported 
   using link/node protection together with pre-established, pre-
   reserved path protection. Best effort traffic, on the other hand, may 
   use path protection that is established on demand or may simply rely 
   on IP re-route or higher layer recovery mechanisms.  As another 
   example of their range of application, MPLS-based recovery strategies 
   may be used to protect traffic not originally flowing on label 
   switched paths, such as IP traffic that is normally routed hop-by-
   hop, as well as traffic forwarded on label switched paths. 
      
3.1. Recovery Models 
    
   There are two basic models for path recovery: rerouting and 
   protection switching. 
    
   Protection switching and rerouting, as defined below, may be used 
   together.  For example, protection switching to a recovery path may 
   be used for rapid restoration of connectivity while rerouting 
   determines a new optimal network configuration, rearranging paths, as 
   needed, at a later time. 
    
3.1.1     Rerouting 
    
   Recovery by rerouting is defined as establishing new paths or path 
   segments on demand for restoring traffic after the occurrence of a 
   fault. The new paths may be based upon fault information, network 
   routing policies, pre-defined configurations and network topology 
   information. Thus, upon detecting a fault, paths or path segments to 
   bypass the fault are established using signaling.  
    
   Once the network routing algorithms have converged after a fault, it 
   may be preferable, in some cases, to reoptimize the network by 
   performing a reroute based on the current state of the network and 
   network policies. This is discussed further in Section 3.8. 
    
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 7] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   In terms of the principles defined in section 3, reroute recovery 
   employs paths established-on-demand with resources reserved-on-
   demand. 
    
3.1.2     Protection Switching 
    
   Protection switching recovery mechanisms pre-establish a recovery 
   path or path segment, based upon network routing policies, the 
   restoration requirements of the traffic on the working path, and 
   administrative considerations. The recovery path may or may not be 
   link and node disjoint with the working path. However if the recovery 
   path shares sources of failure with the working path, the overall 
   reliability of the construct is degraded. When a fault is detected, 
   the protected traffic is switched over to the recovery path(s) and 
   restored. 
    
   In terms of the principles in section 3, protection switching employs 
   pre-established recovery paths, and, if resource reservation is 
   required on the recovery path, pre-reserved resources. The various 
   sub-types of protection switching are detailed in Section 4.4 of this 
   document. 
 
    
3.2. The Recovery Cycles 
    
   There are three defined recovery cycles: the MPLS Recovery Cycle, the 
   MPLS Reversion Cycle and the Dynamic Re-routing Cycle. The first 
   cycle detects a fault and restores traffic onto MPLS-based recovery 
   paths. If the recovery path is non-optimal the cycle may be followed 
   by any of the two latter cycles to achieve an optimized network 
   again. The reversion cycle applies for explicitly routed traffic that 
   that does not rely on any dynamic routing protocols to be converged. 
   The dynamic re-routing cycle applies for traffic that is forwarded 
   based on hop-by-hop routing. 
    
3.2.1     MPLS Recovery Cycle Model  
    
   The MPLS recovery cycle model is illustrated in Figure 1.  
   Definitions and a key to abbreviations follow. 
    
    --Network Impairment 
    |    --Fault Detected 
    |    |    --Start of Notification  
    |    |    |    -- Start of Recovery Operation 
    |    |    |    |    --Recovery Operation Complete  
    |    |    |    |    |    --Path Traffic Restored 
    |    |    |    |    |    | 
    |    |    |    |    |    | 
    v    v    v    v    v    v 
   ---------------------------------------------------------------- 
    | T1 | T2 | T3 | T4 | T5 | 
     

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 8] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   Figure 1. MPLS Recovery Cycle Model 
     
   The various timing measures used in the model are described below. 
   T1   Fault Detection Time 
   T2   Hold-off Time 
   T3   Notification Time 
   T4   Recovery Operation Time 
   T5   Traffic Restoration Time 
 
   Definitions of the recovery cycle times are as follows: 
    
   Fault Detection Time 
    
   The time between the occurrence of a network impairment and the 
   moment the fault is detected by MPLS-based recovery mechanisms. This 
   time may be highly dependent on lower layer protocols. 
    
   Hold-Off Time 
    
   The configured waiting time between the detection of a fault and 
   taking MPLS-based recovery action, to allow time for lower layer 
   protection to take effect. The Hold-off Time may be zero. 
    
   Note: The Hold-Off Time may occur after the Notification Time 
   interval if the node responsible for the switchover, the Path Switch 
   LSR (PSL), rather than the detecting LSR, is configured to wait. 
    
   Notification Time 
    
   The time between initiation of a fault indication signal (FIS) by the 
   LSR detecting the fault and the time at which the Path Switch LSR 
   (PSL) begins the recovery operation.  This is zero if the PSL detects 
   the fault itself or infers a fault from such events as an adjacency 
   failure. 
    
   Note: If the PSL detects the fault itself, there still may be a Hold-
   Off Time period between detection and the start of the recovery 
   operation. 
    
   Recovery Operation Time 
    
   The time between the first and last recovery actions.  This may 
   include message exchanges between the PSL and PML to coordinate 
   recovery actions. 
    
   Traffic Restoration Time 
    
   The time between the last recovery action and the time that the 
   traffic (if present) is completely recovered.  This interval is 
   intended to account for the time required for traffic to once again 
   arrive at the point in the network that experienced disrupted or 
   degraded service due to the occurrence of the fault (e.g. the PML).  

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003                [Page 9] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   This time may depend on the location of the fault, the recovery 
   mechanism, and the propagation delay along the recovery path. 
    
3.2.2     MPLS Reversion Cycle Model 
    
   Protection switching, revertive mode, requires the traffic to be 
   switched back to a preferred path when the fault on that path is 
   cleared.  The MPLS reversion cycle model is illustrated in Figure 2. 
   Note that the cycle shown below comes after the recovery cycle shown 
   in Fig. 1. 
     
          --Network Impairment Repaired 
          |    --Fault Cleared 
          |    |    --Path Available 
          |    |    |    --Start of Reversion Operation 
          |    |    |    |    --Reversion Operation Complete  
          |    |    |    |    |    --Traffic Restored on Preferred Path 
          |    |    |    |    |    | 
          |    |    |    |    |    | 
          v    v    v    v    v    v 
       ----------------------------------------------------------------- 
          | T7 | T8 | T9 | T10| T11| 
     
   Figure 2. MPLS Reversion Cycle Model 
    
   The various timing measures used in the model are described below. 
   T7   Fault Clearing Time 
   T8   Wait-to-Restore Time 
   T9   Notification Time 
   T10  Reversion Operation Time 
   T11  Traffic Restoration Time 
     
   Note that time T6 (not shown above) is the time for which the network 
   impairment is not repaired and traffic is flowing on the recovery 
   path. 
    
   Definitions of the reversion cycle times are as follows: 
    
   Fault Clearing Time 
    
   The time between the repair of a network impairment and the time that 
   MPLS-based mechanisms learn that the fault has been cleared. This 
   time may be highly dependent on lower layer protocols. 
    
   Wait-to-Restore Time 
    
   The configured waiting time between the clearing of a fault and MPLS-
   based recovery action(s).  Waiting time may be needed to ensure that 
   the path is stable and to avoid flapping in cases where a fault is 
   intermittent. The Wait-to-Restore Time may be zero. 
    


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 10] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   Note: The Wait-to-Restore Time may occur after the Notification Time 
   interval if the PSL is configured to wait. 
    
   Notification Time 
    
   The time between initiation of a fault recovery signal (FRS) by the 
   LSR clearing the fault and the time at which the path switch LSR 
   begins the reversion operation.  This is zero if the PSL clears the 
   fault itself. 
   Note: If the PSL clears the fault itself, there still may be a Wait-
   to-Restore Time period between fault clearing and the start of the 
   reversion operation. 
    
   Reversion Operation Time 
    
   The time between the first and last reversion actions.  This may 
   include message exchanges between the PSL and PML to coordinate 
   reversion actions. 
    
   Traffic Restoration Time 
    
   The time between the last reversion action and the time that traffic 
   (if present) is completely restored on the preferred path.  This 
   interval is expected to be quite small since both paths are working 
   and care may be taken to limit the traffic disruption (e.g., using 
   "make before break" techniques and synchronous switch-over). 
    
   In practice, the only interesting times in the reversion cycle are 
   the Wait-to-Restore Time and the Traffic Restoration Time (or some 
   other measure of traffic disruption).  Given that both paths are 
   available, there is no need for rapid operation, and a well-
   controlled switch-back with minimal disruption is desirable. 
    
3.2.3     Dynamic Re-routing Cycle Model 
    
   Dynamic rerouting aims to bring the IP network to a stable state 
   after a network impairment has occurred. A re-optimized network is 
   achieved after the routing protocols have converged, and the traffic 
   is moved from a recovery path to a (possibly) new working path. The 
   steps involved in this mode are illustrated in Figure 3. 
    
   Note that the cycle shown below may be overlaid on the recovery cycle 
   shown in Fig. 1 or the reversion cycle shown in Fig. 2, or both (in 
   the event that both the recovery cycle and the reversion cycle take 
   place before the routing protocols converge), and after the 
   convergence of the routing protocols it is determined (based on on-
   line algorithms or off-line traffic engineering tools, network 
   configuration, or a variety of other possible criteria) that there is 
   a better route for the working path. 
    
          --Network Enters a Semi-stable State after an Impairment 
          |     --Dynamic Routing Protocols Converge 
          |     |     --Initiate Setup of New Working Path between PSL     
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 11] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


          |     |     |                                         and PML 
          |     |     |     --Switchover Operation Complete 
          |     |     |     |     --Traffic Moved to New Working Path 
          |     |     |     |     | 
          |     |     |     |     | 
          v     v     v     v     v 
       ----------------------------------------------------------------- 
          | T12 | T13 | T14 | T15 | 
     
   Figure 3. Dynamic Rerouting Cycle Model 
   The various timing measures used in the model are described below. 
   T12  Network Route Convergence Time 
   T13  Hold-down Time (optional) 
   T14  Switchover Operation Time 
   T15  Traffic Restoration Time 
    
   Network Route Convergence Time 
    
   We define the network route convergence time as the time taken for 
   the network routing protocols to converge and for the network to 
   reach a stable state. 
    
   Holddown Time 
    
   We define the holddown period as a bounded time for which a recovery 
   path must be used. In some scenarios it may be difficult to determine 
   if the working path is stable. In these cases a holddown time may be 
   used to prevent excess flapping of traffic between a working and a 
   recovery path. 
    
   Switchover Operation Time 
    
   The time between the first and last switchover actions.  This may 
   include message exchanges between the PSL and PML to coordinate the 
   switchover actions. 
    
   As an example of the recovery cycle, we present a sequence of events 
   that occur after a network impairment occurs and when a protection 
   switch is followed by dynamic rerouting. 
    
   I. Link or path fault occurs 
   II. Signaling initiated (FIS) for the detected fault  
   III. FIS arrives at the PSL 
   IV. The PSL initiates a protection switch to a pre-configured 
   recovery path  
   V. The PSL switches over the traffic from the working path to the 
   recovery path 
   VI. The network enters a semi-stable state 
   VII. Dynamic routing protocols converge after the fault, and a new 
   working path is calculated (based, for example, on some of the 
   criteria mentioned in Section 2.1.1). 


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 12] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   VIII. A new working path is established between the PSL and the PML 
   (assumption is that PSL and PML have not changed) 
   IX. Traffic is switched over to the new working path. 
    
3.3. Definitions and Terminology 
    
   This document assumes the terminology given in [1], and, in addition, 
   introduces the following new terms. 
    
3.3.1     General Recovery Terminology 
    
   Rerouting 
    
   A recovery mechanism in which the recovery path or path segments are 
   created dynamically after the detection of a fault on the working 
   path. In other words, a recovery mechanism in which the recovery path 
   is not pre-established. 
    
   Protection Switching 
    
   A recovery mechanism in which the recovery path or path segments are 
   created prior to the detection of a fault on the working path. In 
   other words, a recovery mechanism in which the recovery path is pre-
   established. 
    
   Working Path 
    
   The protected path that carries traffic before the occurrence of a 
   fault.  The working path exists between a PSL and PML. The working 
   path can be of different kinds; a hop-by-hop routed path, a trunk, a 
   link, an LSP or part of a multipoint-to-point LSP. 
    
   Synonyms for a working path are primary path and active path. 
    
   Recovery Path 
    
   The path by which traffic is restored after the occurrence of a 
   fault. In other words, the path on which the traffic is directed by 
   the recovery mechanism. The recovery path is established by MPLS 
   means. The recovery path can either be an equivalent recovery path 
   and ensure no reduction in quality of service, or be a limited 
   recovery path and thereby not guarantee the same quality of service 
   (or some other criteria of performance) as the working path. A 
   limited recovery path is not expected to be used for an extended 
   period of time. 
    
   Synonyms for a recovery path are: back-up path, alternative path, and 
   protection path. 
    
   Protection Counterpart 
    


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 13] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   The "other" path when discussing pre-planned protection switching 
   schemes. The protection counterpart for the working path is the 
   recovery path and vice-versa. 
    
   Path Group (PG) 
    
   A logical bundling of multiple working paths, each of which is routed 
   identically between a Path Switch LSR and a Path Merge LSR. 
    
   Protected Path Group (PPG) 
    
   A path group that requires protection. 
    
   Protected Traffic Portion (PTP) 
    
   The portion of the traffic on an individual path that requires 
   protection.  For example, code points in the EXP bits of the shim 
   header may identify a protected portion. 
    
   Path Switch LSR (PSL) 
    
   An LSR that is responsible for switching or replicating the traffic 
   between the working path and the recovery path. 
    
   Path Merge LSR (PML) 
    
   An LSR that is responsible for receiving the recovery path traffic, 
   and either merging the traffic back onto the working path, or, if it 
   is itself the destination, passing the traffic on to the higher layer 
   protocols. 
    
   Point of Repair (POR) 
    
   An LSR that is setup for performing MPLS recovery. In other words, an 
   LSR that is responsible for effecting the repair of an LSP. The POR, 
   for example, can be a PSL or a PML, depending on the type of recovery 
   scheme employed. 
    
   Intermediate LSR 
    
   An LSR on a working or recovery path that is neither a PSL nor a PML 
   for that path. 
    
   Bypass Tunnel 
    
   A path that serves to back up a set of working paths using the label 
   stacking approach [1]. The working paths and the bypass tunnel must 
   all share the same path switch LSR (PSL) and the path merge LSR 
   (PML). 
    
   Switch-Over 
    

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 14] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   The process of switching the traffic from the path that the traffic 
   is flowing on onto one or more alternate path(s). This may involve 
   moving traffic from a working path onto one or more recovery paths, 
   or may involve moving traffic from a recovery path(s) on to a more 
   optimal working path(s). 
    
   Switch-Back 
    
   The process of returning the traffic from one or more recovery paths 
   back to the working path(s). 
    
   Revertive Mode 
    
   A recovery mode in which traffic is automatically switched back from 
   the recovery path to the original working path upon the restoration 
   of the working path to a fault-free condition. This assumes a failed 
   working path does not automatically surrender resources to the 
   network. 
    
   Non-revertive Mode 
    
   A recovery mode in which traffic is not automatically switched back 
   to the original working path after this path is restored to a fault-
   free condition. (Depending on the configuration, the original working 
   path may, upon moving to a fault-free condition, become the recovery 
   path, or it may be used for new working traffic, and be no longer 
   associated with its original recovery path). 
    
   MPLS Protection Domain 
    
   The set of LSRs over which a working path and its corresponding 
   recovery path are routed. 
    
   MPLS Protection Plan 
    
   The set of all LSP protection paths and the mapping from working to 
   protection paths deployed in an MPLS protection domain at a given 
   time. 
    
   Liveness Message 
    
   A message exchanged periodically between two adjacent LSRs that 
   serves as a link probing mechanism. It provides an integrity check of 
   the forward and the backward directions of the link between the two 
   LSRs as well as a check of neighbor aliveness. 
    
   Path Continuity Test 
    
   A test that verifies the integrity and continuity of a path or path 
   segment. The details of such a test are beyond the scope of this 
   draft. (This could be accomplished, for example, by transmitting a 
   control message along the same links and nodes as the data traffic or 

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 15] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   similarly could be measured by the absence of traffic and by 
   providing feedback.) 
 
3.3.2     Failure Terminology  
    
   Path Failure (PF) 
   Path failure is fault detected by MPLS-based recovery mechanisms, 
   which is define as the failure of the liveness message test or a path 
   continuity test, which indicates that path connectivity is lost. 
    
   Path Degraded (PD) 
   Path degraded is a fault detected by MPLS-based recovery mechanisms 
   that indicates that the quality of the path is unacceptable. 
    
   Link Failure (LF) 
   A lower layer fault indicating that link continuity is lost. This may 
   be communicated to the MPLS-based recovery mechanisms by the lower 
   layer. 
    
   Link Degraded (LD) 
   A lower layer indication to MPLS-based recovery mechanisms that the 
   link is performing below an acceptable level. 
    
   Fault Indication Signal (FIS) 
   A signal that indicates that a fault along a path has occurred. It is 
   relayed by each intermediate LSR to its upstream or downstream 
   neighbor, until it reaches an LSR that is setup to perform MPLS 
   recovery (the POR).  The FIS is transmitted periodically by the 
   node/nodes closest to the point of failure, for some configurable 
   length of time. 
    
   Fault Recovery Signal (FRS) 
   A signal that indicates a fault along a working path has been 
   repaired. Again, like the FIS, it is relayed by each intermediate LSR 
   to its upstream or downstream neighbor, until is reaches the LSR that 
   performs recovery of the original path. The FRS is transmitted 
   periodically by the node/nodes closest to the point of failure, for 
   some configurable length of time. 
    
    
3.4. Abbreviations 
    
   FIS:   Fault Indication Signal. 
   FRS:   Fault Recovery Signal. 
   LD:    Link Degraded. 
   LF:    Link Failure. 
   PD:    Path Degraded. 
   PF:    Path Failure. 
   PML:   Path Merge LSR. 
   PG:    Path Group. 
   POR:   Point of Repair 
   PPG:   Protected Path Group. 
   PTP:   Protected Traffic Portion. 
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 16] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   PSL:   Path Switch LSR. 
 
4.   MPLS-based Recovery Principles 
    
   MPLS-based recovery refers to the ability to effect quick and 
   complete restoration of traffic affected by a fault in an MPLS-
   enabled network. The fault may be detected on the IP layer or in 
   lower layers over which IP traffic is transported. Fastest MPLS 
   recovery is assumed to be achieved with protection switching and may 
   be viewed as the MPLS LSR switch completion time that is comparable 
   to, or equivalent to, the 50 ms switch-over completion time of the 
   SONET layer. This section provides a discussion of the concepts and 
   principles of MPLS-based recovery. The concepts are presented in 
   terms of atomic or primitive terms that may be combined to specify 
   recovery approaches.  We do not make any assumptions about the 
   underlying layer 1 or layer 2 transport mechanisms or their recovery 
   mechanisms. 
 
    
4.1. Configuration of Recovery 
    
   An LSR may support any or all of the following recovery options: 
    
   Default-recovery (No MPLS-based recovery enabled):  
   Traffic on the working path is recovered only via Layer 3 or IP 
   rerouting or by some lower layer mechanism such as SONET APS.  This 
   is equivalent to having no MPLS-based recovery. This option may be 
   used for low priority traffic or for traffic that is recovered in 
   another way (for example load shared traffic on parallel working 
   paths may be automatically recovered upon a fault along one of the 
   working paths by distributing it among the remaining working paths). 
    
   Recoverable (MPLS-based recovery enabled):  
   This working path is recovered using one or more recovery paths, 
   either via rerouting or via protection switching. 
    
4.2. Initiation of Path Setup 
    
   There are three options for the initiation of the recovery path 
   setup. The active and recovery paths may be established by using 
   either RSVP-TE [4][5] or CR-LDP [6]. 
    
   Pre-established: 
    
   This is the same as the protection switching option. Here a recovery 
   path(s) is established prior to any failure on the working path. The 
   path selection can either be determined by an administrative 
   centralized tool, or chosen based on some algorithm implemented at 
   the PSL and possibly intermediate nodes. To guard against the 
   situation when the pre-established recovery path fails before or at 
   the same time as the working path, the recovery path should have 
   secondary configuration options as explained in Section 3.3 below.  

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 17] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


    
   Pre Qualified: 
    
   A pre-established path need not be created, it may be pre-qualified.  
   A pre-qualified recovery path is not created expressly for protecting 
   the working path, but instead is a path created for other purposes 
   that is designated as a recovery path after determining that it is an 
   acceptable alternative for carrying the working path traffic.  
   Variants include the case where an optical path or trail is 
   configured, but no switches are set. 
    
   Established-on-Demand: 
    
   This is the same as the rerouting option. Here, a recovery path is 
   established after a failure on its working path has been detected and 
   notified to the PSL. 
    
4.3. Initiation of Resource Allocation 
    
   A recovery path may support the same traffic contract as the working 
   path, or it may not. We will distinguish these two situations by 
   using different additive terms. If the recovery path is capable of 
   replacing the working path without degrading service, it will be 
   called an equivalent recovery path. If the recovery path lacks the 
   resources (or resource reservations) to replace the working path 
   without degrading service, it will be called a limited recovery path. 
   Based on this, there are two options for the initiation of resource 
   allocation: 
    
   Pre-reserved: 
    
   This option applies only to protection switching. Here a pre-
   established recovery path reserves required resources on all hops 
   along its route during its establishment. Although the reserved 
   resources (e.g., bandwidth and/or buffers) at each node cannot be 
   used to admit more working paths, they are available to be used by 
   all traffic that is present at the node before a failure occurs. 
     
   Reserved-on-Demand: 
    
   This option may apply either to rerouting or to protection switching. 
   Here a recovery path reserves the required resources after a failure 
   on the working path has been detected and notified to the PSL and 
   before the traffic on the working path is switched over to the 
   recovery path. 
    
   Note that under both the options above, depending on the amount of 
   resources reserved on the recovery path, it could either be an 
   equivalent recovery path or a limited recovery path. 
    
4.4. Scope of Recovery 
    

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 18] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


4.4.1     Topology 
 
4.4.1.1         Local Repair 
    
   The intent of local repair is to protect against a link or neighbor 
   node fault and to minimize the amount of time required for failure 
   propagation. In local repair (also known as local recovery), the node 
   immediately upstream of the fault is the one to initiate recovery 
   (either rerouting or protection switching). Local repair can be of 
   two types: 
    
   Link Recovery/Restoration 
    
   In this case, the recovery path may be configured to route around a 
   certain link deemed to be unreliable. If protection switching is 
   used, several recovery paths may be configured for one working path, 
   depending on the specific faulty link that each protects against.  
    
   Alternatively, if rerouting is used, upon the occurrence of a fault 
   on the specified link, each path is rebuilt such that it detours 
   around the faulty link. 
   In this case, the recovery path need only be disjoint from its 
   working path at a particular link on the working path, and may have 
   overlapping segments with the working path. Traffic on the working 
   path is switched over to an alternate path at the upstream LSR that 
   connects to the failed link. This method is potentially the fastest 
   to perform the switchover, and can be effective in situations where 
   certain path components are much more unreliable than others. 
    
   Node Recovery/Restoration 
    
   In this case, the recovery path may be configured to route around a 
   neighbor node deemed to be unreliable. Thus the recovery path is 
   disjoint from the working path only at a particular node and at links 
   associated with the working path at that node. Once again, the 
   traffic on the primary path is switched over to the recovery path at 
   the upstream LSR that directly connects to the failed node, and the 
   recovery path shares overlapping portions with the working path. 
    
4.4.1.2        Global Repair 
    
   The intent of global repair is to protect against any link or node 
   fault on a path or on a segment of a path, with the obvious exception 
   of the faults occurring at the ingress node of the protected path 
   segment. In global repair, the POR is usually distant from the 
   failure and needs to be notified by a FIS. 
   In global repair also, end-to-end path recovery/restoration applies. 
   In many cases, the recovery path can be made completely link and node 
   disjoint with its working path. This has the advantage of protecting 
   against all link and node fault(s) on the working path (end-to-end 
   path or path segment). 


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 19] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   However, it may, in some cases, be slower than local repair since the 
   fault notification message must now travel to the POR to trigger the 
   recovery action. 
    
4.4.1.3        Alternate Egress Repair 
    
   It is possible to restore service without specifically recovering the 
   faulted path.   
   For example, for best effort IP service it is possible to select a 
   recovery path that has a different egress point from the working path 
   (i.e., there is no PML).  The recovery path egress must simply be a 
   router that is acceptable for forwarding the FEC carried by the 
   working path (without creating looping).  In an engineering context, 
   specific alternative FEC/LSP mappings with alternate egresses can be 
   formed. 
    
   This may simplify enhancing the reliability of implicitly constructed 
   MPLS topologies. A PSL may qualify LSP/FEC bindings as candidate 
   recovery paths as simply link and node disjoint with the immediate 
   downstream LSR of the working path. 
    
4.4.1.4        Multi-Layer Repair 
    
   Multi-layer repair broadens the network designer's tool set for those 
   cases where multiple network layers can be managed together to 
   achieve overall network goals.  Specific criteria for determining 
   when multi-layer repair is appropriate are beyond the scope of this 
   draft. 
    
4.4.1.5        Concatenated Protection Domains 
    
   A given service may cross multiple networks and these may employ 
   different recovery mechanisms.  It is possible to concatenate 
   protection domains so that service recovery can be provided end-to-
   end.  It is considered that the recovery mechanisms in different 
   domains may operate autonomously, and that multiple points of 
   attachment may be used between domains (to ensure there is no single 
   point of failure).  Alternate egress repair requires management of 
   concatenated domains in that an explicit MPLS point of failure (the 
   PML) is by definition excluded.  Details of concatenated protection 
   domains are beyond the scope of this draft. 
    
4.4.2     Path Mapping 
    
   Path mapping refers to the methods of mapping traffic from a faulty 
   working path on to the recovery path. There are several options for 
   this, as described below. Note that the options below should be 
   viewed as atomic terms that only describe how the working and 
   protection paths are mapped to each other. The issues of resource 
   reservation along these paths, and how switchover is actually 
   performed lead to the more commonly used composite terms, such as 1+1 
   and 1:1 protection, which were described in Section 2.1. 
    
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 20] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   1-to-1 Protection 
    
   In 1-to-1 protection the working path has a designated recovery path 
   that is only to be used to recover that specific working path. 
    
   n-to-1 Protection 
    
   In n-to-1 protection, up to n working paths are protected using only 
   one recovery path. If the intent is to protect against any single 
   fault on any of the working paths, the n working paths should be 
   diversely routed between the same PSL and PML. In some cases, 
   handshaking between PSL and PML may be required to complete the 
   recovery, the details of which are beyond the scope of this draft. 
    
   n-to-m Protection 
    
   In n-to-m protection, up to n working paths are protected using m 
   recovery paths. Once again, if the intent is to protect against any 
   single fault on any of the n working paths, the n working paths and 
   the m recovery paths should be diversely routed between the same PSL 
   and PML. In some cases, handshaking between PSL and PML may be 
   required to complete the recovery, the details of which are beyond 
   the scope of this draft. n-to-m protection is for further study. 
    
   Split Path Protection 
    
   In split path protection, multiple recovery paths are allowed to 
   carry the traffic of a working path based on a certain configurable 
   load splitting ratio.  This is especially useful when no single 
   recovery path can be found that can carry the entire traffic of the 
   working path in case of a fault. Split path protection may require 
   handshaking between the PSL and the PML(s), and may require the 
   PML(s) to correlate the traffic arriving on multiple recovery paths 
   with the working path. Although this is an attractive option, the 
   details of split path protection are beyond the scope of this draft, 
   and are for further study. 
    
4.4.3     Bypass Tunnels 
    
   It may be convenient, in some cases, to create a "bypass tunnel" for 
   a PPG between a PSL and PML, thereby allowing multiple recovery paths 
   to be transparent to intervening LSRs [2].  In this case, one LSP 
   (the tunnel) is established between the PSL and PML following an 
   acceptable route and a number of recovery paths are supported through 
   the tunnel via label stacking. A bypass tunnel can be used with any 
   of the path mapping options discussed in the previous section. 
    
   As with recovery paths, the bypass tunnel may or may not have 
   resource reservations sufficient to provide recovery without service 
   degradation.  It is possible that the bypass tunnel may have 
   sufficient resources to recover some number of working paths, but not 
   all at the same time.  If the number of recovery paths carrying 
   traffic in the tunnel at any given time is restricted, this is 
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 21] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   similar to the n-to-1 or n-to-m protection cases mentioned in Section 
   3.4.2. 
    
4.4.4     Recovery Granularity 
    
   Another dimension of recovery considers the amount of traffic 
   requiring protection. This may range from a fraction of a path to a 
   bundle of paths. 
    
4.4.4.1        Selective Traffic Recovery 
    
   This option allows for the protection of a fraction of traffic within 
   the same path. The portion of the traffic on an individual path that 
   requires protection is called a protected traffic portion (PTP). A 
   single path may carry different classes of traffic, with different 
   protection requirements. The protected portion of this traffic may be 
   identified by its class, as for example, via the EXP bits in the MPLS 
   shim header or via the priority bit in the ATM header. 
    
4.4.4.2        Bundling 
    
   Bundling is a technique used to group multiple working paths together 
   in order to recover them simultaneously. The logical bundling of 
   multiple working paths requiring protection, each of which is routed 
   identically between a PSL and a PML, is called a protected path group 
   (PPG). When a fault occurs on the working path carrying the PPG, the 
   PPG as a whole can be protected either by being switched to a bypass 
   tunnel or by being switched to a recovery path. 
    
4.4.5     Recovery Path Resource Use 
    
   In the case of pre-reserved recovery paths, there is the question of 
   what use these resources may be put to when the recovery path is not 
   in use.  There are two options: 
    
   Dedicated-resource: 
   If the recovery path resources are dedicated, they may not be used 
   for anything except carrying the working traffic.  For example, in 
   the case of 1+1 protection, the working traffic is always carried on 
   the recovery path.  Even if the recovery path is not always carrying 
   the working traffic, it may not be possible or desirable to allow 
   other traffic to use these resources. 
    
   Extra-traffic-allowed: 
   If the recovery path only carries the working traffic when the 
   working path fails, then it is possible to allow extra traffic to use 
   the reserved resources at other times.  Extra traffic is, by 
   definition, traffic that can be displaced (without violating service 
   agreements) whenever the recovery path resources are needed for 
   carrying the working path traffic. 
    
   Shared-resource: 

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 22] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   A shared recovery resource is dedicated for use by multiple primary 
   resources that (according to SRLGs) are not expected to fail 
   simultaneously.  
    
4.5. Fault Detection 
    
   MPLS recovery is initiated after the detection of either a lower 
   layer fault or a fault at the IP layer or in the operation of MPLS-
   based mechanisms. We consider four classes of impairments: Path 
   Failure, Path Degraded, Link Failure, and Link Degraded. 
    
   Path Failure (PF) is a fault that indicates to an MPLS-based recovery 
   scheme that the connectivity of the path is lost.  This may be 
   detected by a path continuity test between the PSL and PML.  Some, 
   and perhaps the most common, path failures may be detected using a 
   link probing mechanism between neighbor LSRs. An example of a probing 
   mechanism is a liveness message that is exchanged periodically along 
   the working path between peer LSRs [3].  For either a link probing 
   mechanism or path continuity test to be effective, the test message 
   must be guaranteed to follow the same route as the working or 
   recovery path, over the segment being tested. In addition, the path 
   continuity test must take the path merge points into consideration. 
   In the case of a bi-directional link implemented as two 
   unidirectional links, path failure could mean that either one or both 
   unidirectional links are damaged. 
    
   Path Degraded (PD) is a fault that indicates to MPLS-based recovery 
   schemes/mechanisms that the path has connectivity, but that the 
   quality of the connection is unacceptable.  This may be detected by a 
   path performance monitoring mechanism, or some other mechanism for 
   determining the error rate on the path or some portion of the path. 
   This is local to the LSR and consists of excessive discarding of 
   packets at an interface, either due to label mismatch or due to TTL 
   errors, for example. 
    
   Link Failure (LF) is an indication from a lower layer that the link 
   over which the path is carried has failed.  If the lower layer 
   supports detection and reporting of this fault (that is, any fault 
   that indicates link failure e.g., SONET LOS), this may be used by the 
   MPLS recovery mechanism. In some cases, using LF indications may 
   provide faster fault detection than using only MPLS_based fault 
   detection mechanisms. 
    
   Link Degraded (LD) is an indication from a lower layer that the link 
   over which the path is carried is performing below an acceptable 
   level.  If the lower layer supports detection and reporting of this 
   fault, it may be used by the MPLS recovery mechanism. In some cases, 
   using LD indications may provide faster fault detection than using 
   only MPLS-based fault detection mechanisms. 
    
4.6. Fault Notification 
    

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 23] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   MPLS-based recovery relies on rapid and reliable notification of 
   faults. Once a fault is detected, the node that detected the fault 
   must determine if the fault is severe enough to require path 
   recovery. If the node is not capable of initiating direct action 
   (e.g. as a point of repair, POR) the node should send out a 
   notification of the fault by transmitting a FIS to the POR. This can 
   take several forms: 
    
   (i) control plane messaging: relayed hop-by-hop along the path of the       
   failed LSP until a POR is reached.  
   (ii) user plane messaging: sent to the PML, which may take corrective 
   action (as a POR for 1+1) or then communicate with a POR (for 1:n) by 
   any of several means:  
   - control plane messaging  
   - user plane return path (either through a bi-directional LSP        
   or via other means)  
 
   Since the FIS is a control message, it should be transmitted with 
   high priority to ensure that it propagates rapidly towards the 
   affected POR(s). Depending on how fault notification is configured in 
   the LSRs of an MPLS domain, the FIS could be sent either as a Layer 2 
   or Layer 3 packet [3]. The use of a Layer 2-based notification 
   requires a Layer 2 path direct to the POR. An example of a FIS could 
   be the liveness message sent by a downstream LSR to its upstream 
   neighbor, with an optional fault notification field set or it can be 
   implicitly denoted by a teardown message. Alternatively, it could be 
   a separate fault notification packet. The intermediate LSR should 
   identify which of its incoming links to propagate the FIS on.  
    
4.7. Switch-Over Operation 
    
4.7.1     Recovery Trigger 
    
   The activation of an MPLS protection switch following the detection 
   or notification of a fault requires a trigger mechanism at the PSL. 
   MPLS protection switching may be initiated due to automatic inputs or 
   external commands. The automatic activation of an MPLS protection 
   switch results from a response to a defect or fault conditions 
   detected at the PSL or to fault notifications received at the PSL. It 
   is possible that the fault detection and trigger mechanisms may be 
   combined, as is the case when a PF, PD, LF, or LD is detected at a 
   PSL and triggers a protection switch to the recovery path. In most 
   cases, however, the detection and trigger mechanisms are distinct, 
   involving the detection of fault at some intermediate LSR followed by 
   the propagation of a fault notification to the POR via the FIS, which 
   serves as the protection switch trigger at the POR. MPLS protection 
   switching in response to external commands results when the operator 
   initiates a protection switch by a command to a POR (or alternatively 
   by a configuration command to an intermediate LSR, which transmits 
   the FIS towards the POR). 
    
   Note that the PF fault applies to hard failures (fiber cuts, 
   transmitter failures, or LSR fabric failures), as does the LF fault, 
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 24] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   with the difference that the LF is a lower layer impairment that may 
   be communicated to - MPLS-based recovery mechanisms. The PD (or LD) 
   fault, on the other hand, applies to soft defects (excessive errors 
   due to noise on the link, for instance). The PD (or LD) results in a 
   fault declaration only when the percentage of lost packets exceeds a 
   given threshold, which is provisioned and may be set based on the 
   service level agreement(s) in effect between a service provider and a 
   customer. 
    
4.7.2     Recovery Action 
    
   After a fault is detected or FIS is received by the POR, the recovery 
   action involves either a rerouting or protection switching operation. 
   In both scenarios, the next hop label forwarding entry for a recovery 
   path is bound to the working path. 
    
4.8. Post Recovery Operation 
    
   When traffic is flowing on the recovery path decisions can be made to 
   whether let the traffic remain on the recovery path and consider it 
   as a new working path or do a switch to the old or a new working 
   path. This post recovery operation has two styles, one where the 
   protection counterparts, i.e. the working and recovery path, are 
   fixed or "pinned" to its route and one in which the PSL or other 
   network entity with real time knowledge of failure dynamically 
   performs re-establishment or controlled rearrangement of the paths 
   comprising the protected service.    
    
4.8.1     Fixed Protection Counterparts 
 
   For fixed protection counterparts the PSL will be pre-configured with 
   the appropriate behavior to take when the original fixed path is 
   restored to service. The choices are revertive and non-revertive 
   mode. The choice will typically be depended on relative costs of the 
   working and protection paths, and the tolerance of the service to the 
   effects of switching paths yet again. These protection modes indicate 
   whether or not there is a preferred path for the protected traffic. 
    
4.8.1.1          Revertive Mode 
    
   If the working path always is the preferred path, this path will be 
   used whenever it is available. Thus, in the event of a fault on this 
   path, its unused resources will not be reclaimed by the network on 
   failure.  If the working path has a fault, traffic is switched to the 
   recovery path.  In the revertive mode of operation, when the 
   preferred path is restored the traffic is automatically switched back 
   to it. 
    
   There are a number of implications to pinned working and recovery 
   paths:  
   - upon failure and traffic moved to recovery path, the traffic is 
   unprotected until such time as the path defect in the original 
   working path is repaired and that path restored to service.  
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 25] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   - upon failure and traffic moved to recovery path, the resources 
   associated with the original path remain reserved.  
    
4.8.1.2        Non-revertive Mode 
    
   In the non-revertive mode of operation, there is no preferred path or 
   it may be desirable to minimize further disruption of the service 
   brought on by a revertive switching operation. A switch-back to the 
   original working path is not desired or not possible since the 
   original path may no longer exist after the occurrence of a fault on 
   that path.   
   If there is a fault on the working path, traffic is switched to the 
   recovery path. When or if the faulty path (the originally working 
   path) is restored, it may become the recovery path (either by 
   configuration, or, if desired, by management actions).  
    
   In the non-revertive mode of operation, the working traffic may or 
   may not be restored to a new optimal working path or to the original 
   working path anyway. This is because it might be useful, in some 
   cases, to either: (a) administratively perform a protection switch 
   back to the original working path after gaining further assurances 
   about the integrity of the path, or (b) it may be acceptable to 
   continue operation on the recovery path, or (c) it may be desirable 
   to move the traffic to a new optimal working path that is calculated 
   based on network topology and network policies. 
    
4.8.2     Dynamic Protection Counterparts 
    
   For dynamic protection counterparts when the traffic is switched over 
   to a recovery path, the association between the original working path 
   and the recovery path may no longer exist, since the original path 
   itself may no longer exist after the fault. Instead, when the network 
   reaches a stable state following routing convergence, the recovery 
   path may be switched over to a different preferred path either 
   optimization based on the new network topology and associated 
   information or based on pre-configured information. 
    
   Dynamic protection counterparts assume that upon failure, the PSL or 
   other network entity will establish new working paths if another 
   switch-over will be performed.  
    
4.8.3     Restoration and Notification 
    
   MPLS restoration deals with returning the working traffic from the 
   recovery path to the original or a new working path.  Reversion is 
   performed by the PSL either upon receiving notification, via FRS, 
   that the working path is repaired, or upon receiving notification 
   that a new working path is established. 
    
   For fixed counterparts in revertive mode, an LSR that detected the 
   fault on the working path also detects the restoration of the working 
   path. If the working path had experienced a LF defect, the LSR 
   detects a return to normal operation via the receipt of a liveness 
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 26] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   message from its peer. If the working path had experienced a LD 
   defect at an LSR interface, the LSR could detect a return to normal 
   operation via the resumption of error-free packet reception on that 
   interface. Alternatively, a lower layer that no longer detects a LF 
   defect may inform the MPLS-based recovery mechanisms at the LSR that 
   the link to its peer LSR is operational.  
   The LSR then transmits FRS to its upstream LSR(s) that were 
   transmitting traffic on the working path. At the point the PSL 
   receives the FRS, it switches the working traffic back to the 
   original working path. 
    
   A similar scheme is for dynamic counterparts where e.g. an update of 
   topology and/or network convergence may trigger installation or setup 
   of new working paths and may send notification to the PSL to perform 
   a switch over. 
    
   We note that if there is a way to transmit fault information back 
   along a recovery path towards a PSL and if the recovery path is an 
   equivalent working path, it is possible for the working path and its 
   recovery path to exchange roles once the original working path is 
   repaired following a fault. This is because, in that case, the 
   recovery path effectively becomes the working path, and the restored 
   working path functions as a recovery path for the original recovery 
   path. This is important, since it affords the benefits of non-
   revertive switch operation outlined in Section 3.8.1, without leaving 
   the recovery path unprotected. 
    
4.8.4     Reverting to Preferred Path (or Controlled Rearrangement) 
    
   In the revertive mode, a "make before break" restoration switching 
   can be used, which is less disruptive than performing protection 
   switching upon the occurrence of network impairments. This will 
   minimize both packet loss and packet reordering. The controlled 
   rearrangement of paths can also be used to satisfy traffic 
   engineering requirements for load balancing across an MPLS domain. 
    
4.9. Performance 
    
   Resource/performance requirements for recovery paths should be 
   specified in terms of the following attributes: 
    
   I. Resource class attribute: 
   Equivalent Recovery Class: The recovery path has the same resource 
   reservations and performance guarantees as the working path. In other 
   words, the recovery path meets the same SLAs as the working path. 
   Limited Recovery Class: The recovery path does not have the same 
   resource reservations and performance guarantees as the working path. 
    
   A. Lower Class: The recovery path has lower resource requirements or 
   less stringent performance requirements than the working path. 
    
   B. Best Effort Class: The recovery path is best effort. 
    
 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 27] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   II. Priority Attribute: 
   The recovery path has a priority attribute just like the working path 
   (i.e., the priority attribute of the associated traffic trunks). It 
   can have the same priority as the working path or lower priority. 
    
   III. Preemption Attribute: 
   The recovery path can have the same preemption attribute as the 
   working path or a lower one. 
    
5.    MPLS Recovery Features 
    
   The following features are desirable from an operational point of 
   view: 
    
   I. It is desirable that MPLS recovery provides an option to identify 
   protection groups (PPGs) and protection portions (PTPs). 
    
   II. Each PSL should be capable of performing MPLS recovery upon the 
   detection of the impairments or upon receipt of notifications of 
   impairments. 
    
   III. A MPLS recovery method should not preclude manual protection 
   switching commands. This implies that it would be possible under 
   administrative commands to transfer traffic from a working path to a 
   recovery path, or to transfer traffic from a recovery path to a 
   working path, once the working path becomes operational following a 
   fault. 
    
   IV. A PSL may be capable of performing either a switch back to the 
   original working path after the fault is corrected or a switchover to 
   a new working path, upon the discovery or establishment of a more 
   optimal working path. 
    
   V. The recovery model should take into consideration path merging at 
   intermediate LSRs. If a fault affects the merged segment, all the 
   paths sharing that merged segment should be able to recover. 
   Similarly, if a fault affects a non-merged segment, only the path 
   that is affected by the fault should be recovered. 
    
6.    Comparison Criteria 
    
   Possible criteria to use for comparison of MPLS-based recovery 
   schemes are as follows: 
    
   Recovery Time 
    
   We define recovery time as the time required for a recovery path to 
   be activated (and traffic flowing) after a fault. Recovery Time is 
   the sum of the Fault Detection Time, Hold-off Time, Notification 
   Time, Recovery Operation Time, and the Traffic Restoration Time. In 
   other words, it is the time between a failure of a node or link in 


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 28] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   the network and the time before a recovery path is installed and the 
   traffic starts flowing on it. 
    
   Full Restoration Time 
    
   We define full restoration time as the time required for a permanent 
   restoration. This is the time required for traffic to be routed onto 
   links, which are capable of or have been engineered sufficiently to 
   handle traffic in recovery scenarios. Note that this time may or may 
   not be different from the "Recovery Time" depending on whether 
   equivalent or limited recovery paths are used. 
    
   Setup vulnerability   
    
   The amount of time that a working path or a set of working paths is 
   left unprotected during such tasks as recovery path computation and 
   recovery path setup may be used to compare schemes.  The nature of 
   this vulnerability should be taken into account, e.g.:  End to End 
   schemes correlate the vulnerability with working paths, Local Repair 
   schemes have a topological correlation that cuts across working paths 
   and Network Plan approaches have a correlation that impacts the 
   entire network. 
    
   Backup Capacity 
    
   Recovery schemes may require differing amounts of "backup capacity" 
   in the event of a fault. This capacity will be dependent on the 
   traffic characteristics of the network. However, it may also be 
   dependent on the particular protection plan selection algorithms as 
   well as the signaling and re-routing methods. 
    
   Additive Latency 
    
   Recovery schemes may introduce additive latency to traffic. For 
   example, a recovery path may take many more hops than the working 
   path. This may be dependent on the recovery path selection 
   algorithms. 
    
   Quality of Protection 
    
   Recovery schemes can be considered to encompass a spectrum of "packet 
   survivability" which may range from "relative" to "absolute". 
   Relative survivability may mean that the packet is on an equal 
   footing with other traffic of, as an example, the same diff-serv code 
   point (DSCP) in contending for the resources of the portion of the 
   network that survives the failure. Absolute survivability may mean 
   that the survivability of the protected traffic has explicit 
   guarantees. 
    
   Re-ordering 
    


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 29] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   Recovery schemes may introduce re-ordering of packets. Also the 
   action of putting traffic back on preferred paths might cause packet 
   re-ordering. 
    
   State Overhead 
    
   As the number of recovery paths in a protection plan grows, the state 
   required to maintain them also grows. Schemes may require differing 
   numbers of paths to maintain certain levels of coverage, etc. The 
   state required may also depend on the particular scheme used to 
   recover. In many cases the state overhead will be in proportion to 
   the number of recovery paths. 
    
   Loss 
    
   Recovery schemes may introduce a certain amount of packet loss during 
   switchover to a recovery path. Schemes that introduce loss during 
   recovery can measure this loss by evaluating recovery times in 
   proportion to the link speed. 
    
   In case of link or node failure a certain packet loss is inevitable. 
    
   Coverage 
    
   Recovery schemes may offer various types of failover coverage. The 
   total coverage may be defined in terms of several metrics: 
 
   I. Fault Types: Recovery schemes may account for only link faults or 
   both node and link faults or also degraded service. For example, a 
   scheme may require more recovery paths to take node faults into 
   account. 
    
   II. Number of concurrent faults: dependent on the layout of recovery 
   paths in the protection plan, multiple fault scenarios may be able to 
   be restored. 
    
   III. Number of recovery paths: for a given fault, there may be one or 
   more recovery paths. 
    
   IV. Percentage of coverage: dependent on a scheme and its 
   implementation, a certain percentage of faults may be covered. This 
   may be subdivided into percentage of link faults and percentage of 
   node faults. 
    
   V. The number of protected paths may effect how fast the total set of 
   paths affected by a fault could be recovered. The ratio of protected 
   is n/N, where n is the number of protected paths and N is the total 
   number of paths. 
    
7.   Security Considerations 
    


 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 30] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


   The MPLS recovery that is specified herein does not raise any 
   security issues that are not already present in the MPLS 
   architecture. 
    
8.   Intellectual Property Considerations 
    
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in 
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this 
   document. For more information consult the online list of claimed 
   rights. 
    
9.   Acknowledgements 
    
   We would like to thank members of the MPLS WG mailing list for their 
   suggestions on the earlier versions of this draft. In particular, 
   Bora Akyol, Dave Allan, Dave Danenberg, Sharam Davari, and Neil 
   Harrison whose suggestions and comments were very helpful in revising 
   the document. 
    
   The editors would like to give very special thanks to Curtis 
   Villamizar for his careful and extremely thorough reading of the 
   document and for taking the time to provide numerous suggestions, 
   which were very helpful in the last couple of revisions of the 
   document. 
 
    
10.  Editors' Addresses 
    
   Vishal Sharma                        Fiffi Hellstrand 
   Metanoia, Inc.                       Nortel Networks 
   1600 Villa Street, Unit 352          St Eriksgatan 115  
   Mountain View, CA 94041-1174         PO Box 6701 
   Phone: (650) 386-6723                113 85 Stockholm, Sweden 
   v.sharma@ieee.org                    Phone: +46 8 5088 3687 
                                        Fiffi@nortelnetworks.com 
                                         
   
 

11.  References
                     
   [1] Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and Callon, R., "Multiprotocol Label 
      Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001. 
    
   [2] Awduche, D., Malcolm, J., Agogbua, J., O'Dell, M., McManus, J., 
      "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS", RFC 2702, 
      September 1999. 
    
   [3] Haung, C., Sharma, V., Owens, K., Makam, V. "Building Reliable 
      MPLS Networks Using a Path Protection Mechanism", IEEE Commun. 
      Mag., Vol. 40, Issue 3, March 2002, pp. 156-162. 
    

 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 31] 
Internet Draft     draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-07.txt September 2002 


                                                                                                                                                  
   [4] Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., "Resource 
      ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional 
      Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 
    
   [5] Awduche, D., et al "RSVP-TE Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", 
      RFC 3209, December 2001.  
        
   [6] Jamoussi, B., et al "Constraint-Based LSP Setup using LDP", RFC 
      3212, January 2002. 
    
 
 








































 
Sharma, Hellstrand, Eds.    Expires March 2003               [Page 32] 
