



Internet Architecture Board                                       J. Yao
Internet-Draft                                                     CNNIC
Intended status: Informational                              July 1, 2021
Expires: January 2, 2022


             Setting Up A special day for the IETF outreach
               draft-yao-iab-special-day-for-outreach-00

Abstract

   Outreach is very important for IETF's development.  This document
   suggests to set up a special day for the IETF outreach.  This day can
   be used to propaganda the Internet standards, promote their
   deployment, and attract more new IETFers to join IETF to contribute
   to the Internet.  This day can be called Internet Standards Day.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                outreach-day                     July 2021


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Why should IAB care for the Outreach? . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Motivation of having a Special Day for outreach . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Current Practice of the Special Day in other organizations  .   4
     4.1.  World Standards Day set up by IEC, ISO and ITU  . . . . .   4
     4.2.  International Internet Day set up by UN . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.3.  World IPv6 Day set up by ISOC . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.4.  Data Privacy Day set up by the Council of Europe  . . . .   5
   5.  Suggested Date of Internet Standards Day  . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Organization of Internet Standards Day  . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   Outreach, as the name implies, is an active form of reaching out to
   other groups or persons to create a possible partnership or share the
   information.  This may lead to attract more people to join IETF and
   contribute to IETF's work.  This may also help to improve the
   relationships between IETF and other SDOs.

   IETF standards are key to make Internet run better.  Outreach is very
   important for IETF's development.  This document suggests to set up a
   special day for the IETF outreach.  This day can be used to
   propaganda the Internet standards, promote their deployment, and
   attract more new IETFers to join IETF to contribute to the Internet.
   This day can be called Internet Standards Day.  At that day, every
   IETFer can broadcast IETF's message on all available channels all
   over the world, and transmit the IETF's message to the right
   audiences.

2.  Why should IAB care for the Outreach?

   Firstly, the Internet Architecture Board provides long-range
   technical direction for Internet development, ensuring the Internet
   continues to grow and evolve as a platform for global communication
   and innovation.  In order to reach this aim, IETF needs to attract
   more people and new generation to join.  IETF outreach plays a key
   role for fulfilling this aim.

   Secondly, the IAB is responsible for liaising with other
   organizations on behalf of the IETF.  Outreach also helps the liaison
   work of IAB.



Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                outreach-day                     July 2021


   Thirdly, if there has a special day to call IETFers and volunteers
   all over the world to action together to promote the IETF value and
   culture, it will help IETF's protocol to prevail in the Internet,
   which will help to ensure the Internet continues to grow and evolve.

3.  Motivation of having a Special Day for outreach

   Currently, there are two kind of community IETF can reach usually
   through IETF channels.  One is Direct Community, which can be
   regarded as RFC Producers.  The direct community includes those who
   join the IETF mailing lists, who write RFCs and drafts, who join IETF
   discussion.  The other is Indirect Community, which can be regarded
   as RFC Consumers.  The indirect community includes those who read
   RFCs, who apply RFCs into the products and operations, and who follow
   RFCs.  Many IETFers are not only RFC producers but also RFC
   consumers.

   According to the IETF survey in early 2021, there are around 50K
   subscribed email address over all active mailing lists, 13K followers
   of @IETF on Twitter, 5.1K followers of the IETF YouTube channels,
   6670 datatracker user records, 6336 number of unique email addresses
   across I-D authors, I-D submitters, posters to ietf.org email lists,
   and IETF meeting registrants in 2020.  This is the total number of
   people IETF can directly reach.  The number is less than 100K.

   The global digital population as of January 2021 is around 4.6
   billions.  With the explosive growth of Internet, the IETF also needs
   to reach more people and new generation.  The new people and
   generation can contribute to the IETF standards, help the deployment
   of IETF standards, and become the new strength of IETF.

   It is necessary to let IETF protocols and IETF culture to more people
   and new generation.  IETF needs an effective outreach strategy to
   reach more.  There are various outreach strategies that can be used.
   The most common outreach strategies include passive outreach such as
   social media and blogger outreach, and active outreach such as
   influencer outreach.  Social media has become an incredible tool for
   reaching audience and building brand awareness.  Many modern audience
   do not trust something that lack a social media presence.  Social
   media is a medium by which IETF can share IETF's activity.

   An active approach can be taken via influencer outreach to engage the
   audience further.  Influencers outreach are often more engaged and
   have a strong emotional connection in different places in the world.
   Influencer outreach can propaganda and recommend something through
   their channels.  Both active outreach and passive outreach are very
   important.  Taking a multifaceted approach is key to the effective




Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                outreach-day                     July 2021


   outreach.  Great outreach does not happen by magic.  It takes hard
   work, research, and dedication.

   Outreaching separately can not have a strong influence.  More hands
   together will produce a stronger flame, helping IETF to outreach
   more.  The main motivation for setting up a special day was to
   collect all IETFers' strength together to make it work strongly.
   During the special day, both active outreach and passive outreach can
   be used.  During this special day, IETFers, companies, industry
   players and any organizations or individuals who are interested in
   IETF can help to do something.  An additional goal was to motivate
   organizations across the industry Internet service providers,
   hardware makers, operating system vendors, web companies and more to
   help to promote the deployment of some IETF protocols, such as IPv6.

   Many organizations have their own special day to action together to
   promote their value and activities.  IETF needs its own special day,
   which can promote IETF value, celebrate IETF technology, and attract
   the future IETFers.

4.  Current Practice of the Special Day in other organizations

   Different organizations normally set different special days for
   outreaching or celebrating.  Below are some examples.

4.1.  World Standards Day set up by IEC, ISO and ITU

   Each year on 14 October, the members of the IEC, ISO and ITU
   celebrate World Standards Day, which is a means of paying tribute to
   the collaborative efforts of thousands of experts worldwide who
   develop the voluntary technical agreements that are published as
   International Standards.  World Standards Day 2020's theme is
   Protecting the planet with standards.

4.2.  International Internet Day set up by UN

   International Internet Day is on 29th October every year.  It aims to
   honour a momentous day in the history of telecommunications and
   technology.  This day also highlights the sending of the 1st
   electronic message which was conveyed from one computer to another
   computer in the year 1969.  It was celebrated for the first time on
   October 29, 2005.  At the World Summit on the Information Society
   celebrated in Tunisia in November 2005, it was decided to propose to
   the UN the designation of October 29 as the World-wide Day of the
   Information Society, which resulted in Internet Day being celebrated
   on that day.





Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                outreach-day                     July 2021


4.3.  World IPv6 Day set up by ISOC

   World IPv6 Day was a technical testing and publicity event in 2011
   sponsored and organized by the Internet Society (ISOC) and several
   large Internet content services to test and promote public IPv6
   deployment.  Following the success of the 2011 test day, the Internet
   Society carried out a World IPv6 Launch day on June 6, 2012 which,
   instead of just a test day, was planned to permanently enable IPv6
   for the products and services of the participants.

4.4.  Data Privacy Day set up by the Council of Europe

   Data Privacy Day was originally established as European Data
   Protection Day by the Council of Europe in 2007 to raise awareness of
   data privacy issues and promote data protection best practices.  Each
   year, Data Privacy Day is celebrated on January 28 to commemorate the
   signing of the first legally binding international data protection
   treaty. 28 January 2014 is International Data Privacy Day, and IETF
   lets Alissa Cooper say a few words about how IETF are working on
   privacy topics.  It is an opportunity to promote user empowerment and
   education about protecting personal data.

5.  Suggested Date of Internet Standards Day

   On April 7, 1969, the very first Request for Comments or RFC was
   issued by Steve Crocker.  This RFC 1 marks the beginning of IETF
   standards although the first IETF meeting happened after many years.
   RFC 1 defines the IMP software used in the communication between
   hosts on the ARPAnet and makes for interesting reading today.  Back
   in 1999, on the same day, Steve offered some reflections in RFC 2555
   [RFC2555]named with 30 years of RFCs that included this bit about how
   it began.  On the same day of 2009, RFC 5540 [RFC5540] named with 40
   Years of RFCs was published.  On the same day of 2019, RFC 8700
   [RFC8700]named with 50 Years of RFCs was published.  The RFC will be
   published to mark the first RFC on April 7, every 10 years from 1999.

   This document suggests that April 7 every year is set to be the
   Internet Standards Day. It marks the first RFC.  Let's all IETFer
   action together at that day to outreach to promote RFCs and IETF.

6.  Organization of Internet Standards Day

   Internet Standards Day is a special day that can be used for all
   IETFers to promote IETF's activity.  Different people have different
   definition about the outreach, but at the Internet Standards Day,
   people from all over the world can action together.

   o  Some may do technical outreach for improvment of IETF protocols.



Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                outreach-day                     July 2021


   o  Some may do education outreach to raise the visibility of the IETF
      and the importance of standards.

   o  Some may do the coordination work among SDOs.

   o  Some may go to universities and research instituities.

   o  Some may do ...

   o  Others may do ...

   Organizing an event is not easy.  There are a few steps that we may
   keep in mind.

   o  Before each Internet Standards Day, IETF can call for the topics/
      themes of the year.

   o  IETF discusses the topics/themes, and finally decides the year's
      theme.

   o  Call for volunteers to form the community.

   o  Allocate responsibilities within the community.

   o  Announce the theme via social medias, bloggers, and email lists.

   o  All interested IETFers outreach and action together on Internet
      Standards Day.

   o  Ask for feedback after the event.

   Each year we can have a different theme.  For example, we can promote
   QUIC, IPv6, or DOH/DOT in each different year.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require action by IANA.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document does not have any direct security impact; however, this
   document will help IETF's development; failing to do so might have
   negative effect in the long term.








Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                outreach-day                     July 2021


9.  Acknowledgements

   Some ideas are from discussion with the members from IAB, IESG and
   ISOC, especially from Deborah Brungard, Alvaro Retana and Zhenbin Li.

10.  Informative References

   [RFC2555]  Editor, RFC. and et. al., "30 Years of RFCs", RFC 2555,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2555, April 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2555>.

   [RFC5540]  Editor, RFC., "40 Years of RFCs", RFC 5540,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5540, April 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5540>.

   [RFC8700]  Flanagan, H., Ed., "Fifty Years of RFCs", RFC 8700,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8700, December 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8700>.

Author's Address

   Jiankang Yao
   CNNIC
   4 South 4th Street,Zhongguancun,Haidian District
   Beijing, Beijing  100190
   China

   Phone: +86 10 5881 3007
   Email: yaojk@cnnic.cn






















Yao                      Expires January 2, 2022                [Page 7]