



SPRING Working Group                                      Sanjoy Bardhan
Internet-Draft                                            Madhukar Anand
Intended Status: Informational                       Ramesh Subrahmaniam
                                                    Infinera Corporation
                                                           Jeff Tantsura
                                                              Individual
Expires: January 7, 2017                                    July 7, 2016


         OAM for Packet-Optical Integration in Segment Routing 
                   draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00


Abstract

   This document describes a list of functional requirements for
   transport segment OAM in Segment Routing (SR) based networks. 




Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

 


bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00       July 7, 2016


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Detailed Requirement List  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
























 


bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00       July 7, 2016


1  Introduction

   [I-D.filsfils-rtgwg-segment-routing] introduces and explains Segment 
   Routing architecture that leverages source routing and tunneling  
   standards which can be applied directly to MPLS dataplane with no   
   changes on forwarding plane and on IPv6 dataplane with new Routing  
   Extension Header. In addition [I-D. draft-anand-spring-poi-sr]
   introduces the concept of a Transport Segment at the edge of the
   packet and optical network that represents the optical path taken for
   a given flow. This document is a place holder to identify and list
   the OAM requirements for Segment Routing based network which can
   further be extended to produce OAM tools for path liveliness and
   service validation across the optical domain using Transport
   Segments.


1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

      SR: Segment Routing

      Initiator: Centralized OAM initiator

      POG: Packet Optical Gateway that interworks between a packet and
   optical network


2.  Detailed Requirement List

   This section list the OAM requirement for Transport Segments in a
   Segment Routing based network.  The below listed requirements MUST be
   supported within an optical dataplane. 


   REQ#1:  Transport Segment OAM SHOULD support Continuity Check
   (liveliness of a path - BFD), Connectivity Verification (BFD, Ping),
   Fault Verification - exercised on demand to validate the reported
   fault (Ping).

   REQ#2:   Transport Segment OAM MUST support both On-demand and
   Continuous OAM functionality.

   REQ#3:   Transport Segment OAM packet MUST follow exactly the same
   path as the dataplane traffic.

 


bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00       July 7, 2016


   REQ#4:   The Transport Segment  OAM packet MUST have the ability to
   exercise any available paths as defined by the transport segment
   label.

   REQ#5:   Transport Segment OAM SHOULD have the ability to allow the
   Initiator to add the Remote Transport Label and control the return
   path from egress responder. draft-ietf-mpls-bfd-directed has provided
   the semantics of a return path which would suit this need. 


   REQ#6:   Transport Segment OAM MUST have the ability to be
   initialized from an ingress POG node to perform connectivity
   verification and continuity check to any remote POG  within the same
   optical domain ID based on the declared Transport Segment Label. 

   REQ#7:   In case of any failure with continuity check, Transport
   Segment OAM Layer SHOULD support rapid Connectivity Fault
   notification to the Packet Control plane of the POG to withdraw the
   Transport Segment Label associated with the affected path and/or take
   a local protection action.

   REQ#8:  Transport Segment OAM SHOULD also have the ability to be
   initialized from a centralized controller.

   REQ#9:  When Transport Segment OAM is initialized from centralized
   controller, the node on receiving the alert MAY take a local
   protection action and/or  pop an informational message.

   REQ#10:  When Transport Segment OAM is initialized, it SHOULD support
   node redundancy based on network configuration.  If primary Initiator
   fails, secondary one MUST take over the responsibility without having
   any impact on customer traffic.

   REQ#11:  Transport Segment OAM MUST have the ability to measure
   bidirectional packet loss, throughput measurement, delay variation,
   as well as unidirectional and dyadic measurements.

   REQ#12:  When a new path is instantiated, Transport Segment OAM
   SHOULD allow path verification without noticeable delay. It may be
   desired to check for liveliness of the optical path using Transport
   Segment OAM before announcing the Transport Segment. 

   REQ#13:  The above listed requirements SHOULD be supported without
   any scalability limitation imposed and SHOULD be extensible to
   accommodate any new SR functionality.

   REQ#14:  Transport Segment OAM SHOULD maintain per Transport label
   state entry at the originating POG.  
 


bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00       July 7, 2016


   REQ#15:  When traffic engineering is initiated by centralized
   controller device, and when Transport Segment OAM is performed by
   POGs, there MUST be a mechanism to communicate the failure to a
   centralized controller device.

   REQ#16: When a local repair in the optical network takes place, the
   characteristics of the path between the POGS may have changed. If
   there is significant change in the path characteristics based on
   thresholds, the ingress POG SHALL trigger a re-advertisement of the
   transport segment label at the global level. 

   REQ#17: The format of the Transport Segment OAM Ping packet SHALL
   follow RFC 4379.

   REQ#18: The format of the Transport Segment OAM BFD packet SHALL
   follow RFC 5884.
































 


bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00       July 7, 2016


3  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any new security considerations.


4  IANA Considerations

   TBD.


5  References

5.1  Normative References


              [I-D.ietf-spring-segment-routing]        Filsfils, C.,
              Previdi, S., Decraene, B., Litkowski, S.,        and r.
              rjs@rob.sh, "Segment Routing Architecture", draft-       
              ietf-spring-segment-routing-04 (work in progress), July   
                  2015.

              [I-D.ietf-mpls-bfd-directed]         Mirsky, G., Tantsura,
              J., Varlashkin, I., and M. Chen,         "Bidirectional
              Forwarding Detection (BFD) Directed Return         Path",
              draft-ietf-mpls-bfd-directed-02 (work in progress),       
               March 2016.

              [I-D.draft-anand-spring-poi-sr-01]        Madhukar Anand,
              Sanjoy Bardhan, Ramesh Subrahmaniam, Tantsura, J.       
              "Packet-Optical Integration in Segment Routing",  draft-
              anand-spring-poi-sr-01        (work in progress), July
              2016.


5.2  Informative References



Authors' Addresses



      Sanjoy Bardhan
      Infinera Corporation
      169 W Java Dr, Sunnyvale, CA 94089

      Email: sbardhan@infinera.com

 


bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     draft-bardhan-spring-poi-sr-oam-00       July 7, 2016


      Madhukar Anand
      Infinera Corporation
      169 W Java Dr, Sunnyvale, CA 94089

      Email: manand@infinera.com


      Ramesh Subrahmaniam
      Infinera Corporation
      169 W Java Dr, Sunnyvale, CA 94089

      Email: RSubrahmaniam@infinera.com

      Jeff Tantsura

      Email: jefftant.ietf@gmail.com



Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Krish Verma for his comments and
   review of this document.




























bardhan et al.,         Expires January 7, 2017                 [Page 7]
