



DNSSD Working Group                                          T. Pusateri
Internet-Draft                                              Unaffiliated
Intended status: Standards Track                           March 6, 2019
Expires: September 7, 2019


                 DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery
                  draft-pusateri-dnssd-update-proxy-01

Abstract

   This document describes a method to dynamically map multicast DNS
   announcements into the unicast DNS namespace for use by service
   discovery clients.  It does not define any new protocols but uses
   existing DNS protocols in new ways.  This solves existing problems
   with service discovery across multiple IP subnets in a simple, yet
   efficient, manner.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  DNS Subdomain Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Subdomain Naming  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Domain Name Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Client Service Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Update Proxy Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  mDNS Service Announcements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Service Caching and Refresh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  mDNS Probing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.4.  Link-local Addressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.5.  IPv6 and IPv4 on Same Link  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.6.  Multiple Logical IP Subnets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.7.  Proxy Redundancy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.8.  Service Filtering and Translation . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  DNS UPDATE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Selection of Authoritative Unicast DNS Server . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  DNS UPDATE Sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       5.2.1.  Zone Section  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       5.2.2.  Prerequisite Section  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       5.2.3.  Update Section  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       5.2.4.  Additional Data Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  DNS Authoritative Server Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.1.  DNS Push Notifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.2.  DNSSEC Compatibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.3.  DNS Update Record Lifetimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7.  Transitioning to Unicast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Appendix A.  Comparison to Discovery Proxy  . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

1.  Introduction

   Multicast DNS is used today for link-local service discovery.  While
   this has worked reasonably well on the local link, current deployment
   reveals two problems.  First, mDNS wasn't designed to traverse across
   multi-subnet campus networks.  Second, IP multicast doesn't work
   across all link types and can be problematic on 802.11 Wifi networks.
   Therefore, a solution is desired to contain legacy multicast DNS
   service discovery and transition to a unicast DNS service discovery



Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   model.  By mapping the current mDNS discovered services into regular
   authoritative unicast DNS servers, clients from any IP subnet can
   make unicast queries through normal unicast DNS resolvers.

   There are many ways to map services discovered using multicast DNS
   into the unicast namespace.  This document describes a way to do the
   mapping using a proxy that sends DNS UPDATE messages [RFC2136]
   directly to an authoritative unicast DNS server.  While it is
   possible for each host providing a service to send it's own DNS
   UPDATE, key management has prevented widespread deployment of DNS
   UPDATEs across a domain.  By having a limited number of proxies
   sitting on one or more IP subnets, it is possible to provide secure
   DNS updates at a manageable scale.  Future work to automate secure
   DNS UPDATEs on a larger scale is needed.

   This document will explain how services on each .local domain will be
   mapped into the unicast DNS namespace and how unicast clients will
   discover these services.  It is important to note that no changes are
   required in either the clients, DNS authoritative servers, or DNS
   resolver infrastructure.  In addition, while the Update proxy is a
   new logical concept, it requires no new protocols to be defined and
   can be built using existing DNS libraries.

   An Update proxy is an ideal service to run on routers and/or switches
   to map local services into a larger network infrastructure.

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.  These words may also appear in this
   document in lower case as plain English words, absent their normative
   meanings.

3.  DNS Subdomain Model

   Each .local domain which logically maps to an IP subnet is modeled as
   a separate subdomain in the unicast DNS hierarchy.  Each of these
   subdomains must be browsable (respond to PTR queries for "b._dns-
   sd._udp.<subdomain>.").  See Section 11 of [RFC6763] for more details
   about browsing.  In the context of the Update proxy, these subdomains
   are typically special use subdomains for mDNS mappings.







Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


3.1.  Subdomain Naming

   The browseable subdomain label is prepended to the domain name and
   separated by a period.  See [RFC7719] for more information on
   subdomains and labels.  It is not important that the label be human
   readable or have organizational significance.  End users will not be
   interacting with these labels.  The main requirement is that they be
   unique within the domain for each IP subnet.  Subdomain labels can be
   obtained by the proxy in several ways.  The following methods should
   be attempted in order to assure consistency among redundant proxies:

   1.  address-derived domain enumeration through local resolver

       The proxy issues a PTR query for the registration or browse
       domains based on the IP subnet.  Separate queries are performed
       for IPv4 and IPv6 on the same link since they are different IP
       subnets.  Since the Update proxy will be registering services
       with DNS UPDATE, it should begin querying for registration
       domains and fallback to browse domains if no registration domains
       are configured.

       As an example, suppose a proxy was connected to IPv4 subnet
       "203.0.113.0/24".  In order to determine if there was a subdomain
       name for this subnet, the base domain name to query would be
       derived as "0.113.0.203.in-addr.arpa."  The proxy would issue a
       PTR query for the following names in order to find the subdomain
       for the IP subnet:

       "dr._dns-sd._udp.0.113.0.203.in-addr.arpa."
       "r._dns-sd._udp.0.113.0.203.in-addr.arpa."
       "db._dns-sd._udp.0.113.0.203.in-addr.arpa."
       "b._dns-sd._udp.0.113.0.203.in-addr.arpa."
       "lb._dns-sd._udp.0.113.0.203.in-addr.arpa."

       The first response with an answer should be the subdomain name
       including the domain name for the network and further queries
       through this list are not needed.  If multiple answers are
       returned in the same response, any one of the answers can be used
       but the proxy should only use a single subdomain name for the IP
       subnet.

       The Update proxy should periodically rediscover the subdomain
       name at approximately 5 minute intervals for each IP subnet
       adding appropriate random jitter across IP subnets so as to
       prevent synchronization.

   2.  proxy local configuration override




Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


       If no answer is returned, the proxy may have local configuration
       containing a subdomain name for the network.  If so, this
       subdomain should be used.

   3.  algorithmic subdomain label generation

       If no local configuration is present for the IP subnet, the proxy
       may generate a unique label and use that for the subdomain by
       appending a common domain name.  One such algorithm is to take
       the network form of an IPv4 subnet without a prefix length (host
       portion all zeros) and convert it to a hexadecimal string.  This
       will give a 8 character unique string to use as a subdomain
       label.  For the example above, this label would be "cb007100".

   In the cases where through either local configuration or algorithmic
   generation of subdomain names, a subdomain name is known by the proxy
   but cannot be address derived through a PTR query, the Update proxy
   SHOULD register the appropriate address-derived enumeration records
   through an UPDATE to the zone master.  If the IP subnet is removed or
   becomes inactive on the Update proxy, the proxy MUST attempt to
   remove these records.

3.2.  Domain Name Discovery

   The base domain name to use for each subdomain also has to be
   discovered on a per IP subnet basis.  In most cases, the domain name
   will be the same for all IP subnets because they are all contained in
   a single administrative domain.  However, this is not required and a
   proxy administrator may need to span multiple administrative
   boundaries requiring different domain names on different IP subnets
   (and therefore, subdomains).

   There is not a direct query to discover a separate domain name but
   the domain name is included with the subdomain in the response to the
   PTR query above in Section 3.1.  If the PTR query returns an empty
   response, then the domain name can be obtained from local proxy
   configuration and if no domain name is specified there, the default
   domain for the host should be used.

3.3.  Client Service Discovery

   Fortunately, clients performing service discovery require no changes
   in order to work with the Update proxy.  Existing clients already
   support wide-area bonjour which specifies how to query search domains
   and subdomains for services.  See section 11 of [RFC6763].

   However, in order for clients to discover the subdomain for each IP
   subnet, the subdomain MUST be browseable and a browse record for the



Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   domain must enumerate all of the subdomains.  If the domain records
   do not exist, the Update proxy MUST create them in the domain and
   MUST ensure each subdomain is browseable.

   In the future, authoritative unicast DNS servers may add support for
   DNS Push Notifications [I-D.ietf-dnssd-push] which would allow
   clients to maintain long lived subscriptions to services.  Clients
   may also wish to add support for this feature to provide an efficient
   alternative to polling.

4.  Update Proxy Behavior

   Since no new protocols are defined, this document mostly describes
   the expected behavior of the Update proxy and how it uses existing
   protocols to achieve multi IP subnet service discovery.  The behavior
   is mostly intuitive but is described to ensure compatibility and
   completeness.

4.1.  mDNS Service Announcements

   The Update proxy should listen to mDNS service announcements
   (responses) on all interfaces it is proxying for.  Multiple Update
   proxies can be active on the same IP subnet at the same time.  See
   [RFC6762] for more information on multicast DNS.

4.2.  Service Caching and Refresh

   As specified in Section 8.3 of [RFC6762], service announcements are
   sent multiple times for redundancy.  However, there is no need to
   send duplicate UPDATE messages to the authoritative unicast DNS
   server.  Therefore, the Update proxy should cache service
   announcements and only send DNS UPDATE messages when needed.

   As described in Section 8.4 of [RFC6762], a host may send "goodbye"
   announcements by setting the TTL to 0.  In this case, the record MUST
   be removed from the cache or otherwise marked as expired and a DNS
   UPDATE should be sent to the authoritative unicast DNS server
   removing the record.

   The Update proxy MUST also remove/expire old cache entries and remove
   the records from the authoritative unicast DNS server when the cache-
   flush bit is set on new announcements as described in Section 10.2 of
   [RFC6762].

   A host providing a service may automatically refresh the TTL in the
   announcement from time to time keeping the service valid based on
   subsequent multicast queries it receives.  However, if no mDNS
   clients are requesting the particular service for the length of the



Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   TTL value, the service announcement could timeout naturally.  In
   order to keep accurate information regarding all of the services on
   the IP subnet, the Update proxy SHOULD send a unicast PTR query for
   the service name directly to the host announcing the service.  This
   query should be sent at a random time between 5 and 10 seconds before
   the TTL value indicates the announcement will expire.

   As described in Section 11 of [RFC6762], the Update proxy should use
   an IP source address of the IP subnet of the interface it is
   transmitting over and that is on the same IP subnet as the service
   provider.  It is also permissible to use a link-local IP address in
   the IPv6 case as long as the service itself is available on an IPv6
   address that is reachable from outside the local link.

   In order for the Update proxy to discover as many services available
   on each IP subnet as possible, it should periodically send a PTR
   multicast query for "_services._dns-sd._udp.local." on each subnet.
   The unicast response bit SHOULD be set in the query in order to force
   unicast responses to the Update proxy.  As PTR responses are
   received, The Update proxy can then send Service Instance Enumeration
   PTR queries (also with the unicast response bit set) for each
   service.

   This was not the intended behavior of mDNS since local clients would
   just ask dynamically when they needed to know all of the providers of
   a service name but keeping this information up to date in the
   authoritative server provides benefits to remote clients such as
   faster response times and ability to use DNSSEC validation that were
   not previously possible with multicast DNS.  These benefits are
   provided at the additional cost of a slight increase in network
   activity and processing time by the hosts announcing services.
   However, if the Update proxy uses unicast to query the service
   providers directly, other clients are not affected by these refresh
   queries and do not have to turn their radios on for queries/responses
   that they have no interest in.

4.3.  mDNS Probing

   While Section 8.2 of [RFC6762] recommends all potential answers be
   included in mDNS probe queries, because these records haven't gone
   through conflict resolution, they should not be regarded as
   announcements of services.  Therefore, an Update proxy MUST NOT rely
   on information in any section of DNS query messages.








Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


4.4.  Link-local Addressing

   In the IPv6 case, the source address of the announcements is a link-
   local IPv6 address that will probably be different than the IP subnet
   that the service is being provided on.  However, it is certainly
   possible that link-local addressing is used with IPv4 as well.  This
   is not as common but exists in a zero-conf environment where no IPv4
   addresses are assigned via DHCP or statically and the hosts revert to
   link-local IPv4 addresses ("169.254/16"), see [RFC3927].

   If the service SRV target resolves to only a link-local address, then
   the service is not eligible to be advertised outside of the link and
   shouldn't be sent to the authoritative unicast DNS server by the
   Update proxy.

   In general, the Update proxy needs to ensure that the service is
   reachable outside of the link it is announced on before sending an
   UPDATE to the authoritative server for the subdomain.

4.5.  IPv6 and IPv4 on Same Link

   Announced services may be available on IPv4, IPv6, or both on the
   same link.  If both IPv4 A records [RFC1035] and IPv6 AAAA records
   [RFC3596] are published for an SRV target [RFC2782] name, the
   administrator should provide the service over both protocols.

   In some cases, this won't be possible.  This will not incur any extra
   delays if clients attempt connections over both IPv4 and IPv6
   protocols simultaneously but if one protocol is preferred over
   another, delays may occur.

4.6.  Multiple Logical IP Subnets

   Multiple IP subnets on the same link is just a more general case of
   IPv4 and IPv6 on the same link.  When multiple IP subnets exist for
   the same protocol on the same link, they appear as separate
   interfaces to the Update proxy and require a separate subdomain name
   just as IPv4 and IPv6 do.

   This is required for a client on one logical IP subnet of an
   interface to communicate with a service provided by a host on a
   different IP subnet of the same link.

   If a SRV target resolves to addresses on multiple logical IP subnets
   of the same interface, the service can be included in multiple
   subdomains on the appropriate server(s) for those subdomains.





Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


4.7.  Proxy Redundancy

   Providing redundant Update proxies for the same IP subnet can be
   easily achieved by virtue of the DNS UPDATE protocol.  None of the
   redundant proxies needs to be aware of any of the other redundant
   proxies on an IP subnet.

   Alternatives for ways to format DNS UPDATE messages are defined below
   in Section 5.2.2 as to possible uses of the Prerequisite section for
   use with redundant Update proxies.

   Alternatively, a proxy MAY choose to hibernate when it discovers
   another active Update proxy as described below in Section 7.

4.8.  Service Filtering and Translation

   In the process of registering services with an authoritative unicast
   DNS server, the proxy can perform filtering and translation on the
   dynamically discovered services.

   As an example, suppose legacy printers are discovered that do not
   support the current AirPrint feature set.  The proxy can alter the
   TXT record associated with the printer to add the necessary keys as
   well as any additional service records to allow AirPrint clients to
   discover and use the legacy printer.

   As another example, suppose there is a printer that is behind a
   locked door where students do not have access.  In this case, the
   printer's resource records MAY be filtered by the proxy so it does
   not show up during a browse operation on the subnet.

   An Update proxy could have rulesets that define the translations it
   performs on the fly as is learns about matching services.

5.  DNS UPDATE

   While DNS UPDATE is well supported in authoritative DNS servers, it
   typically requires some form of authentication for the server to
   accept the update.  The most common form is TSIG [RFC2845],[RFC4635]
   which is based on a shared secret and a one way hash over the
   contents of the record.

   The Update proxy doesn't dictate a method of privacy or
   authentication for communication to an authoritative DNS UPDATE
   server.  However, implementations SHOULD ensure some form of
   authentication exists and even refuse to operate in an environment
   without authentication.




Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


5.1.  Selection of Authoritative Unicast DNS Server

   The Update proxy should attempt to locate the authoritative DNS
   UPDATE server for each subdomain in the following manner:

   1.  An Update proxy should first send an SRV query for "_dns-update-
       tls._tcp.<subdomain>."  If an answer is received, the target and
       port number will provide the parameters needed for where to send
       updates.  The proxy can also try the TCP and UDP variants of this
       service name "_dns-update._tcp" and "_dns-update._udp" if the TLS
       variant does not exist.  If no TLS variant is found, the proxy
       can still attempt a TLS connection on the SRV port of the TCP or
       UDP variant.  The proxy can also attempt to connect to the target
       on the reserved port (853) for DNS over TLS as defined in
       Section 3.1 of [RFC7858].

   2.  The Update proxy can make a similar query for the same service in
       the domain if a subdomain specific answer isn't returned: "_dns-
       update-tls._tcp.<domain>." as well as the TCP and UDP variants.

   3.  If no matching SRV records are returned, the Update proxy SHOULD
       consult local configuration policy to see if an DNS UPDATE server
       has been configured.

   4.  If no local configuration exists for a DNS UPDATE server, the
       Update proxy can query the SOA records for the subdomain and try
       sending updates to the MNAME master server configured for the
       subdomain.  Again, using TLS/TCP is encouraged if available.

   5.  If DNS UPDATEs are not accepted by the server(s) represented by
       the SOA MNAME master server, then the Update proxy can assume
       that DNS UPDATEs are not available for the subdomain and
       listening to mDNS announcements on the IP subnet would be
       unproductive.

5.2.  DNS UPDATE Sections

   A DNS UPDATE message contains four sections as specified in
   [RFC2136].

5.2.1.  Zone Section

   When an Update proxy is adding or removing services to/from a
   subdomain, the zone section MUST contain a single zone (ZOCOUNT = 1)
   and the ZNAME MUST be the subdomain being updated.  ZTYPE MUST be SOA
   and ZCLASS MUST be the same class as the records being added/removed.





Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   DNS UPDATEs to multiple subdomains MUST be performed in separate DNS
   UPDATE messages with one subdomain per message.

   If a new subdomain is being created for a domain by the Update proxy,
   the subdomain's parent zone should be used for the ZNAME.  ZTYPE MUST
   be SOA and ZCLASS MUST be the same class as the subdomain's NS record
   CLASS that is going to be added.  Similarly for removing a subdomain.

5.2.2.  Prerequisite Section

   It is not necessary for the Update proxy to include any prerequisites
   when adding/removing records.  However, if the Update proxy wants to
   have better error handling, it can add prerequisites to ensure the
   state of the authoritative server is consistent.

   Given that multiple Update proxies may exist for the same IP subnet
   (and subdomain), it is possible that similar records may be added or
   deleted to/from the authoritative server before the Update proxy's
   own messages are processed.  This is not to be considered a fatal
   error and may happen during normal operation of redundant proxies.
   The use of prerequisite can be used to identify these cases if
   desired.

5.2.3.  Update Section

   The Update section contains all of the records that the proxy wants
   to be added/removed in a single subdomain.  If TIMEOUT resource
   records are being manually added to the authoritative server, they
   MUST be included as regular resource records in the Update section.
   See Section 6.3 below for more information.

5.2.4.  Additional Data Section

   The Update proxy may include additional data as needed.  Instances
   where additional data might be included are:

   1.  When creating a subdomain by adding new NS records to a domain, A
       or AAAA glue records MAY be needed.  Though, in most cases, the
       same authoritative server name / IP addresses should be used as
       in the parent domain.

   2.  If including a lease lifetime as discussed below in Section 6.3,
       the OPT recording containing the Update lease will be sent in the
       additional data section.

   3.  The TSIG cryptographic signature of the DNS UPDATE message should
       be the last resource record in the additional data section.




Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


6.  DNS Authoritative Server Behavior

   The Update proxy will rely on the authoritative server to update the
   SERIAL number for the zone after each update is completed.

6.1.  DNS Push Notifications

   An authoritative unicast DNS server MAY support DNS Push
   notifications [I-D.ietf-dnssd-push] for client queries in order to
   provide more timely and more efficient responses.  While this is
   outside of the scope of the Update proxy, it is mentioned here for
   completeness.

6.2.  DNSSEC Compatibility

   With mDNS, the next domain name field in an NSEC record could not
   reference the next record in the zone because it was not possible to
   know all of the records in the zone a priori.  By mapping all known
   records into a unicast subdomain, the NSEC next domain name field can
   contain the next known record as defined.  As new services are
   discovered and UPDATEd in the authoritative unicast DNS server, the
   NSEC records can be kept up to date by the authoritative server.

   The Update proxy will assume that DNS updates sent to zones with
   DNSSEC enabled will be updated as needed as specified in [RFC3007].

6.3.  DNS Update Record Lifetimes

   When the Update proxy sends an DNS UPDATE message to an authoritative
   unicast DNS server, it MAY include a lease lifetime to indicate how
   long the UPDATE server should keep the resource records active in the
   zone.  This is different from the TTL which tells resolvers how long
   to keep the records in their cache.  Lease lifetimes may be based on
   different origin data.  For example, when an IP address is assigned
   to a host via DHCP, the DHCP server will provide a time period for
   which the address is assigned to the host.

   There are several possibilities for how a DNS UPDATE server may limit
   the lifetime of records added via an update message.

   1.  The DNS update server MAY be configured to automatically delete
       the records after a certain fixed time period (such as 24 hours).
       This is a failsafe mechanism in case the origin of the record
       data goes offline and does not ever try to remove the records.

   2.  A lease lifetime can be communicated via an OPT record as defined
       in Dynamic DNS Update Leases [I-D.sekar-dns-ul].  This provides a
       timeout period for all of the records added in the update message



Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


       and is controlled by the sender of the update.  This is a work in
       progress and does not yet have widespread adoption among
       authoritative unicast DNS server software.

   3.  Individual DNS TIMEOUT resource records
       [I-D.pusateri-dnsop-update-timeout] can be added to the update
       message to indicate the timeout value for one or any number of
       the resource records contained in the update message.  This is
       the most flexible but also does not have any adoption among
       authoritative unicast DNS server software.  One advantage of the
       TIMEOUT resource records is that they are stored in the
       authoritative server like any other record and synchronized to
       secondary servers as well.  Therefore, if the primary server were
       to restart or experience an extended failure, the lease lifetime
       would not be lost.

   Note that it is possible to use both the Dynamic DNS Update leases to
   communicate the lease lifetime and for the authoritative unicast DNS
   server to create TIMEOUT resource records on demand to achieve the
   same result if the Update proxy does not include TIMEOUT resource
   records natively.

7.  Transitioning to Unicast

   The design of the Update proxy is intended to work within the
   existing mDNS model and allow it to scale to multiple subnets using
   existing unicast DNS infrastructure.  It is careful not to increase
   the amount of multicast traffic used for service discovery but it is
   also capable of providing a transition path to actually reduce
   multicast usage incrementally.  Hosts have generally not been able to
   directly register their own services through DNS UPDATE because of
   the security scaling problem of shared passwords needed by TSIG.

   By creating trusted infrastructure in the form of an Update proxy,
   services can now be registered through the Update proxy directly via
   unicast.  This alleviates the need to advertise over mDNS at all.

   Therefore, if we allow service providers to discover the Update proxy
   using either unicast or multicast queries, we can then perform all
   subsequent communication over unicast.  This greatly reduces the
   multicast usage and the need for every host on the network to wake up
   and listen to multicast responses and periodic announcements.

   In order to accomodate this transition, the Update proxy MAY announce
   and respond to PTR queries for the update proxy service using service
   name "_dns-updateproxy-tls._tcp.local." pointing to a local instance
   name.  As host implementations are updated to locate an Update proxy,
   they can switch entirely to unicast for all of the services they



Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   provide.  The SRV record for the instance name can provide a target
   name and port for which the service provider can connect directly
   using TLS and send unicast registrations for all of its services.
   The TXT record for the instance name can contain vendor specific
   information associated with the Update proxy if desired.  There are
   no required keys in the TXT record and while the record MUST exist
   (see Section 6 of [RFC6763]), it can consist of a single zero length
   byte.  Multiple announcements can be sent across a single TLS
   connection.  There are no responses expected from the Update proxy
   after sending the announcements.  However, Update proxies MUST only
   announce this service if they intend to provide a unicast interface
   for service providers on the local subnet.

   Discovery of the Update proxy can also be entirely using unicast for
   service providers that prefer or are not multicast capable.  The
   service provider would use address-derived domain enumeration as
   described in Section 3.1 to determine the subdomain name of the local
   link and then perform a normal unicast PTR query through the local
   resolver for "_dns-updateproxy-tls._tcp.<subdomain>." to find the
   Update proxy instance.  In the case of redundant proxies, multiple
   PTR records with different instance names may exist.  The SRV records
   priority and weight fields can be used to determine the preferred
   Update proxy.

   Once these services are initially registered with the Update proxy,
   the proxy may occasionally sent unicast queries to confirm these
   services are still active.  A 60 second interval with appropriate
   jitter is recommended for confirmation.  If, in the meantime, the
   service is discontinued, the service provider SHOULD reconnect to the
   Update proxy and send "goodbye" announcements with TTL 0 as normally
   would be done with mDNS to expire the services as described in
   Section 8.4 of [RFC6762].  The Update proxy will not send any
   response to these "goodbye" announcements, therefore, the connection
   MUST be closed gracefully to ensure proper delivery.

8.  Security Considerations

   When a secure DNS UPDATE is sent to an authoritative server, it
   should not be construed that this information is any more reliable
   than the original mDNS announcement was for which it was based.  Care
   should always be taken when receiving mDNS announcements to ensure
   they are source IP address is one that belongs to an IP subnet on the
   received interface of the Update proxy.  In addition, the TTL of the
   received link local announcement MUST be 1 to ensure it was not
   forwarded from a remote network.






Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   Each Update proxy requires configuration of a shared secret for
   creation of the TSIG signature resource record contained as the last
   record in the UPDATE message.
















































Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1035>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2136]  Vixie, P., Ed., Thomson, S., Rekhter, Y., and J. Bound,
              "Dynamic Updates in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE)",
              RFC 2136, DOI 10.17487/RFC2136, April 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2136>.

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2782, February 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2782>.

   [RFC2845]  Vixie, P., Gudmundsson, O., Eastlake 3rd, D., and B.
              Wellington, "Secret Key Transaction Authentication for DNS
              (TSIG)", RFC 2845, DOI 10.17487/RFC2845, May 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2845>.

   [RFC3007]  Wellington, B., "Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Dynamic
              Update", RFC 3007, DOI 10.17487/RFC3007, November 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3007>.

   [RFC3596]  Thomson, S., Huitema, C., Ksinant, V., and M. Souissi,
              "DNS Extensions to Support IP Version 6", STD 88,
              RFC 3596, DOI 10.17487/RFC3596, October 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3596>.

   [RFC3927]  Cheshire, S., Aboba, B., and E. Guttman, "Dynamic
              Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses", RFC 3927,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3927, May 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3927>.

   [RFC4635]  Eastlake 3rd, D., "HMAC SHA (Hashed Message Authentication
              Code, Secure Hash Algorithm) TSIG Algorithm Identifiers",
              RFC 4635, DOI 10.17487/RFC4635, August 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4635>.





Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>.

   [RFC6763]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "DNS-Based Service
              Discovery", RFC 6763, DOI 10.17487/RFC6763, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6763>.

   [RFC7858]  Hu, Z., Zhu, L., Heidemann, J., Mankin, A., Wessels, D.,
              and P. Hoffman, "Specification for DNS over Transport
              Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 7858, DOI 10.17487/RFC7858, May
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7858>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-hybrid]
              Cheshire, S., "Discovery Proxy for Multicast DNS-Based
              Service Discovery", draft-ietf-dnssd-hybrid-08 (work in
              progress), March 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-mdns-relay]
              Lemon, T. and S. Cheshire, "Multicast DNS Discovery
              Relay", draft-ietf-dnssd-mdns-relay-01 (work in progress),
              July 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-push]
              Pusateri, T. and S. Cheshire, "DNS Push Notifications",
              draft-ietf-dnssd-push-16 (work in progress), November
              2018.

   [I-D.pusateri-dnsop-update-timeout]
              Pusateri, T. and T. Wattenberg, "DNS TIMEOUT Resource
              Record", draft-pusateri-dnsop-update-timeout-02 (work in
              progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.sekar-dns-ul]
              Cheshire, S. and T. Lemon, "Dynamic DNS Update Leases",
              draft-sekar-dns-ul-02 (work in progress), August 2018.

   [RFC7719]  Hoffman, P., Sullivan, A., and K. Fujiwara, "DNS
              Terminology", RFC 7719, DOI 10.17487/RFC7719, December
              2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7719>.





Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   DNS Update Proxy for Service Discovery       March 2019


Appendix A.  Comparison to Discovery Proxy

   The Update Proxy defined in this document is an alternative to the
   Discovery Proxy [I-D.ietf-dnssd-hybrid] and the Discovery Relay
   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-mdns-relay].  This solution makes different trade-
   offs than the ones made by the Discovery Proxy which offer some
   advantages at a cost of increased state.

   The main difference is that the Discovery Proxy builds the list of
   matching services on demand by querying over mDNS and collecting the
   announcements in response to client queries.  Whereas the Update
   proxy tries to build a complete list of services by listening for all
   announcements, discovering and refreshing them, and then inserting
   them into subdomains using DNS UPDATE.

   The main advantages of the Update proxy include limiting further
   propagation of IP multicast across the campus, providing a pathway to
   eliminate multicast entirely, faster response time to client queries,
   and the ability to provide DNSSEC signed security responses for
   client queries.

   While the Discovery Proxy increases multicast queries and responses
   based on received unicast queries "O(n^2)", the Update proxy can
   reduce or eliminate mDNS traffic on the local links "O(1)".

   Another key difference is that the Update proxy never becomes an
   authoritative unicast DNS server for the attached subdomain.  It
   simply updates the existing authoritative server for the domain.
   Therefore, the administrator is free to use existing authoritative
   DNS server infrastructure.

Author's Address

   Tom Pusateri
   Unaffiliated
   Raleigh  NC 27608
   USA

   Phone: +1 (919) 867-1330
   Email: pusateri@bangj.com











Pusateri                Expires September 7, 2019              [Page 18]
