
Network Working Group                                     J. Ottensmeyer
Internet-Draft                                                Siemens AG
Expires: September 1, 2003                                 March 3, 2003


   Emergency Services provided in Public Switched Telephone Networks
                <draft-otty-ieprep-pstn-features-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the set of emergency call services that are
   provided in Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN) today and will
   be in the near future.  It discusses related features which are
   needed to provide these services.











Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


1. Introduction

   Emergency Preparedness is an important factor for public
   communication networks.  The IEPREP WG is currently gathering the
   pieces available in the Internet today into BCPs to document the
   required emergency services.

   Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN) have features which enable
   to provide several types of emergency services.  And PSTN is still
   evolving: e.g.  based on E.106 [1], a new scheme for International
   emergency support, methods are now being implemented in SS7 and BICC
   signaling to convey a calling party category on an international
   basis.  This allows authorized users to have access to the
   International Telephone Service while the service is restricted due
   to damage, congestion and/or other faults.

   This document surveys the set of emergency services and related
   features available in PSTN today and planned for the near future.
   Hence, it is aimed as input to the discussion in the IEPREP working
   group.































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


2. Emergency Call Services available in PSTN today

   There are three main emergency services available.  These are SOS
   calls, origin-dependent calls and user-dependent calls.  In the
   following, we give an informal description of these services rather
   than a formal definition.

2.1 SOS Calls (911,...)

   The "SOS call" is the classical emergency call service (e.g.  911, or
   112 in Europe).  It is a "destination-dependent call service", i.e.
   calls are authorized by dialing a publicly, well-known emergency
   number(s), e.g.  of the fire brigade, police, or ambulance, etc.

   SOS calls are routed to the nearest emergency center.  Nearest is
   relative to the geographical location of the subscriber, which is
   held in the database of the local exchange.  The selection of the
   region specific servicing center is done in the local exchange by
   mapping the dialed number to the routable number of this center.

   Emergency calls are available in all states of the networks.  They
   can be placed from any subscriber line, even if the subscriber has a
   service restriction in the outgoing direction, the subscriber has
   selected an individual barring of outgoing calls, the credit limit of
   the subscriber is reached or the account of the subscriber is
   suspended.  Emergency calls belong to the class of non-blockable
   calls.

   When it takes some time until the emergency caller gets connected
   with the emergency center, an announcement can be played to inform
   the caller that the emergency call is being processed and he should
   hold the line.  Finally, emergency calls are non-chargeable calls.
   This means there need to be provisions to allow placing emergency
   calls from coinbox telephones without depositing coins.

2.2 Origin-dependent emergency calls

   The "origin-dependent call service" is used to realize emergency
   calls from special phones, for example calls from a police office or
   a fire brigade center.  Authorization to use this service is granted
   by checking the properties of the subscriber line from which the call
   is originated.  These properties are included in a subscriber
   database at the local exchange.

   This call service may be used during disaster recovery operations, so
   that these calls must be placed under all network circumstances.  The
   call service is realized by associating a call preference with this
   call, which allows a preferred routing of the call throughout the



Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


   network.  Such calls might even preempt other calls, if the called
   party is currently carrying out another, non-emergency call.

2.3 User-dependent or authenticated emergency calls

   The "user-dependent call service" is used to realize emergency calls
   from specially authorized users, for example calls from polices
   officers or fire fighters.  Such call may originate form any terminal
   in the public communication network.  Thus, users must dial a special
   access and authentication codes to gain access to the service.

   An example for a national implementation of this call service in US
   is GETS (the Government Emergency Telephony Service) [2].  The
   international version is called International Emergency Preparedness
   Scheme [1].

   This calls must be placed under all network conditions.  This call
   service is realized by associating a call preference with this call.
   This allows a preferred routing of the call throughout the network.
   Such calls might even preempt other calls, if the called party is
   currently carrying out another, non-emergency call.






























Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


3. Features needed to realize Emergency Call Services

   This section lists the features required to realize the emergency
   call services as described before.  This includes features to enable
   the services itself and features to fight congestion.  Several
   features are available at all time while others are activated during
   exceptional network states.

   Under normal operation of the network, the core idea is to enable and
   route these calls, even if system configuration would prevent other
   (normal) calls (e.g.  if the subscriber account is suspended due to
   overdue credit limit).

   In case of unexpected disaster situations, such as earthquakes,
   storms, big fires and other types of catastrophes, networks can be
   immensely affected or even damaged.  The idea here is to fight
   overload and prioritize emergency calls.

   The first subsection covers system-based features.  The second
   subsection describes several other (hardware) features which are used
   to increase availability of the emergency call services in the case
   of various network failures.

3.1 System-based features

   o  "Digit translation on the dialed number" means that the dialed
      number may be replaced by a new code and call preferences are
      added or altered.  This is applied to convert a uniform emergency
      call number (e.g.  911) to the region specific servicing center
      number.

   o  "Subscriber emergency override" means that it is possible, to
      override subscriber service restrictions for specific dialed
      numbers (e.g.  emergency numbers).  Thus subscribers with outgoing
      call restrictions can still place emergency calls.

   o  "Disable Calling Line Identification Restriction".  Originating
      subscribers may hide the presentation of the calling line
      identification on the called party's terminal.  For emergency
      calls, it is possible to define categories for terminating
      subscribers (e.g.  the emergency centers) to get the ability to
      override the presentation restriction and have the calling party's
      identity presented.

   o  "Preference category during catastrophe" means that the local
      exchanges will impose service restrictions when a catastrophe
      state is activated.  Then, call admission is based on the
      following criteria:



Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


      *  the destination of the call.  Call are classified as "regular
         calls" and "emergency calls" (e.g.  911 calls).

      *  the source of the call.  All subscriber lines are
         administratively assigned a preference category (which are held
         within the local exchange).  There are several possible levels.
         Normal subscribers get preference category 0 while e.g.  the
         "red phone of the president" gets the highest category.

      *  the identity of the caller.  By means of a specific service,
         the identity of the caller is verified and if eligible, the
         preference category of the subscriber line is increased (for
         the call to be placed).

      *  the active level of service restriction in the local exchange.

         The administration can activate different levels of service
         restrictions in the local exchange; these are for example:

         +  Level 0: Normal Operation of the Local Exchange

         +  Level 1: Only subscribers with preference category 1 or 2
            are permitted to originate calls.  Subscribers without
            preference can place emergency calls.  The terminating
            traffic is not restricted.

         +  Level 2: Only subscribers with preference category 2 are
            permitted to originate calls.  Emergency calls are accepted
            only if the calling subscriber has a preference category
            greater than zero.  The terminating traffic is not
            restricted.

   o  "Priority Routing" means preferential treatment to calls
      originating from certain subscribers and their dial preferences in
      order to receive special path selection.

   o  "Automatic Repeat Attempt" means that in case of congestion,
      repeated set-up attempts can be made on the last-choice route for
      priority subscribers or emergency traffic.  The feature requires
      that the signaling system transmits the calling category
      information.

   o  "Last trunk reserved for special traffic" means that the last idle
      trunk within a trunk group can be reserved for special traffic,
      e.g.  origin-dependent (priority calling category) or
      destination-dependent (e.g.  emergency) traffic.

   o  "Authentication and authorization" means that a caller is



Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


      authenticated (e.g.  via an account number and a PIN) and is then
      authorized to receive a special service (e.g.  a higher preference
      category).  This is typically done in special service offices
      reached through a dialed access code (e.g.  for GETS).

   o  "Call release" means that - depending on the actual configuration
      - ordinary calls may be released (pre-empted) when an emergency
      call can not be placed due to lack of resources.

   o  "Hard-to-Reach Control (HTRC)" is a kind of congestion control
      which fights overloads resulting from catastrophes.  In these
      cases, communication from outside with subscribers inside the
      catastrophe area is almost impossible.  The number of call
      attempts to reach the affected area increase rapidly and the
      network is severely overloaded.  Many call attempts fail because
      the called destination is congested.  Additionally, calls to other
      areas (not affected by the catastrophe) cannot be successfully
      routed to their destinations due to the propagated congestion;
      hence the telecommunication companies are not able to provide
      their service effectively.  Therefore, the networks run a
      Hard-to-Reach Control (HTRC).  HTRC is based on the following
      functions:

      1.  Automatic determination of HTR destinations

      2.  Automatic reduction of HTR traffic through network management
          controls (e.g.  by means of trunk reservation)

      3.  Administration of destinations to be automatically detected,
          to be excluded from HTR determination, to be excluded from HTR
          reduction or even to be marked as HTR in order to benefit from
          HTR traffic reduction through network management controls.


3.2 Hardware-based features

   There are several features to increase the availability of emergency
   call services in case of network or other hardware failures.  Those
   are for example:

   o  "Provision of backup lines for emergency calls".  If a remote part
      of the local exchange is in stand alone service (which means, all
      PCM-links from the remote part to the local exchange are out of
      service), calls to emergency numbers can be routed to subscriber
      ports, which are defined as emergency call ports.  These emergency
      call ports can be connected via suitable transmission equipment to
      an emergency center.




Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


   o  "Power Supply of User Terminals".  The interface S0 (between
      customer premise equipment and the local exchange) for analog and
      ISDN lines include power supply of the terminal equipment in
      normal and emergency operation.  This means that appropriate
      terminals can be operated even without external power supply.

   o  "Power Supply for Network Elements".  Typically, regional
      regulators demand 48 hours of operation without external power
      supply.  Therefore, reliable battery backup and/or fuel based
      generators are provided for exchanges, transmission equipment and
      other essential elements.








































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


4. Denial of Service Protection

   PSTN provides denial of service protection through statistical and
   other means.  Thereby individual channels are supervised.  There are
   two major features.

   o  "noisy port supervision" provides supervision of the subscriber
      line by comparing the actual usage pattern against the dialing
      characteristics of well-behaved subscribers.  This feature detects
      attacks or malfunctions if the subscriber requests more than a
      certain number of incomplete, short, or faulty calls on that line
      in a given period of time.

   o  "killer trunk supervision" works the same way as noisy port
      supervision, it just compares against the dialing characteristics
      on trunk lines.



































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


5. PSTN Emergency Call Services and Features

   In this section we give a brief listing which features are needed to
   provide which emergency services.  The aim is to make clear that not
   all features are needed for each service.


         Service   "Emergency  "origin-dependent        "user-dependent/
                    call"       emergency call service"  authenticated call
                                                         emergency service"
   Feature
   - digit translation on    x          x                 x
     dialed number/ address
     replacement
   - subscriber emergency    x
     override
   - preference category     x          x                 x
     during catastrophe
   - Disable calling line    x
     identification restriction
   - priority                x          x                 x
   - automatic repeat                   x                 x
     attempt
   - last trunk reserved for x          x                 x
     special traffic
   - call release            x          x                 x
   - authentication and                                   x
     authorization


   Table 1: Mapping of Features and Emergency Services




















Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


6. Emergency Call Services under development for the PSTN

   One essential information for the Emergency Center is the spatial
   location of the emergency caller.  The operators of fixed networks
   regularly provide updates of their customer data (telefon number and
   address) to the emergency centers.  Using this information, the
   emergency centers can determine the location for incoming emergency
   calls.  Unfortunately, this model is inherently impossible for mobile
   networks.  Moreover, there are other proprietary mechanisms in place
   in some countries.  Therefore, Standardization Bodies like ETSI [3]
   and ANSI are developing an interface to provide the spatial
   information about the caller to the emergency center.  This service
   is called "Enhanced 112 calls".

   For the purpose of providing a single mechanism to the Emergency
   Centers, Enhanced 112 calls (E112) will be used in both, fixed and
   mobile networks.  The interface between the network operator and the
   Emergency Center will be based on the Mobile Location Protocol (MLP)
   of the LIF (Location Interoperability Forum).  There are two models
   under discussion for the interface: a pull and a pull model.  The
   pull model allows the Emergency Center to retrieve the spatial
   location of the caller from the network operator.  Using the push
   model, the network operators provides the spatial location
   information together with the emergency call to the emergency center.



























Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


7. Conclusions

   PSTN systems offer features to aid all kind of catastrophe and
   emergency state.  This ranges from prioritization of personal
   emergency calls under normal network operation up to blocking of
   other than emergency calls during catastrophe state.  Additionally,
   parts of the network are protected from congestion by automatic
   detection of hard-to-reach catastrophe areas.  Thus, originating
   calls from different areas can still reach emergency centers within
   this catastrophe area.

   This paper summarizes a set of services that may find their way into
   the requirement sheets of the IEPREP working group.  Of course, not
   all of these services may be applicable in the Internet, but further
   discussion is needed to select an appropriate subset of the above
   described features.



































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


8. Security Considerations

   This draft is on security.  Specific requirements to other security
   functions may be derived if further considered.















































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


9. IANA Considerations

   Service and feature name spaces may be needed if further considered.
















































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


References

   [1]  ITU-T, "International Emergency Preparedness Scheme", ITU-T
        E.106, March 2000.

   [2]  Calberg, K., "Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony",
        Internet-Draft , January 2003,
        <draft-ietf-ieprep-framework-03.txt>.

   [3]  Koolen, L., "Regulatory issues for emergency communications in
        Europe", February 2002, <http://www.emtel.etsi.org/Workshop/
        Session%202/speech_ETSI_Feb_V4_files/frame.htm>.


Author's Address

   Joerg Ottensmeyer
   Siemens AG
   Hofmannstr. 51
   Muenchen  81359
   Germany

   Phone: +49 89 722 43239
   EMail: joerg.ottensmeyer@siemens.com



























Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          PSTN Emergency Features               March 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Ottensmeyer            Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 17]

