


Network Working Group                                         P. Hoffman
Internet-Draft                                            VPN Consortium
Expires: October 20, 2008                                 April 18, 2008


         Proposed High-level Changes From IDNA2003 To IDNA200x
                    draft-hoffman-idna200x-topics-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 20, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document lists the changes that are proposed for IDNA200x.  It
   covers both the changes in the initial documents from the design team
   and other changes proposed in the Working Group.


1.  Introduction

   This document lists the high-level changes that have been proposed
   for IDNA2003 in the idnabis WG.  It does not list the low-level



Hoffman                 Expires October 20, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Changes in IDNA200x                April 2008


   changes, such as the disposition of individual characters.

   This is a temporary document meant for the use by the idnabis WG.
   This work is being discussed on the mailing list at
   idna-update@alvestrand.no.


2.  Proposed Changes from the Design Team Documents

   The initial set of documents for the IDNA200x effort consist of the
   following:

   o  [IDNA200X-Protocol] - Internationalizing Domain Names in
      Applications (IDNA): Protocol

   o  [IDNA200X-Tables] - The Unicode Codepoints and IDNA

   o  [IDNA200X-BIDI] - An updated IDNA criterion for right-to-left
      scripts

   o  [IDNA200X-Rationale] - Internationalizing Domain Names for
      Applications (IDNA): Issues, Explanation, and Rationale

   At the time of this writing, these documents propose the following
   changes to IDNA2003:

   1.   Update base character set from Unicode 3.2 to Unicode version-
        agnostic

   2.   Separate the definitions for the "registration" and "lookup"
        activities

   3.   Disallow most symbol characters

   4.   Remove the mapping and normalization steps from the protocol and
        have them instead done by the applications themselves, possibly
        in a local fashion, before invoking the protocol

   5.   Change the way that the protocol specifies which characters are
        allowed in labels from "humans decide what the table of
        codepoints contains" to "decision about codepoints are based on
        Unicode properties plus a small exclusion list created by
        humans"

   6.   Introduce the new concept of characters that can be used only in
        specific contexts.





Hoffman                 Expires October 20, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Changes in IDNA200x                April 2008


   7.   Allowing typical words and names in languages such as Dhivehi
        and Yiddish to be expressed

   8.   Make bidirectional domain names (delimited strings of labels,
        not just labels standing on their own) display in a non-
        surprising fashion

   9.   Make bidirectional domain names in a paragraph display in a non-
        surprising fashion

   10.  Remove the dot separator from the mandatory part of the protocol

   11.  Make some currently-legal, non-IDNA labels illegal


3.  Changes Proposed by Individuals in the Working Group

   In addition to the changes above, individuals in the Working Group
   have proposed high-level changes.  These include:

   a.  Add conversion between traditional and simplified Chinese
       characters

   b.  Add guidelines or requirements for registration of character
       variants, along the lines of RFC 3743


4.  Security Considerations

   The evenutal documents will all have security considerations sections
   of their own.


5.  Informative References

   [IDNA200X-BIDI]
              Alvenstrand, H. and C. Karp, "An updated IDNA criterion
              for right-to-left scripts", draft-alvestrand-idna-bidi
              (work in progress).

   [IDNA200X-Protocol]
              Klensin, J., "Internationalizing Domain Names in
              Applications (IDNA): Protocol",
              draft-klensin-idnabis-protocol (work in progress).

   [IDNA200X-Rationale]
              Klensin, J., "Internationalizing Domain Names for
              Applications (IDNA): Issues, Explanation, and Rationale",



Hoffman                 Expires October 20, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Changes in IDNA200x                April 2008


              draft-klensin-idnabis-issues (work in progress).

   [IDNA200X-Tables]
              Faltstrom, P., "The Unicode Codepoints and IDNA",
              draft-faltstrom-idnabis-tables (work in progress).


Appendix A.  Change Log

A.1.  Differences between -00 and -01

   Added "Remove the dot separator from the mandatory part of the
   protocol" to the list.

   Added "Make some currently-legal, non-IDNA labels illegal" to the
   list.

A.2.  Differences between -01 and -02

   Changed the title to "Proposed...".  Reworded the abstract and intro
   to reflec this new coverage.

   Added new section for WG-submitted changes.


Author's Address

   Paul Hoffman
   VPN Consortium

   Email: paul.hoffman@vpnc.org




















Hoffman                 Expires October 20, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Changes in IDNA200x                April 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Hoffman                 Expires October 20, 2008                [Page 5]

