IPSP Working Group                                         L.A. Sanchez
INTERNET-DRAFT                             	       BBN Technologies
Expire in March, 2001                                          H. Orman
                                                     Novell Corporation
                                                     September 25, 2000


		A Roadmap for IPsec Policy Management
                   draft-ietf-ipsp-roadmap-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
   its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net 
   (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
   (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu 
   (US West Coast).

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

    This document describes the approach that the IPSP WG will follow
    to resolve the challenges that IPsec compliant devices phase with
    respect to modeling, specifying, translating, provisioning,
    exchanging, negotiating, checking and enforcing IPsec policies.

1. What is the IPSP WG trying to solve?

    The rapid growth of the Internet and the need to control access to
    network resources (bandwidth, routers, hosts, etc.) has quickly
    generated the need for representing, discovering, exchanging and
    managing the policies that control access to these resources in a
    scalable, secured and reliable fashion.

    Current IP security protocols and algorithms [RFCs 2401-2412, 2085,
    2104 and 2451] can exchange keying material using IKE [RFC2409] and
    protect data flows using the AH [RFC2402] and/or ESP protocols
    [RFC2406]. The scope of IKE limits the protocol to the authenticated
    exchange of keying material and associated policy information between
    the end-points of a security association. 

    However, along the path of a communication, there may be
    administrative entities that need to impose policy constraints on
    entities such as security gateways and router filters.  There also is
    a need for end-points of a security association and/or, for their
    respective administrative entities, to securely discover and
    negotiate access control information for the end hosts and for the
    policy enforcement points (security gateways, routers, etc.) along
    the path of the communication.

2. Roadmap to a solution

    In essence the IPSP WG will produce a set of documents and working
    code. To accomplish this the IPSP WG will work on the items listed
    below. Please note, that not all items require code
    development. Below, you will find a complete list of all
    items. The IPSP WG will:

	1) first establish the requirements for IPsec policy
	   management. Any solution developed under the IPSP umbrella
	   MUST meet these requirements. The requirements document
          will cover all aspects of IPsec policy management including:

		- IPsec data model
		- IPsec policy architecture
		- IPsec policy specification
		- IPsec policy provisioning
		- IPsec security gateway discovery
		- IPsec policy discovery, negotiation, conflict
                  resolution and compliance checking
	
	This WG item will produce a standards-track document.

	2) define a data model for IPsec policies. This model will be
	   compatible with the P-CIM [PCIM]. This WG item will
          produce a standards-track document.

	3) develop an architecture for IPsec policy management. The
           document will discuss and cover the following topics:

		- IPsec data model
		- IPsec policy specification
		- IPsec policy provisioning
		- IPsec security gateway discovery
		- IPsec policy discovery, negotiation, conflict
                  resolution and compliance checking

	This WG item will produce a standards-track document.

	4) develop a flexible, vendor-independent language to
           represent IPsec policies. The language MUST follow the
           IPsec data model which in turns follows the P-CIM.
	
	This WG item will produce a standards-track document and
	parser implementations.

	5) develop guidelines for the provisioning of IPsec policies
           using existing policy provisioning protocols. This includes
           profiles for distributing IPsec policies over protocols
           such as LDAP, COPS, SNMPCONF, FTP, etc.

	This WG item will produce standards-track documents and
	implementations.

	6) specify and develop adopt or develop an IPsec policy
           exchange and negotiation protocol. The protocol must be
           capable of:

		i) discovering security gateways 
             ii) exchanging and negotiating security policies, and; 
            iii) resolving policy conflicts in both intra/inter
                   domain environments. The protocol must be
                   independent of any security protocol suite and key
                   management protocol.

	Note that the WG MAY decide to divide the above-mentioned
        functionality into one or more protocols. This WG item will
        produce a standards-track document and implementations.

3. Roadmap Nutshell


  Roadmap Document

  Information Model

  Specification Language

  Provisioning Guidelines

  Gateway Discovery, policy exchange, 



3. Security Considerations
 
   The document provides a framework for applications to identify the
   relevant policies in place across the network. Policies must be
   communicated in a secure way so as not to jeopardize the ability
   of the application to run. It is also important to ensure that the
   policies that are communicated statically or dynamically to the
   Policy Enforcement device are doen so, securely. Not doing so could
   compromise the security of the entire network.
  

REFERENCES

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key Words for use in RFCs to indicate
       Requirement Levels", RFC2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2401] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet
       Protocol", RFC 2401.

   [RFC2403] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header", RFC 2402

   [RFC2406] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security Payload
 	(ESP)", RFC 2406.

   [PCIM] Moore, et al., "Policy Core Information Model -- Version 1        
      Specification" 
      ftp://ftp.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-policy-core-info-model-07.txt

   [RFC2407] D. Piper, "The Internet IP Security Domain of Interpretation
	for ISAKMP", RFC 2407.

   [RFC2409] D. Harkins, D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)",
        RFC 2409.

Authors' Addresses

   Luis A. Sanchez
   BBN Technologies
   GTE Internetworking
   10 Moulton Street
   Cambridge, MA 02140

   Voice: (617) 873-3351
   EMail: lsanchez@bbn.com 


   Hilarie Orman
   Novell, Inc.
   Net Content Services
   1800 South Novell Place
   Provo, UT 84606

   Voice: (801)861-5278
   EMail: horman@novell.com 












