Internet Engineering Task Force                       S. Harris
INTERNET-DRAFT                                        Merit Network
                                                      January 9, 2001

                          IETF Code of Conduct
                    <draft-ietf-poisson-code-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
     with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as
     Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

This Code of Conduct provides a set of guidelines for personal
interaction in the Internet Engineering Task Force. The Code recognizes
the diversity of IETF participants, emphasizes the value of mutual
respect, and stresses the broad applicability of our work.

Introduction

The work of the IETF relies on cooperation among a broad cultural
diversity of peoples, ideas, and communication styles.  The Code of
Conduct guides our interaction as we work together to develop multiple,
interoperable technologies for the Internet.  All IETF participants aim
to abide by this Code as we build consensus in person, at IETF meetings,
and in e-mail.

Harris                                                          [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT            IETF Code of Conduct              January 2001


Principles of the Code of Conduct

1.   IETF participants extend respect and courtesy to their colleagues
     at all times.

     IETF participants come from diverse origins and backgrounds and
     are equipped with multiple capabilities and ideals.  Regardless
     of these individual differences, participants treat their
     colleagues with respect as persons--especially when it is
     difficult to agree with them.  Seeing from another's point of
     view is often revealing, even when it fails to be compelling.

     English is the de facto language of the IETF, but it is not the
     native language of many IETF participants.  Native English
     speakers attempt to speak clearly and a bit slowly and to limit
     the use of slang in order to accommodate the needs of all
     listeners.

2.   IETF participants develop and test ideas impartially, without
     finding fault with the colleague proposing the idea.

     We dispute ideas by using reasoned argument, rather than through
     intimidation or ad hominem attack. Or, said in a somewhat more
     IETF-like way:

          "Reduce the heat and increase the light"

3.   IETF participants think globally, devising solutions that meet the
     needs of diverse technical and operational environments.

     The goal of the IETF is to maintain and enhance a working,
     viable, scalable, global Internet, and the concomitant problems
     are genuinely very difficult.  We understand that "scaling is the
     ultimate problem" and that many ideas quite workable in the small
     fail this crucial test.

     IETF participants use their best engineering judgement to find
     the best solution for the whole Internet, not just for any
     particular network, technology, vendor, or user.  To this end, we
     participate in the IETF as individual contributors, rather than
     as representatives of organizations.

     IETF participants aim to benefit the Internet community and the
     public at large in all matters of intellectual property rights
     and procedures in a standard, while respecting the legitimate
     rights of others.  We follow the guidelines outlined in the
     "Intellectual Property Rights" section of BCP 9, particularly
     those that deal with permissions and disclosure.

Harris                                                          [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT            IETF Code of Conduct              January 2001


4.   Individuals who attend Working Group meetings are prepared to
     contribute to the ongoing work of the group.

     IETF participants who attend Working Group meetings read the
     relevant Internet-Drafts, RFCs, and e-mail archives beforehand,
     in order to familiarize themselves with the technology under
     discussion.  This may represent a challenge for newcomers, as e-
     mail archives can be difficult to locate and search, and it may
     not be easy to trace the history of longstanding Working Group
     debates.  With that in mind, newcomers who attend Working Group
     meetings are encouraged to observe and absorb whatever material
     they can, but should not interfere with the ongoing process of
     the group. Working Group meetings run on a very limited time
     schedule, and are not intended for the education of individuals.
     The work of the group will continue on the mailing list, and many
     questions would be better expressed on the list in the months
     that follow.

Acknowledgements

Mike O'Dell wrote the first draft of the Code of Conduct, and many of
his thoughts, statements, and observations are included in this version.
Many useful editorial comments were supplied by Dave Crocker.  Members
of the POISSON Working Group provided many significant additions to the
text.

Author's Address

Susan Harris
Merit Network, Inc.
4251 Plymouth Rd., Suite C
Ann Arbor, MI 48105-2785
Phone: (734) 936-2100
Fax:   (734) 647-3185


















Harris                                                          [Page 3]


