
Individual Submission to the LDAPExt Working Group        Mark Meredith
Internet Draft                                              Novell Inc.
Document: draft-mmeredith-rootdse-vendor-info-01.txt   February 7, 2000


Category: Proposed Standard


               Storing Vendor Information in the root DSE


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   Comments and suggestions on this document are encouraged.
   Comments on this document should be sent to the LDAPEXT working
   group discussion list ietf-ldapext@netscape.com or the author.

1. Abstraction

   This document specifies two new attributes, vendorName and
   vendorVersion that can be included in the root DSE to contain
   vendor-specific information.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2219]

3. Overview

   The root DSE query is a mechanism used by clients to find out what
   controls, extensions, etc. is available from a given LDAP server. It
   is useful to be able to query an LDAP server to determine the vendor
   of that server and see what version of that vendor∆s code is
   currently installed. Since vendors can implement X- options for
   attributes, classes, and syntaxes (described in section 4 of
   [RFC2251] and section 4 of [RFC2252] ) that may or may not be
   published, this would allow users or applications to be able to
   determine if these features are available from a given server.
   It is also possible for vendors to have an LDAP server
   implementation to be incomplete in some respect or to have


M. Meredith               Expires August-2000                         1

    LDAP root DSE to display vendor information          February 2000

   implementation quirks that must be worked around until they can be
   fixed in the subsequent release. The vendorName and vendorVersion
   allow client developers to identify a specific implementation of
   LDAP and work around any shortcomings of that implementation as
   needed.

4. Vendor specific information

   This is an addition to the Server-specific Data Requirements defined
   in section 3.4 of [RFC-2251] and the associated syntaxes defined in
   section 4 of [RFC-2252].

   - vendorName

     All LDAP server implementations SHOULD maintain a vendorName,
     which is generally the name of the company that wrote the LDAP
     Server code like "Novell, Inc." This is single-valued so that it
     will only have one vendor.

     ( 2.16.840.1.113719.1.27.4.43 NAME 'vendorName' SYNTAX
     1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.15 NO-USER-MODIFICATION SINGLE-VALUE
     USAGE dSAOperation )

   - vendorVersion

     All LDAP server implementations SHOULD maintain a vendorVersion,
     which is the release number of the LDAP server product, (as
     opposed to the supportedLDAPVersion, which specifies the version
     of the LDAP protocol supported by this server). This is single-
     valued so that it will only have one version number.

     ( 2.16.840.1.113719.1.27.4.44 NAME 'vendorVersion' SYNTAX
     1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.15 NO-USER-MODIFICATION SINGLE-VALUE
     USAGE dSAOperation )

5. Notes to Implementers

     Implementers may want to consider tying the vendorVersion
     attribute value to the build mechanism so that it is automatically
     updated when the version number changes.

6. Notes to Client Developers

     The use of vendorName and vendorVersion SHOULD NOT be used to
     discover features. It is just an informational attribute. If a
     client relies on a vendorVersion number then that client MUST
     be coded to work with later versions and not just one version and
     no other.

7. Security Considerations

   The vendorName and vendorVersion attributes are provided only as an
   aid to help client implementers assess what features may or may not
   exist in a given server implementation. Server and application
   implementers should realize that the existence of a given value in
   the vendorName or vendorVersion attribute is no guarantee that the
   server was actually built by the asserted vendor or that its version
   is the asserted version and should act accordingly.




M. Meredith               Expires August-2000                         2

    LDAP root DSE to display vendor information          February 2000

8. References

   RFC-2219
         Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   RFC-2026
         Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process-Revision 3", BCP
         9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   RFC-2251
         Wahl, M., Howes, T., Kille, S., "Lightweight Directory Access
         Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997

   RFC-2252
         Wahl, M., Coulbeck, A., Howes, T., Kille, S., "Lightweight
         Directory Access Protocol (v3): Attribute Syntax Definitions",
         RFC 2252, December 1997

9. Acknowledgments

        The author would like to thank the generous input and review by
        individuals at Novell including but not limited to Jim Sermersheim,
        Mark Hinckley, Renea Campbell, and Roger Harrison.

10. Author∆s Addresses

   Mark Meredith
   Novell Inc.
   122 E. 1700 S. Provo, UT 84606
   Phone: 801-861-2645
   Email: mark_meredith@novell.com

Full Copyright Statement
   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (1999). All Rights Reserved. This
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MER-CHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




M. Meredith               Expires August-2000                         3
