



Network Working Group                                       B. Carpenter
Internet-Draft                                                       IBM
Expires: December 18, 2006                                 June 16, 2006


                     Dispute Resolution in the IETF
                    draft-carpenter-ietf-disputes-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 18, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This personal draft suggests updates to the IETF process for dispute
   resolution during the execution of the IETF standards process.  It
   would replace the material on Conflict Resolution and Appeals in RFC
   2026.








Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Disclaimer and background [not intended for RFC
       publication] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Scope of the Dispute Resolution Procedure  . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Time Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Suspensive Effect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Single Dispute per Topic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  Steps in the Dispute Resolution Procedure  . . . . . . . . . .  5
     7.1.  Working Group Disputes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     7.2.  Disputes about non-Working Group Documents . . . . . . . .  6
     7.3.  Process Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.4.  Questions of Applicable Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.5.  Dispute Resolution Request format  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.6.  Dispute Resolution Request processing  . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. Change log [RFC Editor: please remove this section]  . . . . .  9
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Main changes from RFC 2026 section 6.5  . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12

























Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


1.  Disclaimer and background [not intended for RFC publication]

   This is a personal draft based on observations over the last several
   years.  Community comment is welcome.  If the community doesn't want
   to invest energy in this area, the draft will die.  Please use the
   ietf@ietf.org list for discussion.

   For convenience going forward, the text is drafted in definitive BCP-
   style language.  Comments giving the rationale for changes from the
   current process are embedded in double brackets [[ ]], but would be
   moved to the Appendix in any final version.  Where there aren't any
   such comments, the text is exactly as in RFC 2026 except for minor
   editorial or self-evident changes.


2.  Introduction

   Disputes are possible at various stages during the IETF process.  As
   much as possible the process is designed so that compromises can be
   made, and genuine consensus achieved; however there are times when
   even the most reasonable and knowledgeable people are unable to
   agree.

   [[ The following two paragraphs are new.  RFC 2026 does not discuss
   rough consensus.  It doesn't indicate that any decision by anybody in
   a leadership role might be disputed, and it isn't insistent on
   preliminary attempts to resolve disputes by discussion and mediation.
   Also, it uses the word "Appeal" which has quite visibly caused some
   people to take a legalistic approach and treat the IESG and IAB
   almost like courts of law.  Thus I propose the more neutral term
   "Dispute Resolution" going forward. ]]

   A basic principle of the IETF is that decisions are taken by rough
   consensus, rather than by voting or by endlessly seeking unanimous
   consensus.  Thus, even if there is disagreement, it is possible to
   reach a decision.  However, when the responsible chairperson declares
   a rough consensus despite a measure of disagreement, that declaration
   itself may be disputed.  Other decisions by persons in IETF
   leadership positions may also be disputed.

   The IETF greatly prefers that disputes be settled by discussion
   between the parties, if appropriate by asking a neutral third party
   to facilitate this discussion.  The Dispute Resolution Procedure
   (DRP) defined below must not be invoked until a best effort has been
   made to reach such a settlement.

   To achieve the goals of openness and fairness, unsettled disputes
   must be resolved by a process of open review and discussion.  This



Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


   document specifies the Dispute Resolution Procedure that shall be
   followed to deal with Internet standards disputes that cannot be
   resolved through the normal processes whereby IETF Working Groups and
   other Internet Standards Process participants ordinarily reach
   consensus.

   [[ The next sentence is new and does sound legalistic.  It seems
   necessary, to avoid attempts to export IETF disputes elsewhere. ]]

   Participants in the IETF are deemed to agree to these procedures in
   full and final settlement of such disputes.

   BCP 9 [RFC2026] defines the current version of the Internet Standards
   Process, amended by BCP 92 [RFC3932], BCP 78 [RFC3978], and BCP 79
   [RFC3979].  This document replaces Section 6.5 "Conflict Resolution
   and Appeals" of RFC 2026.  It becomes the reference for any mention
   of appeals or dispute resolution in other IETF documents.


3.  Scope of the Dispute Resolution Procedure

   [[ RFC 2026 leaves the scope of the appeals process rather unclear -
   does it apply only to section 6 of RFC 2026, or more widely?  The
   IESG has not chosen to limit the scope of appealable decisions, and
   various other RFCs refer rather loosely to the appeals process.  This
   new section is intended to clarify the scope. ]]

   The DRP may be initiated by any individual.  However, it is intended
   primarily for use by active participants in the Internet Standards
   Process, and by persons directly affected by decisions taken in the
   execution of this process.  Matters that have been discussed or
   decided outside the IETF are not subject to the DRP.

   In general, the DRP shall apply to any decision announced by a person
   in a designated role in the Internet Standards Process.  These roles
   include:
   o  Working Group Chair
   o  Area Director
   o  IESG Chair, or the IESG as a whole
   o  IETF Chair
   o  Designated Expert [RFC2434]
   o  Manager or administrator of an IETF-related mailing list

   A specific exception is made for a decision to issue a Working Group
   or IETF Last Call.  Since this is by definition the mechanism for
   establishing rough consensus, deciding to issue a Last Call cannot be
   the subject of the DRP.




Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


   In general, in the case of disputes about rough consensus, merely
   disagreeing with the rough consensus does not give grounds for
   invoking the DRP.  As described below in more detail for the case of
   Working Group disputes, it is necessary to show either that views
   expressed in the discussion were not adequately considered, or that a
   serious technical problem has been overlooked.

   Other IETF process documents may also provide entry points into the
   DRP (sometimes using the older "appeal" terminology).


4.  Time Limit

   [[ This isn't changed apart from clarifying *calendar* month. ]]

   The DRP must be initiated within two calendar months of the public
   knowledge of the action or decision to be challenged.


5.  Suspensive Effect

   [[ This is new.  It's a gap in RFC 2026. ]]

   Initiation of the DRP does not automatically have suspensive effect
   on the decision under appeal.  In particular, the body considering a
   dispute shall decide from case to case whether an RFC in course of
   publication shall be delayed while under appeal, and this decision is
   not subject to the DRP.


6.  Single Dispute per Topic

   [[ This is new.  It's intended to avoid "machine gun" use of the
   process to repeatedly delay a work item and/or to saturate the IESG
   and IAB with disputes. ]]

   A given individual may only initiate the DRP once in relation to a
   given action, decision or technical issue.  If multiple individuals
   initiate the DRP separately for a given action, decision or technical
   issue, this may be handled as a single dispute.


7.  Steps in the Dispute Resolution Procedure

   [[ The following is mainly unchanged from RFC 2026 except for
   removing the word "appeal". ]]





Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


7.1.  Working Group Disputes

   An individual (whether a participant in the relevant Working Group or
   not) may disagree with a Working Group rough consensus based on his
   or her belief that either (a) his or her own views have not been
   adequately considered by the Working Group, or (b) the Working Group
   has made an incorrect technical choice which places the quality
   and/or integrity of the Working Group's product(s) in significant
   jeopardy.  The first issue is a difficulty with Working Group
   process; the latter is an assertion of serious technical error.
   These two types of disagreement are quite different, but both are
   handled by the same process of review.

   A person who disagrees with a Working Group recommendation shall
   always first discuss the matter with the Working Group's chair(s),
   who may involve other members of the Working Group (or the Working
   Group as a whole) in the discussion.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved in this way, any of the
   parties involved may bring it to the attention of the Area
   Director(s) for the area in which the Working Group is chartered.
   The Area Director(s) shall attempt to resolve the dispute.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved by the Area Director(s), any
   of the parties involved may then formally invoke the DRP.  This must
   be done by sending a message to the IESG as a whole including
   "Dispute Resolution Request" in the Subject field of the message.
   The IESG shall then review the situation and attempt to resolve it in
   a manner of its own choosing.

   If the disagreement is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
   parties at the IESG level, any of the parties involved may escalate
   the Dispute Resolution Request to the IAB.  The IAB shall then review
   the situation and attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own
   choosing.  The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of
   whether or not the Internet standards procedures have been followed
   and with respect to all questions of technical merit.

7.2.  Disputes about non-Working Group Documents

   [[ This subsection is new, to fill a gap in RFC 2026, but hopefully
   not controversial. ]]

   IESG decisions about documents submitted directly to the IESG for
   approval are subject to the DRP exactly as if they had originated in
   a WG.  The DRP applies to disputes about decisions taken by the IESG
   under BCP 92 [RFC3932].  It does not otherwise apply to documents
   submitted to the RFC Editor outside the Internet Standards Process,



Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


   unless so specified elsewehere.

7.3.  Process Failures

   BCP 9 [RFC2026] sets out procedures required to be followed to ensure
   openness and fairness of the Internet Standards Process, and the
   technical viability of the standards created.  The IESG is the
   principal agent of the IETF for this purpose, and it is the IESG that
   is charged with ensuring that the required procedures have been
   followed, and that any necessary prerequisites to a standards action
   have been met.

   If an individual should disagree with an action taken by the IESG in
   this process, that person should first discuss the issue with the
   IESG Chair.  If the IESG Chair is unable to satisfy the complainant,
   the complainant may then formally invoke the DRP.  This must be done
   by sending a message to the IESG as a whole including "Dispute
   Resolution Request" in the Subject field of the message.  Then the
   IESG as a whole should re-examine the action taken, along with input
   from the complainant, and determine whether any further action is
   needed.  The IESG shall issue a report on its review of the complaint
   to the IETF.

   Should the complainant not be satisfied with the outcome of the IESG
   review, the complainant may escalate the Process Dispute Resolution
   Request to the IAB.  The IAB shall then review the situation and
   attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own choosing and report to
   the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   If circumstances warrant, the IAB may direct that an IESG decision be
   annulled, and the situation shall then be as it was before the IESG
   decision was taken.  The IAB may also recommend an action to the
   IESG, or make such other recommendations as it deems fit.  The IAB
   may not, however, pre-empt the role of the IESG by issuing a decision
   which only the IESG is empowered to make.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet standards procedures have been followed.

7.4.  Questions of Applicable Procedure

   Further recourse is available only in cases in which the IETF
   procedures themselves (such as the procedures described in BCP 9
   [RFC2026] or in this document) are claimed to be inadequate or
   insufficient to the protection of the rights of all parties in a fair
   and open Internet Standards Process.  Claims on this basis may be
   made to the Internet Society Board of Trustees.  The President of the
   Internet Society shall acknowledge such a request within two weeks,



Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


   and shall at the time of acknowledgment advise the petitioner of the
   expected duration of the Trustees' review of the request.  The
   Trustees shall review the situation in a manner of its own choosing
   and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   The Trustees' decision upon completion of their review shall be final
   with respect to all aspects of the dispute.

7.5.  Dispute Resolution Request format

   [[ This section is new, because the IESG has sometimes received
   appeals that were very hard to understand. ]]

   A Dispute Resolution Request (DRR) is a message initiating or
   escalating the DRP.  It must, as mentioned above, contain "Dispute
   Resolution Request" in its Subject field, as well as text to identify
   the topic (such as the filename of a draft).  It may be a self
   contained message or it may refer to a longer separate soft-copy
   document in a non-proprietary format.

   All DRRs must include a detailed and specific description of the
   facts of the dispute, with references if needed.  They must start
   with a very short summary which states in a few words exactly which
   decision is in dispute and why.  The summary must indicate explicitly
   whether the dispute is about Working Group process, a technical
   matter, or a general process matter.

   It is recommended that a DRR contains a suggested remedy, especially
   in the case of a technical dispute.

   A DRR that does not contain a summary, or that is sufficiently badly
   written as to be incomprehensible, may be rejected summarily.

7.6.  Dispute Resolution Request processing

   At all stages of the DRP process, the individuals or bodies
   responsible for making the decisions have the discretion to define
   the specific procedures they will follow in the process of making
   their decision.

   [[ The next paragraph is new but it simply describes the practice
   adopted over many years, for clarity. ]]

   They are expected to publish the text of the DRR and of their
   response but not necessarily to publish minutes of the related
   discussions.  They are at liberty to request additional information
   as needed during their analysis of the dispute, and to hold open
   discussions if they so wish.



Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


   In all cases a decision concerning the disposition of the dispute,
   and the communication of that decision to the parties involved, must
   be accomplished within a reasonable period of time.

   [[ The question has come up how much time the community wants the
   IESG or IAB to spend on appeals.  This sentence is a proposed answer:
   ]]

   The effort expended on dispute resolution must be kept in proportion;
   the community may prefer the IESG and IAB to spend most of their time
   on regular business.

   These procedures intentionally and explicitly do not establish a
   fixed maximum time period that shall be considered "reasonable" in
   all cases.  The Internet Standards Process places a premium on
   consensus and efforts to achieve it, and deliberately foregoes
   deterministically swift execution of procedures in favor of a
   latitude within which more genuine technical agreements may be
   reached.


8.  Security Considerations

   This document does not directly affect the security of the Internet.


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request for IANA assignments.


10.  Acknowledgements

   Much material from BCP 9 [RFC2026] originally edited by Scott Bradner
   has been included.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


11.  Change log [RFC Editor: please remove this section]

   draft-carpenter-ietf-disputes-00: original version, 2006-06-16.


12.  References






Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.

   [RFC3932]  Alvestrand, H., "The IESG and RFC Editor Documents:
              Procedures", BCP 92, RFC 3932, October 2004.

   [RFC3978]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78,
              RFC 3978, March 2005.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

12.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.


Appendix A.  Main changes from RFC 2026 section 6.5

   The name has been changed from the legalistic "Appeal" to the less
   confrontational "Dispute Resolution."

   The scope has been clarified with respect to which and whose
   decisions are covered.  At the same time, some restriction has been
   placed on repeated attempts to dispute the same decision.

   The IESG and IAB have been given explicit discretion whether a
   dispute has suspensive effect.

   Slightly more specific requirements have been placed on the content
   of Dispute Resolution Requests.

   Other changes are intended only as clarification or as description of
   current practice.










Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


Author's Address

   Brian Carpenter
   IBM
   8 Chemin de Blandonnet
   1214 Vernier,
   Switzerland

   Email: brc@zurich.ibm.com










































Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Dispute Resolution in the IETF            June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Carpenter               Expires December 18, 2006              [Page 12]


