 



Internet Engineering Task Force                                  K. Wang
Internet-Draft                                                 X. Zhuang
Intended status: Informational                              China Mobile
Expires: August 31, 2015                               February 27, 2015


            Integrated Security with Access Network Use Case
                draft-qi-i2nsf-access-network-usecase-01

Abstract

   In traditional telecommunication system, operators usually provide
   general and limited security protection service for users during
   access (e.g. AKA in 3G/4G network). Now, with the development of
   network virtualization technology and data center, the physical
   network device is became a network function software which is running
   on virtual machine of server and the network functions can be
   flexible and elastic. So operators can provide more flexible security
   function to users.  In order to provide more flexible security
   service, interfaces between operator's network and user should be
   needed.  These interfaces will be used to request/achieve operate
   (Virtual) Network Security Functions from operator's network. This
   draft describes use cases for using the interface in operator's
   network environment.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 31, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.


 


Wang &Zhuang &Qi &Liu   Expires August 31, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Access Network Use Case            February 2015


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Use case summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Use case for Instantiation and Configuration of Security
       Service Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Use case for Updating Security Service Function  . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Use case for Collecting and Feedback of Status of Security
       Service Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  The Benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6




1.  Introduction

   This draft is a revised version of draft-qi-i2nsf-access-network-
   usecase. This draft refines the original use case to more concrete.
   In draft-qi-i2nsf-access-network-usecase, an interface between UE and
   network was described. This draft describes two interfaces, user can
   use client to achieve security service of operator via these
   interfaces. The user can be an enterprise, an enterprise user,
   administrator of operator etc. The detailed revisions are as below:
   1.For original use case-Interface about sending security
   configuration information from network to UE: All examples have been
   deleted and network did not send configuration information to UE via
   interface.  User will send security service request to security
   controller to configure NSF(s). 2.For original use case-Interface
   about optional security function negotiation between    Network and
   UE: All examples have been deleted and there is no security function
   negotiation between network and UE. User will send security service
   request to security controller to configure NSF(s). 3.For original
 


Wang &Zhuang &Qi &Liu   Expires August 31, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Access Network Use Case            February 2015


   use case-UE proposed security request to the network: The original
   interactions between user and network will be more concrete. For
   example, the original interaction between user and specific network
   element will be revised interaction between user's client and
   security controller. The interaction specific network element and
   security function settings will be described in detail. 4.For
   original section of Abstraction and The Benefits: In order to better
   match with revised use cases, they have been refined also.

2.  Conventions used in this document

   The section clarifies the intended meaning of specific terms used
   within this document.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS.  Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying [RFC2119] significance.

3.  Use case summary

   With the development of virtualization and NFV, operators can provide
   more flexible security services and users wish to get more customized
   security services.This draft describes users(e.g. enterprise users,
   BSS/OSS and so on) using operators' flexible security services
   through client.Reference model is as followed,

                       +----------+
+-------+              |          |                  +-------+
|       |  Interface 1 |Security  |   Interface 2    | NSF(s)|
|Client <-------------->          <------------------>       |
|       |              |Controller|                  |       |
+-------+              |          |                  +-------+
                       +----------+
    Figure 1. Reference Model for using Operator's security service



4.  Use case for Instantiation and Configuration of Security Service
   Function

   Client sends collected security requirements through interface 1 to
   security controller in operator's network which then translates them
   into a security function or a set of security functions then the
   corresponding vNSFs are instantiated and configured through interface
 


Wang &Zhuang &Qi &Liu   Expires August 31, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Access Network Use Case            February 2015


   2.For example, an enterprise user A is a tenant of operator data
   center and wants to filter all TCP data packets flowing to A's
   network. Such a requirement is sent from client to security
   controller through interface 1. Security controller translates the
   requirement into a firewall function and then instantiates a firewall
   NSF through interface 2. The corresponding filter rule is also
   configured onto this firewall NSF.

5.  Use case for Updating Security Service Function

   User can use client to update security service function, including
   adding/deleting a security service function and updating
   configurations at former security service function. For example, if
   client collects a requirement of enabling an IDS service from the
   user who has instantiated a security service, the requirement will be
   sent to security controller through interface 1 and be translated and
   then security controller instantiates and configures an IDS NSF
   through interface 2. Another example is that if the user A mentioned
   in use case 1 wants to filter all UDP packets besides TCP packets,
   client sends this requirement to security controller through
   interface 1 and then security controller configures translated
   requirement onto the former firewall NSF.

6.  Use case for Collecting and Feedback of Status of Security Service
   Function

   When users want to get the executing status of security service, they
   can request the status statistics information of NSF(s) from client.
   Security controller can collect vNSFs' status statistics information
   through interface 2 and give feedback to client through interface 1,
   which is helpful for user analyzing or updating security
   requirements. Users can collect status statistics information of
   NSF(s) related to their security service and can also be authorized
   to collect all vNSFs' status statistics information for the analysis
   of big data for network security like the overall security status of
   the network in operator's data center.

7.  The Benefits

   It will bring benefits by defining such interfaces. Operator could
   provide more flexible and tailored security service for specific user
   which would lead more efficient and secure protection to each user.

8.  IANA Considerations

   TBD

9.  Informative References
 


Wang &Zhuang &Qi &Liu   Expires August 31, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Access Network Use Case            February 2015


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Authors' Addresses

   Ke Wang
   China Mobile
   32 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xicheng District
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: wangkeyj@chinamobile.com


   Xiaojun Zhuang
   China Mobile
   32 Xuanwumenxi Ave, Xicheng District
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: zhuangxiaojun@chinamobile.com

   Minpeng Qi
   China Mobile
   32 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xicheng District
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: qiminpeng@chinamobile.com

   Fuwen Liu
   China Mobile
   32 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xicheng District
   Beijing  100053
   China


   Email: liufuwen@chinamobile.com













Wang &Zhuang &Qi &Liu   Expires August 31, 2015                 [Page 5]
