PKIX Working Group                                          Hyangjin Lee
Internet Draft                                              Tae Kyu Choi
Document: draft-choi-pkix-ui-00.txt                       In Kyoung Jeon
Expires: October 9, 2004                                       Jaeil Lee
Target category : Standard Track                                    KISA
                                                           July 10, 2004




User Interface Requirement for the Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
                      <draft-choi-pkix-ui-00.txt>




Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC 2026].


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   This document provides basic requirements of user interface at PKI
   client software that satisfy a full of PKI implementation with
   usability. To meet with the requirements, it defines root CA
   certificate trust mechanism, certificate sharing mechanism, and
   certificate representation method.






Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 1]






INTERNET-DRAFT   User Interface Requirement for the PKI        July 2004



1. Introduction


   For effective PKI implementation, this document defines a basic
   requirement for developing user interface in terms of security,
   interoperability, and usability aspect.


2. Requirements


2.1 Security


   Client software that is downloaded from PKI application servers must
   be installed and upgraded with a reliable and secure manner. After
   that, it is to establish secure trust relationship with root CA in
   order to receive root CA public key. If the root CA cer-tificate is
   updated, the client software also must establish trust with the
   updated root CA certificate.


2.1.1 Client software installation and upgrade


   Client software should be obtained in secure manner for installation.
   It is necessary to provide a secure method to distribute client
   software and this document defines it as automatic update function,
   which is a similar concept with Window update in MS Windows.
   Automatic update function is also used for software upgrade purpose.



2.1.2 Root CA certificate trust mechanism


   The relying party should obtain the root CA certificate and public
   key in secure manner. Major root CA certificates are installed in
   major web browsers and it is automatically installed from beginning
   installation so that user can easily make trust with root CA.


   However, a user from third party certificate that cannot install in
   web browser has difficulty in identifying their own root public key
   trust relationship. In addition, it becomes inevitable situation when
   trusted certificate is expired or updated. Therefore, it is necessary
   to provide a secure method to distribute root public key and this
   document defines it as automatic update function, which is a similar
   concept with Window update in MS Windows.


   An end entity must securely possess the public key of its root CA
   during the end entity initialization process [RFC2510] by acquiring
   root CA certificate. It can be done through many ways but this
   document describes the root CA certificate trust mechanism using
   client software.


   The root CA can make arrangements with manufactures of application




Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 2]






INTERNET-DRAFT   User Interface Requirement for the PKI        July 2004



   software to deliver the root CA certificate within their software.
   End entities can acquire the root CA certificate after installation
   of client software. The end entity can show the hash value of
   acquired root CA certificate to trust it. The end entity may acquire
   the hash value of root CA certificate through face-to-face contacting
   or root CA web site before software installation.


   If the root CA certificate is expired, then all PKI entities can not
   use their certificate. Therefore, the root CA certificate must me
   updated before expiration date of it, and the client software also
   must acqurie the updated root CA certificate. At this point, the end
   entity can use the client software upgrade fuction. During client
   software upgrading, it can download the updated root CA certificate.
   And then it can trust the updated root CA certificate using the same
   mechanism with an initial installation of old root CA certificate.
   This approach is more convinient and secure way to manage root  CA
   public key information, especially when the root CA public key is
   more then one or requires frequent update.


2.2 Interoperability


   Interoperability can be accomplished by using one certificate to many
   PKI applications. It can be defined as certificate and private key
   sharing mechanism that mainly aims for increasing certificate
   mobility, which benefits the user's convenience. This section will
   introduce certificate and private key sharing mechanism as covering
   three management rules of certificate and private key.


2.2.1 Certificate sharing mechanism


   Generally, PKI application such as web browser or mail application
   defines the user's certificate and private key location by their own
   way. However, most users want to use multi PKI programs by one
   certificate without each certificate per programs under one CA.
   Therefore, we define common storage location by storing devices for
   various operating systems.


2.2.1.1 Common storage location


   To increase compatibility in different client softwares, user
   interface defines to make a common path to store certificate and
   private key for various storage mediums in each operating system.


   For example, a common storage location of hard disk in MS Windows
   system is assigned to be:


       C:\Program Files\IETF\PKIX





Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 3]






INTERNET-DRAFT   User Interface Requirement for the PKI        July 2004



   At this path, the directory name of 'IETF' location is replaced by
   PKI domain name, and the directory name of 'PKIX' location is
   assigned by organization value of distinguished names in certificate.



2.2.1.2 Storage format


   Considering certificate size stored at storage medium and
   compatibility with other operating systems, it must define storage
   format that satisfy these requirements such as DER or PEM format.


   For storage format of private key, it has to use PKCS#5, which is a
   password based cryptographic method. Afterward, it is stored to
   storage medium according to PKCS#8.


2.2.1.3 File naming rule of certificate and private key


   On occasion of updating CA certificate and having a certificate which
   has muti identical DN, it uses an unique file name as a form of
   extension field and certificate serial number within certificate and
   private key file name of CA in order to establish certificate
   validation path.


   Namely, a form of the file name for root CA or CA certificate is
   defined as 'SKI value_serial number.der'. SKI(Subject Key Identifier)
   is an extension field value of  Subject Key Identifier and it
   represents as a hex number of forty digits.  Serial number represents
   as decimal number.


   For example of MS Windows, absolute file path and name of CA
   certificate can be represented as following:


       C:\Program Files\IETF\PKIX\SKI value_serial number.der


   Regarding as individual certificate and private key, it should be
   stored as a form of 'xxx.der' or 'xxx.key' after creating a directory
   named by DN. 'xxx' naming is identically used for distinguishing
   between digital signature and certificate distribution purpose.


2.2.2 Import and export function


   To use certificate in other PKI applications on the Internet X.509
   Public Key Infrastructure, user interface should offer certificate
   export and import function according to PKCS#12.








Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 4]






INTERNET-DRAFT   User Interface Requirement for the PKI        July 2004



2.3 Usability


   User interface must consider usability on implementing PKI functions,
   so that a user who doesn't know about any PKI knowledge can easily
   and safely use PKI services. In this section, it specifies
   certificate representation method and categorization of storage
   medium at PKI client software.


2.3.1 Certificate representation


   Essential part of initial user inteface must be composed of three
   kinds of representaion areas;


       - Certificate information area
       - Storage type selection area
       - Certificate management area


   Certificate information area in client software is to displaying
   certificate that was automatically searched by client software so
   that user can select the certificate to be log in. At this point, a
   detail information of certificate including subject name, expiration
   date, issuer about certificate should be listed.


   For selecting various storage types, storage type selection area in
   client software should appropriately display its storage medium by
   categorization defined Section 2.3.2.


   Additionally, certificate management area should offer certificate
   management functions as required;


       - Import and export function
       - Public key password change
       - Certificate delete function
       - Certificate verification function


2.3.2 Categorization of Storage Medium


   On the certificate representation, a choice for storage medium should
   effectively provide for user to select the desired choice. In order
   to do so, storage medium is independently categorized by the nature
   of storage medium. User interface may consider to include the
   following:


       - Hard disk
       - Floppy Diskette
       - USB Drive, token, and key
       - Smartcard
       - CD




Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 5]






INTERNET-DRAFT   User Interface Requirement for the PKI        July 2004



3. Reference


   [PKCS5]     RSA Laboratories, PKCS#5 v2.0 "Password-Based Cryptography
               Standard", RSA Data Security Inc., 1993


   [PKCS8]     RSA Laboratories, PKCS#8 v1.2 "Private  Key Information
               Syntax Standard", RSA Data Security Inc., 1993


   [PKCS12]    RSA Laboratories, PKCS#12 v1.0 "Personal  Key Information
               Exchange Syntax Standard", RSA Data Security Inc., 1993


   [RFC2459]   R.Housley, "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
               Certificate and CRL Profile", RFC 2459, January 1999


   [RFC2119]   S.Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels",RFC3467, March 1997


4. Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
   to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
   explain it or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied,
   published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
   restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
   and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
   works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any
   way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the
   Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
   for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
   procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards
   process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
   languages other than English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
   be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
   PURPOSE."







Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 6]






INTERNET-DRAFT   User Interface Requirement for the PKI        July 2004



5. Authors' Address


    Hyangjin Lee
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: +82-2-405-5448
    FAX  : +82-2-405-5499
    Email: jiinii@kisa.or.kr


    Tae Kyu Choi
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: +82-2-405-5448
    FAX  : +82-2-405-5499
    Email: tkchoi@kisa.or.kr


    Inkyoung Jeon
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: +82-2-405-5432
    FAX  : +82-2-405-5499
    Email: inkyoung@kisa.or.kr


    Jaeil Lee
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: +82-2-405-5300
    FAX  : +82-2-405-5499
    Email: jilee@kisa.or.kr



























Lee, et. al.             Expires - October 2004                 [Page 7]