


Network Working Group                                      XingWei. Wang
Internet-Draft                                             XiuShuang. Yi
Intended status: Standards Track                                Yu. Wang
Expires: July 10, 2009                                        Ming. Dong
                                                             Qiang. Chen
                                                                     NEU
                                                         January 6, 2009


                     Self-organizing network model
                  draft-xwwang-sonnetworkmodel-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 10, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.





Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


Abstract

   In this paper, a kind of self-organizing network model, which
   provides a new kind of network model based on the swarm intelligence
   for the suppliers, was introduced.  The document defines the problems
   of the existing network, as well as the characteristics of the next
   generation Internet NGI, illustrates the motivation of self-
   organizing network model.  In this paper, a network architecture
   model based on a kind of swarm intelligence was introduced, the
   collection technical term was defined, network parameters in the
   network node, network behavior and the node stability depict portrait
   was described.  The document describes the important factors such as
   the user needs under the self-organizing network model, the network
   satisfaction, the avail computing, the path and multicast tree
   evaluation, the mathematical models of the QoS routing optimization,
   small-world behavior and so on, which have a relationship with the
   self-organizing network QoS routing.


































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  The motivation and the existent problems . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Related issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  Swarm intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  QoS routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Self-organizing network design model . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.1.  Model one: The design attains the partial behavior
           rule of the overall situation attribute  . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.2.  Develop the implicit coordination  . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.3.  Minimize the status information of existence over a
           long period of time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.4.  Design the protocol of the orientation change  . . . . . . 16
   6.  Network model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     6.1.  Network parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     6.2.  The design of the network behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     6.3.  Node stability depict  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   7.  User demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     7.1.  Unicast user demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     7.2.  Multicast user demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   8.  Link satisfaction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     8.1.  The illegible description of the Link parameter  . . . . . 26
     8.2.  Satisfaction function  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     8.3.  The computing of the Link satisfaction . . . . . . . . . . 29
   9.  The avail computing and the game analysis  . . . . . . . . . . 32
     9.1.  The cost and the price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     9.2.  The computing of the Link avails . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     9.3.  The game analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   10. The path and multicast tree evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   11. Mathematics model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     11.1. Unicast mathematics model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     11.2. Mathematics model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   12. Worldlet behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
   13. The route strategy base on self-organizing network . . . . . . 42
   14. Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
   15. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
   16. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
   Appendix A.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48










Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


1.  Introduction

   In this paper, a kind of self-organizing network model, which
   provides a new kind of network model based on the swarm intelligence
   for the suppliers, was introduced.  To a certain extent it can be
   resolved the problems along with the expansion of the network size
   and dynamic-increase.  The document defines the problems of the
   existing network, as well as the characteristics of the next
   generation Internet NGI, illustrates the motivation of self-
   organizing network model.  In this paper, a network architecture
   model based on a kind of swarm intelligence was introduced, the
   collection technical term was defined, network parameters in the
   network node, network behavior and the node stability depict portrait
   was described.  The document describes the important factors such as
   the user needs under the self-organizing network model, the network
   satisfaction, the avail computing, the path and multicast tree
   evaluation, the mathematical models of the QoS routing optimization,
   small-world behavior and so on, which have a relationship with the
   self-organizing network QoS routing.
































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


2.  Term

   We have the following definition of the term, attention: out of the
   self-organizing network these terms maybe have other definitions, so
   our definition is not universal, only having specific meaning in this
   paper:

   Router

      The smart node witch has a characteristic of biological behavior
      and has the ability to transmit and process in the self-organizing
      network.

   Link

      Communication line which connects the smart node in the self-
      organizing network.

   QoS

      It specifies variety of performance of packet transmission in the
      network, it is descriptions to variety of performance, include
      operational reliability, delay, jitter, packet loss and throughput
      rates.

   Delay

      Include the link transmission delay and the delay from its
      upstream node in processing on the path and communication
      conversion delay.

   Delay-Jitter

      It means the Delay-Jitter from its upstream node in processing on
      the path.

   Error Rate

      Include the link transmission error rate and the error rate from
      its upstream node in processing on the path.  Assume that the size
      of the error rate achieved by the business which uses the Link has
      nothing to do with the type of business, only have relations with
      the type of the link and the network state at that time.

   Stability

      Here we define the stability of the node to say the state how the
      nodes can maintain the same degree of stability, the nodes having



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


      a higher stability should be focus on the consideration when the
      routing.

   User demands

      User demand is the requirements of the internet users on the QoS
      parameters of the communication line.  As the state of the network
      is imprecise what make the user demands indefinite, so use a
      series of range to express.

   Cost

      It is the cost of resources from providing the network service by
      network providers.

   Price

      Price is the charge that the users pay for using the network
      resources.

   Worldlet edge

      With running of the routing algorithmic, the nodes in the network
      will gradually accumulate some of the path to the other nodes;
      here we called these path worldlet edges.


























Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


3.  The motivation and the existent problems

   As the growing of computer network and the increasing of dynamic
   network, there is a challenge to the existing network model and
   routing mechanism.  The expanding of the network scale requires
   strong self-organizing and self-management capabilities.  Dynamic
   network require a distributed and adaptive routing mechanism, which
   the node should not maintenance the global network information.  With
   the combination of various technologies, especially mobile, wireless
   and broadband internet access at home and in the company.  Numerous
   mobile terminals, devices and sensors, make the Internet scale growth
   sustainably.  At the same time, applications will be all over the
   body, around the individual, family, transport and broader.  All of
   this has increased the time and space complexity of network topology,
   and complexity of the dynamic, but also increased network
   administrator and user's burden.  In order to alleviate the burden on
   users and administrators and enable them extricate from the complex
   network configuration, a self-organizing network need to be designed
   and developed, and as far as possible to minimize the involvement of
   members.

   Self-organizing phenomenon is prevalent in our lives.  In the natural
   world, fish have a good organization into a structure of the group
   around, the ants could find the shortest route to find food, and
   these are good examples of self-organizing behavior.  In the act of
   self-organizing phenomena, all of the entities establish a
   organizational structure which does not need a coordination center.
   Instead, these entities interact directly and constantly changed
   reacting to the local environment.

   Self-organizing is not just distributed localized control, it is a
   result of independent entities relationship, structure and function.
   In the self-organizing systems, simple entity's acting in the micro-
   level can reach to the entire system's complex acting.  This
   phenomenon known as the "emerging."

   Self-organizing system another important characteristic is the
   adaptation to system environment changing.  In fact, these entities
   have been in a constant implicit way to adapt to changing.  For
   example, the self-organizing system often re-restructuring as
   reaction triggering to the internal and external changing.  By doing
   so, it towards a desired useful structure and avoid to other
   structures.

   It will be robustness towards failure and damaging by combining the
   self- organizing inherent adaptive and distributed properties.  The
   system dose not exist a single point of failure, and the system can
   repair and correct the damage without outside helping.  Therefore,



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   self-organizing system will not be collapse suddenly; it just
   downgraded slowly when it has problems.

   Now, the complexity of the communications network has become an
   increasingly serious problem, the latest progress of self-organizing
   system indicated that it may be find some solution here.  Self-
   organizing network model is based on the building up characteristics
   and behaviors of self-organizing.  In this paper, we will introduce a
   kind of network model based on characteristics and behaviors of self-
   organizing.









































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


4.  Related issues

   In the network environment, we need to solve the main problem is
   routing problem.  With the continuous expansion of the size of the
   Internet, multimedia services and real-time services are emerging;
   the user's requirement to the QoS rises continuously.  Based on
   various performance parameters, the QoS routing is to focus on issues
   in any of the network model.

   In the self-organizing network environment, the solution to the
   routing problem bases on the QoS is general use routing algorithm and
   Routing strategy based on Swarm Intelligence.  Before we introduce
   specific self-organizing network model, we first introduce Swarm
   intelligence and QoS routing.

4.1.  Swarm intelligence

   Swarm intelligence refers to the number of simple individuals have to
   cooperate with each other through the complex characteristics of
   intelligent behavior.  A significant mark which the concept of swarm
   Intelligence was formally put forward was in the E Bonabeau which was
   published by Oxford University in 1999 and a monograph named "Swarm
   Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial System" wrote by M Dorigo
   and other people.

   The concept of swarm comes from the observations to a number of
   insects such as ants, bees, and others in the natural world.  Only a
   single ant's intelligence is not swarm, but a few ants coming
   together, they can handle the food what they encountered on the road
   together.  If having a group of ants, they will be able to work
   together to build a strong and beautiful nest, to resist the risk
   together, to bring-up future generations.  This swarm behavior which
   demonstrated by gregarious biology was known as the swarm
   intelligence.

   In 1994, Millon as M M raised five basic principles that Smart
   intelligence should followed:

   1.  Proximity Principle: Swarm can carry out simple space and time;

   2.  Quality Principle, Swarm can be able to responds to the quality
       factor;

   3.  Principle of Diverse Response: The scope of the Swarm should not
       be too narrow;

   4.  Stability Principle: Swarm should not change their behavior when
       the environment changes;



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   5.  Adaptability Principle: Swarm can change their behavior in due
       course when it doesn't require too high price.

   Swarm intelligence has following characteristics:

   1.  Control is distributed, there is no central control.  Thus, it is
       better to adapt to the working state of current network
       environment.  It is also robust, one or more individual failure
       can not affect to the solution of whole problems;

   2.  Each individual swarm can change the environment, this is a way
       of indirect communication between the individual, which called
       stigmergy.  As Swarm intelligence can transmit information in a
       way of indirect communication.  With the individual number
       increase, the communication overhead increases smaller.  So the
       Swarm intelligence has a better scalability;

   3.  The ability and rules of individual in the Swarm intelligence are
       simple.  So the realization of Swarm intelligence is convenient;

   4.  Swarm intelligence complex behavior is emerging from the
       interaction of simple individual.  So, the swarm has the ability
       of self-organizing.

   Internet as a loose network connects the world.  The key technologies
   about the realization of world-wide connectivity are routing
   technology.  In the current Internet, routing has been essentially
   out of the traditional centralized control of telecommunications
   networks with the meaning of self-organization.  However, this self-
   organization is reflected in the router level.  Router has a number
   of different routing protocols, which use different routing
   algorithm.  In order to make network operate coordinately, routers
   need to exchange a large number of information about links and
   network status, then calculate and update routing table, it has poor
   scalability.  Internet's rapid growth makes the existing route
   scalability and robustness inadequate.  In order to adapt to the new
   network applications, a new and effective routing algorithm with
   better scalability need.

   At present, as the extending of network scale and increasing of
   network speed, simplifying the construction and management of network
   nodes has became the key factor of reducing network costs, increasing
   network utilization and enhancing network reliability.

   Inspired by the entomological society&#65292;many non-smart simple
   individuals show intelligence through co-operation simple acts,
   produced a series of complex solution to the problem by simulating,
   that is Swarm Intelligence Technology.  By applying Swarm



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   Intelligence to the network routing, finding the best routing through
   a certain co-ordination of network routing proxy created by network
   node, and increases network scalability, adaptability and robustness.

4.2.  QoS routing

   QoS specifies variety of performance of packet transmission in the
   network, it is descriptions to variety of performance, include
   Operational reliability, delay, jitter, packet loss and throughput
   rates.

   With the continuous expansion of internet scale, emerging of
   multimedia services and real-time operations, the QoS need is
   improved unceasingly.  The research of QoS is helpful to improve
   network efficiency and reduce network cost.  QoS mechanisms can be
   adopted by the provider, according to the different users of the
   different QoS requirements, provides a wide range of differentiated
   services and enhance customer satisfaction and improve network
   provider earnings.  So, QoS is need in Self-organizing network.

   There is two ways to enhance QoS.  One is node control; the other is
   the control of whole network or local network.  As the route is
   directly related to network performance, QoS routing is a key
   technology to resolve QoS problems.

   QoS routing main goal is to meet transmission path of QoS
   requirements, and ensures the efficient use of network resources.

   QoS routing process involves two aspects as follows:

   1.  Choosing of Measurement parameters

          Measurement parameter is an important parameter in the process
          of QoS routing.  It has a direct bearing on the algorithm
          complexity.  Measurement parameter is divided into three
          categories: Convexity parameters, additive parameters and
          multiplicative parameter.

   2.  Routing

          In accordance with the parameters and network information, has
          found the way to guarantee QoS.  How to choose the path and
          ensure service sending along the path needs to be considered
          in the routing.

   Source routing algorithm and the concept are very simple, easy to
   implement and evaluate.  Source node's centralized calculation can
   avoid kinds of shortcomings of distributed calculation, such as



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   inconsistent data in each node may cause the deadlock and the loop.
   However, since each source node needs to collect and maintain the
   whole global state, the source routing has the following problems:

   1.  As the source routing needs link state interactive, the overhead
       of maintaining Global state is large.

   2.  Source node calculates a viable path by Global state, so the
       overhead of time and space is large.

   3.  The obsolescence of Global state source node maintained cause a
       great affection to routing performance.

   Distributed Routing spreads calculations into all nodes, reduces the
   complexity of the calculations, and even some algorithm only require
   locale state, therefore it has good scalability.  However,
   distributed processing is more complex, especially in the multi-QoS
   bound difficult to design a good heuristic.  In addition, each node
   calculates a viable path depend on the local information
   independently, it may be cause loop since inconsistent information,
   which requires additional loop detection algorithm.

   Hierarchical routing reduces the information nodes interacted and the
   computational complexity, has a good scalability.  However,
   information gathered led to the loss of state, it cause a great
   negative affection to QoS routing.

   Routing can be divided into two categories: unicast routing and
   multicast routing, the algorithm is divided into unicast routing and
   multicast routing algorithm.

   In QoS routing there are two basic problems: optimization and
   performance bound.

   The optimize problem is looking for corresponding QoS optimal path.
   Performance bound is looking for corresponding path greater than QoS
   (such as bandwidth) or less than QoS (such as delay), choosing a
   solution in the set of performance requirements.  Optimization
   requires the optimal solution, performance bound only need a solution
   meet the demand.

   QoS routing algorithm have the following characteristics:

   1.  Intelligent

          Generally use smart algorithm, such as neural networks,
          evolutionary computation, and other intelligent optimization.




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   2.  Heuristic

          Particularly in the multi-constraint QoS routing, due to the
          complexity of the calculation is complete NP, require the
          heuristic algorithm.

   3.  Adaptive

          It can adapt the network changes automatically, make network
          load balancing and not to obstruct.

   4.  Deal with inaccurate information

          Including the cost of fuzzy, imprecise network information,
          layered routing when topology aggregation.

   5.  Fairness

          Equitably access, equitably share resources or account QoS.

   6.  Robustness

          It can re-routing or has an alternative path when linking
          failure.



























Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


5.  Self-organizing network design model

5.1.  Model one: The design attains the partial behavior rule of the
      overall situation attribute

   We consider a design which has a network function with establishment
   of global characteristics, such as: a unique address or connection.
   A center of the solution is to introduce a special entity to be
   responsible for the establishment of global attributes (such as: an
   address server).  However, self-organizing paradigm distribute the
   responsibilities to various independent entities: there is no single
   entity to "manage" the entire organization, but each of the entities
   contributes to a collective act.  According to this model, we must
   design a localized rules of conduct, if the rules applied to all
   entities, will be able to automatically achieve the desired global
   attributes (or at least close to).  The localization means that the
   entity only has a partial view of the network and only interacts with
   their neighbors.

   If we are able to simplify the overall attributes which we are wanted
   into the local attributes, this method can do it.  In Multi-hop
   wireless network the topology control is a good example which can be
   used to explain the concept.  Here, the overall attributes which we
   are wanted is all of the global device connectivity, keep low power
   consumption and interference.  The overall attributes can be mapped
   into a local attributes: If each node to maintain all of its
   k-nearest neighbor connections, where k depends on the specific
   parameters, such a network topology will be derived from a high
   possibility of link.  In order to reach the local characteristics,
   each of the nodes should accordingly adjust its transmission power.

   In general, most self-organizing systems base on the partial view and
   the local acts which are simplified.  Some people might argue the
   localized algorithm can not achieve global optimization in one
   specific attributes, but only to provide a nearly optimal solution.
   However, the second-best sometimes may be not a shortcoming in the
   dynamic network.  Here the best configuration changes frequently, so
   fast reaching a stable configuration is important.

   Finally, attention local attributes also means that the change in the
   network only impact Local influence.  On the other hand, the decision
   of the local may also bring in a state of conflict in the network.
   For example, using local address assignment, two nodes may have the
   same IP address.  This discussion led us into the second self-
   organizing network design model: tolerance and dealing with not
   perfect coordination.





Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


5.2.  Develop the implicit coordination

   In any kind of the communications system, nodes share resources such
   as bandwidth and address.  In order to make access to these resources
   in effective and fair, nodes must be coordinated in some way.  One
   solution is to avoid the conflicts and contradictions between nodes.
   For example, we can assign a channel to only one user in a
   communication or a stream to.  This can be done through explicit
   coordination.  This form of coordination is typically applied in the
   center of the system.  For example: signaling channel and the central
   database of addresses in cellular telephone.

   If the network is dynamic, asynchronous, the pre-conflict avoiding
   and explicit signaling may be a serious problem.  There is way to
   tolerate conflict, if we can manage them in a including way, that is,
   if the conflict is localized, time-bound, or easy to detect and
   resolve, the conflict is acceptable.  A well-known example is the
   CSMA / CD protocol in LAN.  Another example is that the address
   repeated testing in ad hoc network; it abandoned the ideals of the
   globally unique address, but allocated to the local node a unique
   address, besides having a local detection and resolving the address
   conflict.

5.3.  Minimize the status information of existence over a long period of
      time

   The third design model has a relationship with the network state.
   Much of the network topology needs the long-term survival information
   which has relationship with the node, the equipment storage, and
   maintenance and network status.  For example, in cellular networks
   each of the device stores a special network address, such as
   location, security database, language boxes and the Internet gateway.
   This information must be manually configured by users, some network
   administrators or managers.  In addition, some information of
   physical storage needs to maintain a state of synchronization what
   means that some information is continually stored in a number of
   between the nodes and equipments.  Routing tables and data security
   is a very good example.  In a dynamic network environment maintain
   the continuity of this is very difficult, especially when the node
   disconnect very often.  We always need some central entity to ensure
   that the state information is the newest.

   In order to achieve a high level self-organization, we should
   minimize the number of the status information which existed over a
   long period of time.  One way is to bring in discovery mechanism;
   nodes can be able to get the information of the network entities or
   services.  There are two different discovery mechanisms: reaction and
   pre-determined model.  In reaction model discovery mechanism, the



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   node send asking message through multicast or broadcast, if the
   entity which was looked for has received the information, it uses the
   form of unicast in response.  In the pre-determined model discovery
   mechanism, the special entities take the initiative to send a message
   to announce their existence.  If the node has received such
   information, they know the existence of the address and type of
   service and other information.  Information maintains in this
   discovery mechanisms and it is regularly updated, but it dose not
   need to survive for a long time.  Networks become having more
   adaptability and robustness.  In addition, it decreases the
   assumption for other nodes, and removes the dependence between nodes.

5.4.  Design the protocol of the orientation change

   Another important aspect is the ability of the node what respond to
   on the network and environmental change, this is mainly because of
   largely the changes in the resource constraints, the changes of the
   user's needs, the node remove or the node fail.  Because there is no
   central entity to inform the other nodes on the change of the
   information, each node will have to continue to observe the local
   environment and respond in an appropriate way.

   There are three levels of adaptation:

      The first level: design a protocol to deal with the changes such
      as failure and moving.  Basagni movement-adapt to the clustering
      algorithm is a case in point.

      The second level: Design a protocol to meet their parameters as a
      response to change, in order to optimize the system performance.
      For example: McDonald's clustering algorithm, it puts the size of
      the cluster as a function of mobility level in observed network to
      adapt the changes.

      The third level: Design a protocol to replace the current protocol
      which can not work because of the serious change.  For example,
      may be the dynamic of the network too high, resulting in a
      clustering algorithm can no longer carry out cluster functional;
      it can be based on hierarchical clustering routing switch to
      flooding.











Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


6.  Network model

   Self-organizing network model can be expressed as a connected graph
   G(V, E), V which has a characteristic of biological behavior and has
   the ability to transmit and process is a collection of smart nodes,
   as the network router; E is a collection of edge, to represent the
   link in the networks.

6.1.  Network parameters

   In order to describe the state of the network, here need to introduce
   a number of parameters.

   1.  To the edge we consider the following parameters&#65306;

          Total bandwidth (tbw)

          Available bandwidth (abw)

          Delay dl

             Include the link transmission delay and the delay from its
             upstream node in processing on the path and communication
             conversion delay.  Assume that the size of the delay
             achieved by the business which uses the Link has nothing to
             do with the type of business, only have relations with the
             type of the link and the network state at that time;

          Delay-Jitter (jt)

             it means the Delay-Jitter from its upstream node in
             processing on the path;

          Error Rate (ls)

             Include the link transmission error rate and the error rate
             from its upstream node in processing on the path.  Assume
             that the size of the error rate achieved by the business
             which uses the Link has nothing to do with the type of
             business, only have relations with the type of the link and
             the network state at that time;

   2.  To the node we consider the following parameters:

          Stability (st)

             Because in the self-organizing network nodes have
             biological characteristics, they may occur status change at



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


             any time and cause failure, but the routing failure is not
             hoped by us.  So, here we define the stability of the node
             to say the state how the nodes can maintain the same degree
             of stability, the nodes having a higher stability should be
             focus on the consideration when the routing.

6.2.  The design of the network behavior

   Self-organizing network nodes have acts of biological diversity
   characteristics&#65292;in this article the network behavior was
   designed as following&#65306;

   1.   Birth

           The new node generation needs the information to initialize.

   2.   Environment-aware

        *  Nodes perceive the parameters of connected link

              Perceive the connected edge of total bandwidth, available
              bandwidth, delay, jitter and error rate.

        *  Perceive the status information of adjacent nodes

              Perceive the load and stability of adjacent nodes.

   3.   The establishment/elimination of Relations

        *  Establish a more efficient edge

              With running of the routing algorithmic, the nodes in the
              network will gradually accumulate some of the path to the
              other nodes; here we called these path worldlet edges.
              And sometimes, worldlet edge can be directly used as the
              next hop of routing process, with such a worldlet edge has
              been chosen successfully in the next hop, we will be able
              to find that the source and the purpose nodes which
              connected by these edges are often used to a path, so that
              the two nodes should consider to establish a direct edge.

              Here the main consideration is the using frequency of the
              worldlet edge between the two nodes in a period of time,
              only when the worldlet edge is frequently used in routing
              we consider doing a direct link with the worldlet edge.

              In each of worldlet edges which are saved by the nodes set
              a counter, after every time the worldlet edge has been



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


              successfully used to get purpose node, accordingly the
              counter of the worldlet edge adds 1, but the counter is
              cyclically cleared to update.

              Here set when the counter value of a worldlet edge exceed
              the using time of the existing edge, then create a request
              that establish a direct high-performance edge from
              worldlet edge.

        *  Establish a enhanced edge

              When the margin between the two nodes in the next hop
              options, because they can not meet the requirements of QoS
              frequently abandoned the election, showed that while this
              may be the need to strengthen the QoS parameters in order
              to be able to provide better services for each edge to set
              a counter abandon election.  For a period of time, if a
              certain edge abandoned the election to reach a certain
              threshold number, will be aimed at strengthening the edge
              of the border to generate requests.

        *  Delete edge

              When the two nodes found that the edge between them almost
              never be selected, we can remove the edge.  Here we set up
              a counter for each edge, whenever a edge has been chosen
              into the routing path, the counter of the corresponding
              edge add 1, the counter is cleared from time to time.

              After the node dead the edge with it should be removed.

   4.   Load migration

           In order to balance the network load, rationally use
           resources, in the self-organization node we induct load
           migration, here the migration does not mean the physical
           relocation, the node does not physically move from one
           location to another different location, but shares the
           neighbor nodes load.

           The benefits of this load migration are that nodes do not
           have to move a long distance, and do not need to be
           completely divorced from the original function and even can
           completely continue the original service, but only have
           additional functions.

           Since the migration is for balancing load, optimizing the use
           of resources, to determine the basis for whether to migrate



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


           and the direction of the migration is the load.

           Here, by the different triggered ways the load will be moved
           into active migration and passive migration.

           +  Passive migration

                 Passive migration were forced to migrate the load under
                 the case of overload, can not be self-supporting, or it
                 would happen serious packet loss, it makes the load
                 balance.

                 Node through monitoring its own load, when the load
                 continue heavy for a long time delta(t2), this node
                 will issue a request for migration to the neighbor
                 nodes.  The neighbor nodes which received a request for
                 study its own load.  If the load is light, they may
                 decide to accept the migration.

           +  Active migration

                 Active migration is that when a node finds its own load
                 is light, it will actively view whether there are
                 neighbor nodes with a heavier load around it.  If so,
                 it can transfer the load from neighbors; this plays a
                 role in optimizing the use of resources.

                 By monitoring its own load, when the load continue
                 light for a long time delta(t3), the node further
                 studies the load of its neighbor nodes, if the load of
                 its neighbor nodes are heavier for a period of time
                 delta(t3), the node migrates the load from the
                 neighbors.

                 Here, there should be delta(t1) < delta(t2) <
                 delta(t3).

   5.   Clone

           Cloning means that copy information from one node to another
           new node.  The new node has the information of the cloned
           node; it can work as the cloned node.  The new node can be
           used to replace the cloned node, also can be used to share
           the load from the cloned node.

   6.   Reproduction





Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


           Reproduction is mean that two or more nodes make the
           information integrate into a node.  In this way, the
           reproduced nodes have several nodes of information; can be
           used to replace a number of nodes carrying out the work.

   7.   Dormancy

           When the node does not have task over a period of time, the
           node can be dormant to reduce power consumption;

   8.   Coma

           Because of software errors or non-fatal error cause nodes
           being unable to work for the time, the nodes though
           automatically resume over a period of time or the help from
           out edge world can continue to work.

   9.   Wake up

           Wake up the node in a coma or dormant to continue to work.
           If in the routing process, the current node does not have the
           right next hop routing to choose, it needs to wake up dormant
           neighbors, than the neighbors bring into the next hop.

   10.  Awake

           The node in a coma or dormant will automatically wake up
           after a period of time and then start running.

   11.  Save the wake

           Through a certain degree of outside interference, the node in
           a coma can recover, and can be back to work.

   12.  death

           When the node faces of hardware failure or a fatal error,
           resulting in death, it can no longer work.

6.3.  Node stability depict

   1.  The stability of factor descriptions

          In the self-organizing network some of the acts would create
          instability in the node, for example: node migration,
          dormancy, coma and death and so on, and in most cases these
          acts have relationship with the node load, here we have the
          nodes stability of factor do the following portray:



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


          +  External factors

                Here, the external factors witch impact the node
                stability, refer to the load of the neighbor nodes.  The
                neighbors load affects the node migration, if neighbors
                load is heavy; the node is likely to accept the
                migration of neighbor nodes to share the load.  If the
                neighbors load is light, the possibility of the node
                migration is very small.

          +  Self factors

                Here the self factor mainly refers to the self-node
                load.  The self-node load of is a double factor, on the
                one hand, when the load of the self-node is heavy, the
                node is likely to occur in coma or even death behavior;
                on the other hand, when the node load is light, the node
                is likely to occur migration or dormancy behavior .
                Therefore, to the self-node factor, when the node load
                is neither heavy nor light, it was the most stable, too
                heavy or too light will lead to instability.

   2.  Stability calculation

          With the discussion to the stability factors, we know that the
          nodes can portray the node stability through their own load
          and their neighbors load.

          First of all, discuss how to specifically describe the nodes
          load.  Here we induct two parameters, the CPU cycle ACPU which
          can be used by nodes and the buffer zone ABUF which can be
          used by nodes.  For a node, the greater value of the two
          parameters above, the higher processing power which the nodes
          can be used and the lighter load to their own node, on the
          contrary the more serious.

          In order to be able to integrate the two parameters ACPU and
          ABUF with different units into a formula, here we use the form
          of the useable value can be accounted for the percentage of
          the total value to indicate the value of the two parameters.
          For a node, the node can directly get the total number of the
          CPU cycles TCPU and the total size of the buffer zone TBUF, as
          well as the currently available CPU cycles ACPU and the
          currently available size of the buffer zone ABUF.

          The value of cycle CPU and the value of the BUF can be used
          for calculating, the formula like (3.1) and (3.2).




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


             VACPU=ACPU/TCPU (3.1)

             VABUF=ABUF/TBUF (3.2)

          The value of the VACPU and the value of the VABUF are between
          0 and 1, the greater the value of the two is, it shows that
          the lighter the node load is, and the node load calculation
          formula is:

             LOAD=a/(VACPU) + b/(VABUF) (3.3)

             a, b < 0 & a + b = 1, 1 <= LOAD < infinity.

          In the formula, when the VACPU and the VABUF have taken a zero
          value, we consider the node load is infinite, and do not need
          to calculate.

          The above-mentioned formula is meaning: when the node CPU
          cycles and the buffer witch can be used are large, the node
          load is light, in other words the value of the load is less;
          and when the one or both are less, the node load is heavy, in
          other words the value of the load is larger.

          After we get the node load formula, we can depict the node
          stability in accordance with the above description, and the
          node stability is ST, the value of ST is greater, the node
          stability is higher, as (3.4).

             ST = a/LOAD(neighbor) + b * (1 - 2*| 1/LOAD - 1/2 |) (3.4)

             a, b >0 & a + b = 1.

          In formula (3.4), the first is the factor of a neighbor node
          load, LOAD(neighbor) on behalf of the neighbor nodes load, and
          the node has lots of neighbors, so get the value witch is the
          heaviest load in its neighbor nodes.  Because when the node
          transfer it is most likely to move toward the heaviest load of
          the neighbors, namely:

             LOAD(neighbor) = max{ LOAD(i) } (3.5)

          LOAD(i) is the No.i neighbor node load, 0 < 1 / LOAD(neighbor)
          <= 1, this is mean that the value of LOAD(neighbor) is larger,
          the value of ST is less, contrarily is lager.

          The second is the factor of the node's self load, LOAD is the
          value of the node's self, 0 < 1/LOAD <= 1, so 0<= |1/LOAD-1/2|
          <= 1/2, accordingly 0 <= (1 - 2*|1/LOAD - 1/2|) <= 1, when the



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


          value of 1/LOAD is closely to 1/2, Nodes, the degree of node
          stability is higher, when the value of 1/LOAD is far away from
          1/2, the degree of node stability is lower.  Here, the reason
          why the middle value is 1/2: according to the formula, when
          there is the value of the CPU VACPU and the value of the
          buffer zone which can be used VABUF are all 1/2, LOAD = 2, so
          1/LOAD = 1/2.

          The signification of the formula (3.4) is: the load of the
          neighbor node become heavier, the node stability become
          lighter, contrarily is hoist; the load of the node become
          heavier or lighter, the node stability are lower, in the
          middle value, the node stability become higher.






































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


7.  User demands

   User demand is the requirements of the internet users on the QoS
   parameters of the communication line.  As the state of the network is
   imprecise what make the user demands indefinite, so use a series of
   range to express.

7.1.  Unicast user demands

   Define the user QoS request is R(v( , s), v( , d), delta( , bw),
   delta( , dl), delta( , jt), delta( , ls), p). v(s) belonging to V is
   the source node, v( , d) belonging to V is the purpose node, delta( ,
   bw)=[bw_r(L), bw_r(H)] is the bandwidth demand range, delta(
   ,dl)=[bl_r(L, ), bl_r(H, )] is the delay demand range,
   delta(jt)=[jt_r(L, ), jt_r(H, )] is the Delay-Jitter demand range,
   delta( ,ls)=[ls_r(L, ), ls_r(H, )] is the error rate demand range, p
   is the ceiling of the cost what the users want to pay.  Unicast
   routing is to find a path P(sd) from v(s) to v(d), request its
   available bottleneck bandwidth, total delay of the path, the total
   Delay-Jitter of the path, the total error rate of the path
   Respectively falls in delta(bw), delta(dl), delta(jt), delta(js).

7.2.  Multicast user demands

   Multicast users, everyone in the group has its own end-to-end QoS
   demand, for member v( ,d), QoS demand is R(v( , s), v(d, d), delta(d,
   bw), delta(d, dl), delta(d, jt), delta(d, ls), p(d, )), delta(d,
   bw)=[bw_r(L, d), bw_r(H, d)] is the bandwidth demand range, delta(d,
   dk)=[dl_r(L, d), dl_r(H, d)] is the delay demand range, delta(d,
   jt)=[jt_r(L, d), jt_r(H, d)] is the Delay-Jitter demand range,
   delta(d, ls)=[ls_r(L, d), ls_r(H, d)] is the error rate demand range,
   p(d, ) is the ceiling of the cost what the users want to pay.

   In the isomorphism multicast, the demands of each group members are
   the same.
















Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


8.  Link satisfaction

8.1.  The illegible description of the Link parameter

   As the network is dynamic, this led to the Inaccuracy of the
   information network, so in fact the link parameters are very
   difficult to accurately expressed, so here we import fuzzy math
   knowledge to describe the link parameters.  Link parameters are
   expressed by the form of range of, and then calculating the
   membership degree of the range.

   1.  Available bandwidth

          Assume the value range of the available bandwidth abw(l) on
          the link e(l) is [abw(L, l), abw(H, l)], if user application
          bandwidth is bw, bandwidth membership degree function:

             f(l, abw, bw)=1 ,bw<=abw(L, l)

             f(l, abw, bw)=1/2-1/2*sin{pi/
             [abw(H,l)-abw(L,l)]*[bw-(abw(L,l)+abw(H,l))]} ,abw(L,l
             )<bw<=abw(H, l)

             f(l, abw, bw)=0 ,bw>abw(H, l) (3.6)

          The formula is established on the base of setting the
          bandwidth membership degree function to obey the smaller form
          in the mountain-shaped distribution.

   2.  Delay

          Assume the value range of the available bandwidth dl(l) on the
          link e(l) is [dl(L, l, dl(H, l))], if the sharing value of the
          user application delay on the link dl, bandwidth membership
          degree function:

             f(l, dl, dl)=1 ,dl<=dl(L, l)

             f(l, dl, dl)=1/2+1/2*sin{pi/
             [ld(H,l)-dl(L,l)]*[dl-(dl(L,l)+dl(H,l))]} ,dl(L,l
             )<dl<=dl(H, l)

             f(l, dl, dl)=0 ,dl>dl(H, l) (3.7)

          The formula is established on the base of setting the delay
          membership degree function to obey the smaller form in the
          mountain-shaped distribution.




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   3.  Delay-Jitter

          Assume the value range of the Delay-Jitter bandwidth jtl on
          the link el is[jt(L, l, jt(H, l))], if the sharing values of
          the user application Delay-Jitter on the link jt, bandwidth
          membership degree function:

             f(l, jt, jt)=1 ,jt<=jt(L, l)

             f(l, jt, jt)=1/2+1/2*sin{pi/
             [jt(H,l)-jt(L,l)]*[jt-(jt(L,l)+jt(H,l))]} ,jt(L,l
             )<jt<=jt(H, l)

             f(l, jt, jt)=0 ,jt>jt(H, l) (3.8)

          The formula is established on the base of setting the Delay-
          Jitter membership degree function to obey the smaller form in
          the mountain-shaped distribution.

   4.  Error rate

          Assume the value range of the error rate bandwidth lsl on the
          link el is [ls(L, l, ls(H, l))], if the sharing value of the
          user application error rate on the link ls, bandwidth
          membership degree function:

             f(l, ls, ls)=1 ,ls<=ls(L, l)

             f(l, ls, ls)=1/2+1/2*sin{pi/
             [ls(H,l)-ls(L,l)]*[ls-(ls(L,l)+ls(H,l))]} ,ls(L,l
             )<ls<=ls(H, l)

             f(l, ls, ls)=0 ,ls>ls(H, l) (3.9)

          The formula is established on the base of setting the error
          rate membership degree function to obey the smaller form in
          the mountain-shaped distribution.

8.2.  Satisfaction function

   Setting the user's end-to-end QoS requirement, bandwidth constraints
   range delta( , bw)=[bw_r(L, ), bw_r(H, )], delay constraints range
   delta( , dl)=[dl_r(L, ), dl_r(H, )], Delay-Jitter constraints range
   delta( , jt)=[jt_r(L, ), jt_r(H, )], error rate constraints range
   delta( , ls)=[ls_r(L, ), ls_r(H, )], next give the QoS Satisfaction
   function on the link.





Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   1.  Bandwidth

          Assume the Occupied bandwidth on the link el is bw, the
          bandwidth satisfaction function on the link is:

          S(l,bw,bw)=0 ,bw<bw_r(L, )

          S(l,bw,bw)=e^(-((bw_r(H, )-bw)/(bw-bw_r(L, )))^2) ,bw_r(L,
          )<=bw<bw_r(H, )

          S(l,bw,bw)=1 ,bw<bw_r(L, ) (3.10)

          The formula shows that the larger the value is, the more the
          satisfactory of user's bandwidth is, the largest value of the
          satisfaction is 1.

   2.  Delay

          By the following principles:

          delta( , dl)=[dl_r(L, l), dl_r(H, l)] (3.11)

          dl_r(L, l)=dl/sigma(dl( ,i), e(i) belonging to P)*dl_r(L, )
          (3.12)

          dl_r(H, l)=dl( , l)/sigma(dl( ,i), e(i) belonging to
          P)*dl_r(H, ) (3.13)

          Assume the actual delay on the link el is dll, the delay
          satisfaction on the link is:

          S(l,dl,dl)=1 ,dl<dl_r(L, l)

          S(l,dl,dl)=1-e^(-((dl_r(H, l)-dl)/(dl-dl_r(L, l)))^2) ,dl_r(L,
          l)<=dl<dl_r(H, l)

          S(l,bw,bw)=0 ,dl<dl_r(H, l) (3.14)

          The formula shows that the delay satisfaction on the link is
          with the actual delay increase and decrease.

   3.  Delay-Jitter

          The character of the Delay-Jitter is similar to the character
          of the delay, calculation methods of the satisfaction are also
          same, and next we give the formula.





Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


          delta( ,jt)=[jt_r(L, l), jt_r(H, l)] (3.15)

          jt_r(L, l)=jt( ,l)/sigma(jt( ,i), e(i) belonging to P)*jt_r(L,
          ) (3.16)

          jt_r(H, l)=jt( , l)/ sigma(jt( ,i), e(i) belonging to
          P)*jt_r(H, ) (3.17)

          Assume the actual Delay-Jitter on the link el is jtl, the
          Delay-Jitter satisfaction on the link is:

          S(l,jt,jt)=1 ,jt<jt_r(L, l)

          S(l,jt,jt)=1-e^(-((jt_r(H, l)-jt)/(jt-jt_r(L, l)))^2) ,jt_r(L,
          l)<=jt<jt_r(H, l)

          S(l,jt,jt)=0 ,jt<jt_r(H, l) (3.18)

   4.  Error rate

          delta( ,ls)=[ls_r(L, l), ls_r(H, l)] (3.19)

          ls_r(L,l)=1-(1-ls( ,l))*((1-ls_r(L, ))/pi(1-ls( ,i)))^(1/p)
          (3.20)

          ls_r(H,l)=1-(1-ls( ,l))*((1-ls_r(H, ))/pi(1-ls( ,i)))^(1/p)
          (3.21)

          Assume the actual error rate on the link el is lsl, the error
          rate satisfaction on the link is:

          S(l,ls,ls)=1 ,ls<ls_r(L, l)

          S(l,ls,ls)=1-e^(-((ls_r(H, l)-ls)/(ls-ls_r(L, l)))^2) ,ls_r(L,
          l)<=ls<ls_r(H, l)

          S(l,ls,ls)=0 ,ls<ls_r(H, l) (3.22)

8.3.  The computing of the Link satisfaction

   1.  Bandwidth satisfaction calculation

          The bandwidth value of a link is [abw_r(L, ), abw_r(H, )], in
          communications users actually occupied bandwidth is ubw, so
          define the evaluation function of the occupied bandwidth by
          the users on the link as the following:





Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


          g(l, bw)=f(l, bw, ubw)*S(l, bw, ubw) (3.23)

          f(l, bw, ubw) and S(l, bw, ubw) are Bandwidth membership and
          satisfaction, getting from the formulas (3.6) and (3.10).

   2.  Delay faction calculation

          Similarly, the delay value range of a link is [dl(L, ), dl(H,
          )], in communications users actually delay is udl.  So we
          define the Delay for membership function is:

          g(l, dl)=f(l, dl, udl)*S(l, dl, udl) (3.24)

          f(l, dl, udl) and S(l, dl, udl) are delay membership and
          satisfaction, getting from the formulas (3.7) and (3.14).

   3.  Delay-Jitter satisfaction calculation

          Similarly, the Delay-Jitter value range of a link is [jt(L, ),
          jt(H, )], in communications users actually Delay-Jitter is
          ujt.  So we define the Delay-Jitter for membership function
          is:

          g(l, jt)=f(l, jt, ujt)*S(l, jt, ujt) (3.25)

          f(l, jt, ujt) and S(l, jt, ujt) are Delay-Jitter membership
          and satisfaction, getting from the formulas (3.8) and (3.18).

   4.  Error rate satisfaction calculation

          Similarly, the error rate value range of a link is [ls(L, ),
          ls(H, )] , in communications users actually error rate is udl.
          So we define the error rate for membership function is:

          g(l, ls)=f(l, ls, uls)*S(l, ls, uls) (3.26)

          f(l, ls, uls) and f(l, ls, uls) are error rate membership and
          satisfaction, getting from the formulas (3.9) and (3.22).

          Integrate bandwidth, delay, and Delay-Jitter and error rate
          for evaluation of the link; get the satisfaction value formula
          of the link e(l).

          W(l)=a(bw)*g(l, bw)+ a(dl)*g(l, dl)+ a(jt)*g(l, jt)+
          a(ls)*g(l, ls) (3.27)

          a(bw), a(dl), a(jt) and a(ls) are their own weight factor of
          the Qos parameter, a(bw), a(dl), a(jt), a(ls) belonging to [0



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


          1], and a(dl)+a(dl)+a(dl)+ a(dl)=1, Wl is the value between 0
          and 1.

















































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


9.  The avail computing and the game analysis

   According to the principles of economics, the prices of the commodity
   should be based on the current development of market supply and
   demand, while at the same time the price affects the supply and
   demand.

   In order to improve the quality of the network, users will as far as
   possibly take up as more as bandwidth on the link, but this will lead
   to network resources in short supply, so that network operators will
   raise prices, so users should pay more.  In order to increase
   revenue, network operators increase the price of network resources,
   but this would allow users refused to use their network of resources;
   it reduces the operator's revenue.  As a result operators will have
   to cut prices to attract customers.  As a result, users should be
   based on the current pricing decision to take up the number of
   network resources to maximize their own interests; network operators
   should be based on current supply and demand situation to decide how
   resources should be pricing in order to maximize profits.

   In routing, using those links which the error rate and delay is small
   can improve the quality of the communications network.  However, good
   quality link need to pay high costs, so in Link delay, jitter and
   error rate charges will affect the users' avail and the operators'
   revenue.

9.1.  The cost and the price

   The cost is the cost of resources from providing the network service
   by network providers, the unit cost of the bandwidth resources cb of
   the link el, if the distributive bandwidth is ubw, the cost of the
   network providers is:

      Cost(l) = c(d) * ubw (3.28)

   The price is the charge that the users pay for using the network
   resources, for link el, the price is:

      Pay(l)=p*ubw (3.29)

   In the formula, p is the price of the bandwidth (unit time), its
   value has relationship with the Network utilization, when the Network
   utilization is high, the network resources will enhance p, but when
   the Network utilization is low, the network resources will reduce p.
   The strategy like:

      p=p(min) ,h<h(min)




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


      p=c(b)*(1+a*h(-2, 0))/(1+a*h(-2, )) ,h(min)<=h<h(0)

      p=c(b)*[2-e^(-k(h-h(0)))] ,h(0)<=h<h(max)

      p=p(max) ,h(max)<=h<h(1) (3.30)

   c(b) is the unit cost of the bandwidth resources, p(min), p(max) is
   set by network providers.

      a=(c(b)-p(min))/(p(min)*h(-2,min)-c(b)*h(-2,0)),

      k=ln(2-p(max)/c(b))/(h(max)-h(0))^2.

      h is the link bandwidth using rate, definition:

      h=(tbw-abw)/tbw (3.31)


   Table1 Floating Price
     Delay         Jitter      Error rate   Floating Price
   -------------------------------------------------------
   delta(1,dl)   delta(1,jt)   delta(1,ls)     p(f1)
   delta(2,d1)   delta(2,jt)   delta(2,ls)     p(f2)
   delta(3,d1)   delta(3,jt)   delta(3,ls)     p(f3)
      ...           ...           ...           ...
   delta(k,d1)   delta(k,jt)   delta(k,ls)     p(fk)
      ...           ...           ...           ...

                                 Figure 1

   delta(k, dl)=[dl(k, low), dl(k, high)],

   delta(k, dl)=[dl(k, low), dl(k, high)],

   delta(k, jt)=[jt(k, low), jt(k, high)],

   delta(k, ls)=[ls(k, low, jt(k, high))].

9.2.  The computing of the Link avails

   Here, we use the avail to describe the level of earnings which the
   use to of the users and the network providers get in the process of
   routing.

   The user avail on the link is uu(l):

      Uu(l) = W(l) * (p(l) - pay(l)) / p(l) (3.32)




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   The network providers avail on the link has a relationship with the
   cost and the charge, the network providers avail on the link e(l) is:

      Un(l) = (Pay(l) - Cost(l)) / Cost(l) (3.33)

   There into, the user link satisfaction is W(l), on the link the e(l)
   the ceiling which the user wants to pay is p(l) (time unit), the
   user's ceiling is Pay(l), the link cost is Cost(l).

9.3.  The game analysis

   When a game happens on a link, the user strategy is an m-levels
   bandwidth allocation: ubw(1), ubw(2), ubw(3), ubw(4), here ubw(i)
   expresses under the No.i user strategy that the link bandwidth which
   the user choices.

   Network operators' strategies are set n types of price for the link:
   P(1)P(2)...P(n).  Different levels price correspond to the different
   link superiority.

   Users select a bandwidth, network providers select a price, there is
   a corresponding QoS parameters and the costs, we can get the users
   avail and the network providers avail.

   Define the avail matrix R(m*n)=[uu(ij), un(ij)](m*n) on the link&#
   65292;the matrix elements (uu(ij), uu(ij)) express that under the
   strategy group (ubw(i), P(j)), the avail of the users is uu(ij) and
   the avail of the network operators is uu(ij).  The purpose of the
   game is to find out the "best" strategy group (ubw(i), P(j))(best)
   which the avails of the both sides reach together.

   According to the definition of the Nash equilibrium, the avail matrix
   achieves the element of the Nash equilibrium:

      uu(ij) => uu(i(*)j) ,i(*) =1,2,3^m

      un(ij) => un(ij(*)) ,i(*)=1,2,3^n (3.34)

   If we find the element, the group of the node corresponding strategy
   (ubw(i), P(j)) is the group of the Nash equilibrium on the link.

   If we find the element of the Nash equilibrium, the group of the node
   corresponding strategy (ubw(i), P(j)) is the strategy of the Nash
   equilibrium on the link e(l).  The definition is:

      pareto(ij)=1/(a/uu(ij)+b/un(ij)) (3.35)

   a and b are the tilt value of the users and the network operators, a,



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   b > 0.  User this formula, what make the value of pareto(ij) be a
   larger element is the better Pareto.

















































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


10.  The path and multicast tree evaluation

   Here, there are two factors to evaluate the pros and cons of the path
   or the multicast tree, namely: the users' avails, network providers'
   avails.  The purpose to optimize the objectives is: to maximize the
   avail of users, to maximize the network providers avails and to
   maximize the sum of users and network providers avails and reach a
   win-win situation.  Through the following path and multicast tree
   evaluation formula to achieve the optimization goal.

   Here we definite the evaluation value of the path P and the
   evaluation value of the multicast tree T, the formula like:

      J(p)=a(up)/UU(P) + a(np)/UN(P) (3.36)

      0<a(up), a(np)<1, a(up)+a(np) = 1

      J(T)=a(ut)/UU(T) + a(nt)/UN(T) (3.37)

      0<a(ut), a(nt)<1, a(ut)+a(nt) = 1

      UU(P) or UU(T) is the user on the path UU(P) or UU(T) or the
      multicast tree, UN(P) or UN(T) is the network providers avail, the
      calculation methods are like the formulas (3.38), (3.39), (3.40)
      and (3.41).

   The formula is used to calculate the user avail of the path P and the
   user avail of the multicast tree T as the following:

      UU(P)=sigma(uu(l), l belonging to P) / L(P) (3.38)

      UU(T)=sigma(sigma(uu(i, l), l belonging to (s-i)), l belonging to
      T) (3.39)

   The formula is used to calculate the network providers' avail of the
   path P and the network providers avail of the multicast tree T as the
   following:

      UN(P)=sigma(un(l), l belonging to P)/L(P) (3.40)

      UN(T)=sigma(un(l), l belonging to T)/L(T) (3.41)

   L(P) compose the number of the path P, L(T) compose the number of the
   multicast tree T.







Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


11.  Mathematics model

11.1.  Unicast mathematics model

   In the unicast QoS routing, optimizing objectives is: in the case of
   satisfying the QoS constraints, maximize the effectiveness from
   users, network operators and the sum of the effectiveness from users
   and network providers, and make the effectiveness from users and
   network providers achieve a win-win situation .

   There is:

      UU(P) -> max{UU(P)} (3.42)

      UN(P) -> max{UN(P)} (3.43)

      UU(P) + UN(P) -> max{UU(P) + UN(P)} (3.44)

      s.t. main({abw}, e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) => bw_r( , l) (3.45)

      sigma(dl( , l), e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) <= dl_r( , h) (3.46)

      sigma(jt( , l) <= jt_r( , h), e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) (3.47)

      1-pi((1-ls( , l)) e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) (3.48)

      pay( , p) <= p (3.49)

11.2.  Mathematics model

   In the multicast QoS routing, optimizing objectives is: in the case
   of satisfying end-to- end QoS constraints for all the users, maximize
   the effectiveness from users, network operators and the sum of the
   effectiveness from users and network providers.

   There is:

      UU(T) -> max{UU(T)} (3.50)

      UN(T) -> max{UN(T)} (3.51)

      UU(T) + UN(T) -> max{UU(T) + UN(T)} (3.52)

      s.t. main({abw(d, l)}, e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) => bw_r(d, l)
      (3.53)

      sigma(dl(d, l), e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) <= dl_r(d, h) (3.54)




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


      sigma(jt(d, l) <= jt_r(d, h), e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) (3.55)

      1-pi((1-ls(d, l)) e(l) is belonging to P(sd)) (3.56)

      pay(d, p) <= p(d, ) (3.57)

   In the Isomorphism Multicast , the value of bw_r(d, l), dl_r(d, h),
   jt_r(d, h) is the same.











































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


12.  Worldlet behavior

   1.  the acts of the worldlet behavior have the following
       characteristics

       *  The high variability of the node degree distribution can get a
          short path and a high clustering coefficient;

       *  When the variability of the node degree is not very high,, it
          alone can not cause a worldlet behavior;

       *  Preference for local connections can cause a worldlet
          behavior, especially in the router-level network topology;

          Self-organizing network has the biological characteristics,
          the node is dynamic, and the edge can also be established or
          removed, so the degree of the node is variable.  In addition,
          in the self-organizing networks the interaction between the
          nodes is localized, also means that preferred local
          connection.  But, there requires a process to evolve from the
          random network to the networks with a clear worldlet behavior,
          during the period may not directly use the worldlet
          characteristics to process routing.  Another point, in the
          current worldlet network, the connection between the nodes
          refers to directly connection, this means that the node degree
          of variability also referring to the edge with directly
          physical connection.  Here, we can use non-direct connection
          edge to act as a direct connection edge to produce worldlet
          behavior in order to get the advantage, which is in the
          section 3.1.2; we have mentioned the worldlet edge in the
          design of the organizational behavior.

          For example, the node A is directly connected to the nodes A1,
          A2, A3, A4, but the source node routing from A has
          established, the purpose nodes are D1, D2, D3, from A to D1,
          D2, D3, respectively exist worldlet edge.  When we calculating
          the degree of A we take all three worldlet edge s into
          account.

          Of course, to regard the path as an edge can bring a very
          favorable result; also cause some problems, after all, in the
          process of routing the complexity of dealing with a path is it
          is not exactly the same as the complexity of dealing with a
          real edge to deal with.

          Sometimes this way leads to another problem, through the
          worldlet to find the path need a few steps, but the actual
          path of the hop may be a lot of, so it is not a better path.



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


          In order to avoid the many times to induct the worldlet edge
          result in the above problem, in a routing process we should
          limit that only in the last hop we can induct the worldlet
          edge.

          In this way, we can greatly reduce the problems described
          above, and the path witch was introduced from introducing the
          worldlet edge, if the performance is not good, it will be
          eliminated gradually by optimization arithmetic.  In addition,
          in a dynamic environment of self-organizing network, quickly
          reaching the second best is often more meaningful than
          optimal.

   2.  In the self-organizing network realize worldlet behavior

       *  Utilize the worldlet edge

             With the process of algorithm, the node will have
             accumulated some worldlet edge.  With the increasing of the
             worldlet edge, the number of the nodes which can be reached
             will be more and more, in the back of the routing process,
             we can directly use the accessible worldlet edge
             information to speed up the process of routing.

             The record of the worldlet path from the current node is
             like the following table 2.




   Table 2 List of worldlet Edge
      purpose    intermediate   hop   next hop   using times
      nodes      nodes sequence       neighbor
    -------------------------------------------------------
      D(1)       (N(1),...)      5      N(1)        m(1)
      D(2)       (N(4),...)      3      N(4)        m(2)
      D(3)       (N(4),...)      3      N(4)        m(3)
      ...           ...         ...     ...         ...


                                      Figure 2

             Initialization: each node has a table of the worldlet edge,
             when the initial, the table is empty.

             Adding: To be completed by the algorithm, when every time
             the algorithm successes to find a path, it puts the path
             information into the table of the worldlet path, the value



Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


             "used to be counted" is 0.

             Count: When every time a workdlet edge has been
             successfully used to reach the destination node, the value
             of the "be used times" of the worldlet edge will be added
             by 1.

             Update: Every delta(t(swp)) it scans the value of the "be
             used times", to delete those lines whose value is 0, and
             then clear the value "by using times" of the retained
             lines.

   3.  The success rate of node routing

          It means the percentage of succession times in the nodes total
          number of routing.  The node with a higher success rate is
          more credible in the routing more reliable.

          The success rate formula of the computing node i:

             I(i) = rcs(i) / rct(i) (3.58)

   4.  According to the structure of the address

          The node with the same IP address prefix is likely to be close
          to the region, and he longer the part of the same prefix, the
          more likely to located closer to the region, here we call such
          characteristic the similar degree.

          The calculation of the two addresses similar degree take the
          following method: scan the 32-bit address from left to right
          bit-by-bit comparing the binary bit, if they are different,
          records of the same bit M(ik), the similar degree is V(i):

             V(i) = M(ik) / 32 (3.59)
















Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


13.  The route strategy base on self-organizing network

   Self-organizing network has a lot of characteristics such as local,
   dynamic, complicated, and so on.  In the initial stage of building up
   the Self-organizing networks we require to use distributed routing
   algorithm for routing.  With the self-organizing network gradually
   into the relatively stable state, through the environment perception
   of the self-organization behavior protocol and the collection of the
   network topology, centralized routing algorithm can be used in
   routing, to improve the routing efficiency and success rate.









































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


14.  Security considerations

   Security is a major problem in the self-organizing network.  The
   entities in Self-organizing system directly interact in a distributed
   peer-to-peer manne, a simple act of each entity will be able to form
   a complex behavior of the whole system.  Under such a mechanism the
   identity of the entity and conduct surveillance become very
   difficult, For the malicious entities which intruded into the self-
   organizing network we can not carry an effective screening and
   prevention, and easily to be eavesdropped and attacked.  Therefore,
   we need to research the security architecture and security
   technologies which apply to the self-organizing network.  This
   article describes the self-organizing network model which is the
   mainly focus on self-organizing network of the basic network
   structure and the related QoS routing factors, but not discuss the
   security technology of the self-organizing network.



































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


15.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


16.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Zhankao Wen, Weidong Wang, Weixin Wu,
   Jun Liu, Dengke Zhang, Jan Wu, Xiaolei Huang, Xiaofeng Liu, Yao Fu,
   Jun Hu, Guilin Liu, Peiyu Qin, Yulei Wu, Hanrui Wang and the rest of
   the Adaptive Routing Working Group for the ideas and support they
   have given to this project.












































Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


Appendix A.  References

   1.   Christian Prehofer, Christian Bettstetter.  Self-Organization in
        Communication Networks: Principles and Design Paradigms[J], IEEE
        Communications Magazine, 2005: 78-84.

   2.   Sudhir Dixit, Amardeo Sarma.  Advance in self-organizing
        networks[J], IEEE Communications Magazine, 2005: 76-77.

   3.   R. Ghnemat, C. Bertelle, G.H.E. Duchamp.  Self-Organization
        Simulation over Geographical Information System Based on Multi-
        Agent Platform[A], The European Simulation and modeling
        Conference[C], 2006: 23-25.

   4.   Beni, G., Wang, J. Swarm intelligence[A], In Proceedings of the
        Seventh Annual Meeting of the Robotics Society of Japan[C],
        1989: 425-428.

   5.   Susan Hackwood, Gerardo Beni.  Self organization of sensors for
        swarm intelligence[A], proceedings of the 1992 IEEE
        international conference on robotics and automation[C], 1992:
        819-825.

   6.   M. Dorigo, E. Bonabeau, G. Theraulaz.  Ant algorithms and
        stigmergy[J], Future Generation Computer System, 2000, 16(8):
        851-871.

   7.   YingHua Min. Computer network routing survey[J], computer
        Journal, 2003, 26(6): 642-648.

   8.   Wu Jiang, HuiLing Zhao.  Next generation IP backbone network
        technology- Multi-protocol Label Switching [M], 2001, 21-41.

   9.   Brunilde Sanso, Andre Girard, Florent Mobiot.  Integrating
        reliability and quality of service in networks with swhiched
        virtual circuits [J], Computers and Operations Research, 2005,
        32(1): 35-58.

   10.  C Bouras, A Gkamas, A Karaliotas, et al.  Architecture and
        performance evaluation for redundant multicast transmission
        supporting adaptive QoS [J], Multimedia Tools and Applications,
        2005, 25(1): 85-110.

   11.  Brunilde Sanso, Andre Girard, Florent Mobiot.  Integrating
        reliability and quality of service in networks with swhiched
        virtual circuits [J], Computers and Operations Research, 2005,
        32(1): 35-58.




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


   12.  Zhong Fan, E S Lee. Multiple QoS constrained routing with
        inaccurate state information [J], Electronics Letters, 1999, 35
        (21): 1807-1808.

   13.  Li Wang, ZengZhi Li, ChengQian Song and so on. a dynamic
        multicast routing algorithm[J].2004, 32(8): 1245-1247.

   14.  Ariza, E. Casilari, F. Sandoval.  QoS routing with outdated
        network knowledge [J], Electronics Letters, 2000, 36(15): 1332-
        1334.

   15.  Xavier Masip Bruin, Sergio Sanchez Lopez, Josep Sole Pareta, et
        al.  A QoS routing mechanism for reducing the routing inaccuracy
        effects [J], LNCS 2601, 2003: 90-102.

   16.  F P Kelly, A Maulloo, D Tan. Rate control for communication
        networks: Shadow prices, proportional fairness and stability
        [J], Operational Research Society, 1998, 49(3): 237-252.

   17.  Tadashi Nakano, Tatsuya Suda.  Applying biological principles to
        designs of network services[J].  Applied Soft Computing, 2006:
        1-9.





























Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft        Self-organizing network model         January 2009


Authors' Addresses

   XingWei Wang
   Northeastern University
   No.11, Lane 3, WenHua Road, HePing District
   Shenyang, Liaoning, China  110004
   

   Phone:
   Email: wangxw@mail.neu.edu.cn
   URI:


   XiuShuang Yi
   Northeastern University


   Phone:
   Email: xsyi@mail.neu.edu.cn
   URI:


   Yu Wang
   Northeastern University


   Phone:
   Email: wangy@mail.neu.edu.cn
   URI:


   Ming Dong
   Northeastern University


   Phone:
   Email: dongm@mail.neu.edu.cn
   URI:


   Qiang Chen
   Northeastern University


   Phone:
   Email:
   URI:




Wang, et al.              Expires July 10, 2009                [Page 48]

