
    


   Network Working Group                                      Eric. Njedjou 
   Internet Draft                                            France Telecom 
   Expires April 2006                                          October 2005 
                                                                            
    
    
         IP location update for Network Controlled Mobility Management: 
                               Problem Statement 
             draft-njedjou-mobopts-iplocup-netcomm-problem-00.txt 
    
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
        
      By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
      applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
      have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
      aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
       
      "Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
      and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
      time.  It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet-Drafts  as  reference 
      material or to cite them other than a "work in progress." 
       
      The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can  be  accessed  at 
      http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html" 
       
      This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2006. 
       
   Copyright Notice 
       
      Copyright © The Internet Society (2005) 
       
   Abstract 
       
      Mobile IP is good at addressing IP session continuity (hide of the IP 
      address change from transport layer perspective, as well as from the 
      correspondent perspective) but certainly not optimal for mobility 
      management as would perform 3GPP systems providers that want to 
      extend their services to IP access systems. This document only 
    
   njedjou                    Expires April 2006                   [Page 1] 
    
    
   Internet-Draft             problem statement               October 2005 
                                         
                                         
      describes the problem and is not meant to provide any solution nor 
      any requirement thereof. 
       
       
   Table of Contents 
       
      1.      Introduction................................................2 
      2.      Mobility Management basic principle for 3GPP access 
                systems...................................................3 
      3.      IP location update problem in Inter-System Mobility 
                Management (3GPP to IP access systems.....................3 
      3.1.    Redundancy of Mobile IP Location update procedures with 
                inter-system mobility procedures..........................4 
      3.2.    Mobile IP implementation by vendors.........................5 
      4.      Security Considerations.....................................6 
      5.      Conclusion..................................................6 
      6.      References..................................................6 
      7.      Acknowledgments.............................................6 
      8.      Author's Addresses..........................................6 
       
       
      1.Introduction 
       
      The basic principle of 3GPP mobility management systems for real time 
      services is about the terminal reporting radio conditions to the 
      network, that decides of the terminal handover need and target system 
      and point of attachment based on the combination of these radio 
      criteria  to  other  parameters  as  operator  policies  or  network 
      profiles. This mobility management model with control facilities 
      within the network has proved very successful for cellular operators 
      radio resources usage. These operators may predominantly like to re-
      specify such well proven model for inter-system mobility management 
      between UMTS, Evolved UMTS and IP access systems (802.11, 802.16...). 
       
      When IP services are concerned (mostly the case when IP access 
      systems and cellular PS systems are used), it becomes natural to 
      think at Mobile IP to solve the session continuity problem. There 
      comes the issue: for that session continuity function to be performed 
      by Mobile IP, the terminal exchanges signaling with the network for 
      route update of packets sent and received by the mobile terminal. 
       
      Because inter-system mobility is required network controlled by 3GPP 
      systems providers, the incumbent mobility management procedures have 
      to be performed between the terminal and some control function in the 
      network. Therefore the question of whether the signaling mechanism of 
      Mobile IP is not redundant and concurrent to that of inter-system is 
      legitimate. 
      In radio environments, where capacity is limited, it is always a wish 
      that the amount of signaling exchanged be reduced to a minimum. 
       
       
    
   Njedjou                    Expires April 2005                   [Page 2] 
    
    
   Internet-Draft             problem statement               October 2005 
                                         
                                         
   2.Mobility Management basic principle for 3GPP access systems 
       
      Basically, mobility management in 3GPP systems is made up of some 
      major phases; 
         . First, information is collected from terminal and radio access 
           points to assess the need for a handover to take place (this 
           information  is  exploited  by  handover  algorithms  based  on 
           operator policies) 
         . Second,  the  handover  target  (with  associated  configuration 
           parameters) is usually indicated to the station.  
         . In a third phase, the handover procedure is executed (change of 
           radio point of attachment) 
         . In a last phase, if needed, the station location is updated in 
           the 3GPP core network so that the terminal can be reached for 
           further incoming calls. 
       
       
   3.IP location update problem in Inter-System Mobility Management (3GPP 
      to IP access systems 
       
      By IP Access Systems, we refer to radio access systems that are 
      primarily designed for the transport of IP packets. These include 
      IEEE standards 802.3, 802.11, 802.16… 
       
      Cellular operators are complementing their coverage with IP access 
      systems to be able to provide more real time and QoS demanding 
      services.  Because  users  require  these  services  on  the  move, 
      transition facilities to other systems are needed to ensure service 
      continuity. 
       
      Even if IP Access Systems come into play with alternative mobility 
      management procedures (sometimes even poorly furnished), cellular 
      operators  would  still  like  to  perform  inter-system  mobility 
      management as per the 3GPP scheme. 
       
      When other systems are in play, the phases described earlier could be 
      transformed as follows; 
       
         . First, information is collected from terminals and radio access 
           points(on the current system as well as on available access 
           systems) to assess the need for a handover to take place (this 
           information  is  exploited  by  handover  algorithms  based  on 
           operator policies) 
         . Second,  the  handover  target  (with  associated  configuration 
           parameters) is usually indicated to the station. Because this 
           target can be of a different system and because of some 
           requirements  explicated  earlier,  the  corresponding  switch 
           command might be indicated to the terminal over IP (see next 
           paragraph for details). 
         . In a third phase, the handover procedure is executed (change of 
           link of attachment) 
    
   Njedjou                    Expires April 2005                   [Page 3] 
    
    
   Internet-Draft             problem statement               October 2005 
                                         
                                         
         . In a last phase, the station location is updated in the network 
           (change from a cellular location to an IP access location. This 
           is not the IP location update procedure). Following such an 
           update and provided that ther 3GPP interface remains on, the 
           terminal actually has two locations, one on the 3GPP system and 
           the other on the IP access system.  
       
      Because of the economic constraint not to modify existing deployments 
      (UMTS deployment nearly completed and Wifi -as per 1999 edition- 
      deployment seriously advanced) and the need to provide seamless 
      mobility services the sooner to customer, IP is a good candidate for 
      the management of inter-system mobility between 3GPP and IP access 
      systems. Effectively, a straightforward solution to manage inter-
      system mobility in a technology agnostic way is to use IP and above 
      protocols to achieve that inter-system mobility because then control 
      and management planes of either 3GPP or IP Access systems do not have 
      to be changed. Also is this not easy to determine any will from 3GPP 
      as an SDO to seriously change the design of UMTS control plane to 
      accommodate inter-system. [ECCS] describes such scenarios where an IP 
      transport  is  required  for  inter-system  handover  handling.  This 
      problem is however not within the scope of this document. 
       
      In the reminder of this document, the four steps procedure described 
      just below will be the one referred to. 
       
       
   3.1.Redundancy of Mobile IP Location update procedures with inter-
        system mobility procedures 
       
      The  IP  location  update  of  Mobile  IP  reports  to  the  network 
      information that the valid IP address of the terminal has changed to 
      a  new  subnet.  This  information  can  actually  theoretically  be 
      retrieved by alternative means that are less costly in signaling 
      exchange over the air and certainly more optimal in terms of latency 
      before exchanging again IP packets. 
      Effectively, with the assumption that the 4 phases described earlier 
      provide enough information to the network, The Mobile IP registration 
      function  become  useless.  The  paragraph  below  provides  an 
      illustration. 
       
      Let's consider a terminal undergoing a Voice over IP call on evolved 
      3G and for which an opportunity to handoff to an IP Access Systems 
      has become available. The operator would basically want that handover 
      to happen in order to release some capacity on the cellular network. 
      In Phase 1 of the procedure described below, the network can already 
      receive  from  the  terminal  or  from  any  other  network  entity, 
      information on this newly discovered IP access link (served QoS, 
      radio quality, channel occupancy, IP connectivity information…). Whit 
      these information, it such an entity will be able to decide whether 
      the new link should be the target link of attachment.  

    
   Njedjou                    Expires April 2005                   [Page 4] 
    
    
   Internet-Draft             problem statement               October 2005 
                                         
                                         
      Once such a handoff decision is taken, the network can send an order 
      to request the terminal to configure IP connectivity on the new link 
      and switch links, so that when the handover procedure (phase 3) is 
      completed, the new IP location of the terminal is know of the network 
      without performing the Mobile IP registration procedure. Indeed the 
      new IP address to be used by the terminal would then be known of 
      either  parties.  However  when  acknowledging  the  handover  order 
      received by the network, the terminal will still have to update the 
      reverse tunneling to an anchor router in the operator network as well 
      as that anchor router update the route for sending packets to the 
      terminal. This paragraph give a way among many others possible to 
      update the terminal newly active IP address without the need for the 
      registration procedure of MIP. Before the solution space is reached 
      though, the problem will have to be well understood. 
       
      Therefore, IP location update procedures can be totally incorporated 
      in the framework of an inter-system mobility management protocol that 
      would serve a more general set of functionalities than session 
      continuity of IP services. The gain would the reduction of signaling 
      exchange needed for continuing an IP service between two systems as 
      well as the latency. Effectively, a confirmation of the handover 
      execution by the terminal could (end of phase 3) could also serve as 
      indication to the network that IP packets can be forwarded to the new 
      IP location, saving couple frequently sent bytes over the air 
      interface. 
      When using Mobile IP to indicate the change of IP location to the 
      network, the procedure has to take place after the fourth phase 
      presented earlier (for the network to have control on the IP address 
      reselection) and is therefore not well timely operated. 
       
   3.2.Mobile IP implementation by vendors 
       
      Cellular operators would basically like the Mobile IP registration 
      (for updating location) to happen after the four phases procedure as 
      described in the precedent paragraph has been executed. However, as 
      the standard let it totally implementation dependant the set of 
      events that trigger the registration procedure, it is practically 
      impossible to find implementations of Mobile IP that have the same 
      state machine for triggering the registration or re-registration 
      procedure. 
      Further,  most  of  these  implementations  require  on-demand  heavy 
      changes in order for the Mobile IP software to be modified in a way 
      to  perform  the  IP  location  procedure  only  after  the  mobility 
      management phases have been performed. 
      Therefore the fact that the IP location update function happens 
      separately from the inter-system mobility mechanism is cumbersome for 
      operators. Indeed operators that want to deploy seamless mobility for 
      IP services have to make specific request to vendors to design Mobile 
      IP implementations that fit their purpose. This burden becomes 
      considerable when deployment is considered at a large scale. These 
      would prefer to have an inter-system mobility management protocol 
    
   Njedjou                    Expires April 2005                   [Page 5] 
    
    
   Internet-Draft             problem statement               October 2005 
                                         
                                         
      standardized,  with  intrinsically  integrated  IP  location  update 
      functions. 
       
       
   4.Security Considerations 
       
      The IP location update functions of Mobile IP incur many security 
      problems that inter-system mobility procedures also will have to 
      consider. Having that location update integrated in a general single 
      framework would ease considerably the resolution of security issues 
      that otherwise would have to be tackle twice. 
       
       
   5.Conclusion 
      This document aims at explaining a potential gain in scalability and 
      performance of inter-system mobility architectures in a wireless 
      environment, if IP location update functions were performed as part 
      of network controlled mobility management procedures and not as part 
      of a different mechanism namely standalone Mobile IP. 
       
       
   6.References 
       
      [MIPV4] "IP Mobility Support", C. Perkins (Editor), RFC 2002, October 
      1996. 
       
      [MIPV6] "Mobility Support in IPv6", D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and Jari 
      Arkko, draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-21.txt, work in progress, February 
      2003. 
       
       
       
   7.Acknowledgments 
       
      The author would like to acknowledge reviewers of this document. 
       
   8.Author's Addresses 
       
      Eric Njedjou 
      France Telecom  
      4, rue du CLos Courtel 
      35512 Cesson Sévigné BP 91226 
      Phone: +33299124878 
      Email: eric.njedjou@france.telecom.com 
       
       
   Intellectual Property Statement 
    
      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
    
   Njedjou                    Expires April 2005                   [Page 6] 
    
    
   Internet-Draft             problem statement               October 2005 
                                         
                                         
      pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
      this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
      might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
      made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
      on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
      found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
       
      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
      such  proprietary  rights  by  implementers  or  users  of  this 
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
       
      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
      copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
      rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
      this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
      ipr@ietf.org. 
       
       
   Disclaimer of validity 
       
      This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
      "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
      OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
      ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
      INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
      INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
      WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
       
       
   Copyright Statement 
       
       Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). This document is subject 
       to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
       except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
       
       
   Acknowledgment 
       
       Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
       Internet Society. 




    
   Njedjou                    Expires April 2005                   [Page 7] 
    
    