





INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   S. Legg
draft-legg-xed-roadmap-00.txt                        Adacel Technologies
Intended Category: Standard Track                              D. Prager
                                                       Deakin University
                                                          August 7, 2003


                       The XML Enabled Directory

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this document is unlimited.  Comments should be sent
   to the authors.

   This Internet-Draft expires on 7 February 2004.


Abstract

   The XML Enabled Directory (XED) leverages existing Lightweight
   Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) and X.500 directory technology to
   create a directory service that stores, manages and transmits
   Extensible Markup Language (XML) format data, while maintaining
   interoperability with LDAP clients and X.500 agents.  This document
   introduces the various XED specifications.




Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ..................................................  2
   2. Conventions ...................................................  3
   3. Leveraging Existing Specifications ............................  3
   4. Incorporating XML Specifications ..............................  3
   5. User Defined Syntaxes .........................................  4
   6. Protocols .....................................................  5
   7. Security Considerations .......................................  6
   8. Acknowledgements ..............................................  6
   9. Normative References ..........................................  7
   10. Informative References .......................................  8
   11. Intellectual Property Notice .................................  9
   12. Copyright Notice .............................................  9
   13. Authors' Addresses ........................................... 10


1. Introduction

   The XML Enabled Directory (XED) framework leverages existing
   Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) [LDAP] and X.500
   directory [X500] technology to create a directory service that
   stores, manages and transmits Extensible Markup Language (XML) [XML]
   format data, while maintaining interoperability with LDAP clients,
   X.500 Directory User Agents (DUAs), and X.500 Directory System Agents
   (DSAs).  This document introduces the various XED specifications.

   The main features of XED are:

    - semantically equivalent XML renditions of existing directory
      protocols,

    - XML renditions of directory data,

    - the ability to accept at run time, user defined attribute syntaxes
      specified in a variety of XML schema languages,

    - the ability to perform filter matching on the parts of XML format
      attribute values,

    - the flexibility for implementors to develop XED clients using only
      their favoured XML schema language.

   Section 3 describes how existing directory constructs are mapped into
   XML.

   Section 4 describes how separately developed XML schema
   specifications can be incorporated into directory specifications.



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


   Section 5 discusses how user defined attribute syntaxes can be
   imported into directory schema.

   The XML renditions of existing directory protocols are described in
   Section 6.


2. Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and  "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [BCP14].


3. Leveraging Existing Specifications

   X.500 is defined in terms of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)
   [X680].  LDAP is defined in part in ASN.1 and in part with ad-hoc
   syntax definitions, though for the most part the ad-hoc definitions
   have an underlying ASN.1 definition through association with X.500.
   The XED framework enables data conforming to existing directory data
   types in ASN.1 to have an XML representation by defining a set of
   ASN.1 encoding rules, the Directory XML Encoding Rules (DXER) [DXER].
   This representation can be accessed in LDAP through a transfer
   encoding option [XFER].  Directory data are otherwise accessed in
   their XML representation through one of the XED protocols
   (Section 6).


4. Incorporating XML Specifications

   The XED framework does not aim for a complete specification of the
   directory in one schema language (e.g. by translating everything that
   isn't ASN.1 into ASN.1, or by translating everything that isn't XML
   Schema into XML Schema), but rather seeks to integrate specifications
   in differing schema definition languages into a cohesive whole.

   The motivation for this approach is the observation that although XML
   Schema, RELAX-NG and ASN.1 are broadly similar, they each have unique
   features that cannot be adequately expressed in the other languages.
   Thus a guiding principle for XED is the assertion that the best
   schema language in which to represent a data type is the language of
   its original specification.  Consequently, a need arises for the
   means to reference definitions not only in different documents, but
   specified in different schema languages.

   The XED framework defines mechanisms [GLUE] by which ASN.1
   specifications may directly reference XML Schema definitions, RELAX-



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


   NG definitions and DTDs.  This capability is a prerequisite for
   importing user defined non-ASN.1 data types into directory schemas.
   The framework also defines how qualified names [XMLNS] are assigned
   to ASN.1 definitions [ASD] so that XML Schema and RELAX NG documents
   can reference ASN.1 definitions.

   Multi-schema validators conforming to the XED framework will of
   course understand and apply references across schema languages.
   However, in order to accommodate non-ASN.1 aware validators, the XED
   framework provides the means to translate ASN.1 into compatible XML
   Schema [CXSD] or RELAX NG [CRNG].  Note that DXER is specifically
   designed to facilitate the derivation of a compatible XML Schema or
   RELAX-NG specification from an original ASN.1 specification.

   Where a specification in one schema language is translated into
   another schema language the original specification is referred to as
   the Primary Syntax Definition (PSD) and the translation is referred
   to as a Derived Syntax Definition (DSD).

   A DSD is compatible with the PSD in the sense that any XML document
   that validates according to the PSD will also validate according to
   the DSD, though the reverse is not necessarily true.  So the DSD can
   be said to be no more restrictive than the PSD, and may be less
   restrictive than the PSD.

   A single schema language validator can use a DSD to validate markup
   conforming to a definition in a different schema language, though the
   validation it performs will probably be less thorough than that
   performed by a multi-schema validator.

   XED servers MUST use the corresponding PSD when validating any part
   of an XML document (whether the markup represents a protocol
   operation or a data value to be stored) to ensure the integrity of
   directory data.

   XED clients SHOULD use the PSD to validate but may instead use a DSD,
   though many XED clients will have no compelling need to perform
   validation.  That is, they will generate valid markup as a matter of
   course, and will rely on XED servers to only return valid markup.  In
   such cases, DSDs serve as an aid to understanding rather than as a
   basis for implementation.


5. User Defined Syntaxes

   While the creation of user defined syntaxes for directory attributes
   is discouraged by LDAP, it is a central capability of XED.  The XED
   framework defines additional schema operational attributes [SCHEMA]



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


   to hold ASN.1 Schema documents, XML Schema documents, RELAX-NG
   documents and DTDs, whose definitions may be referenced in the syntax
   definitions of user defined directory attribute types.

   The ability for users to import schema definitions in the form of
   ASN.1 types has been notionally available in X.500 since the second
   edition, however the capability has never previously been seriously
   supported.  In part this is because a full parser for the ASN.1
   language is difficult to write.  The XED framework overcomes this
   obstacle to the runtime acquisition of ASN.1 definitions by defining
   ASN.1 Schema [ASD], a semantically equivalent XML representation for
   ASN.1 specifications.  ASN.1 Schema completely avoids the inherent
   ambiguities of the ASN.1 language.  It is therefore much easier to
   parse than ASN.1 specifications.  Note that an ASN.1 Schema
   translation of a PSD ASN.1 specification is not a DSD.  Both the
   original ASN.1 specification and the translation into ASN.1 Schema
   are regarded as different representations of the same PSD.

   ASN.1 Schema, in conjunction with DXER, makes ASN.1 a fully-fledged
   schema language for XML.

   ASN.1 Schema is the preferred form for representing ASN.1
   specifications in XED, and is the primary medium through which
   definitions in other schema languages are imported into directory
   attribute syntax definitions [SCHEMA].

   The XED framework extends directory matching rules [MATCH], and in
   particular component matching rules [CMR], to apply to attribute
   values with a user defined syntax specified in an XML schema language
   other than ASN.1.


6. Protocols

   The Internet Directly Mapped (IDM) protocol [X519] is a recent
   addition to X.500 whereby X.500 protocol operations can be exchanged
   between directory agents using TCP/IP [TCP] with minimal
   encapsulation, bypassing (and dispensing with) the ROSE, ACSE,
   Presentation, Session and Transport layers of the OSI model [OSI].

   Protocol operations in the IDM protocol are encoded according to the
   Basic Encoding Rules (BER) [X690] of ASN.1.  The XED framework
   introduces a new exclusively XML-based protocol, called the XML
   Internet Directly Mapped (XIDM) protocol, which differs from the IDM
   protocol only in that the protocol operations are encoded using a
   Standalone DXER encoding [DXER] instead of BER.  Since the IDM
   protocol does not itself support any form of negotiation of the
   transfer syntax, communication end points for the XIDM protocol must



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


   be distinct, with different ports and/or different IP addresses.

   Whilst the IDM protocol is amenable to a simple substitution of the
   encoding rules to create a uniformly XML formatted protocol
   operation, LDAP is not, due to discontinuities in the encoding, i.e.
   places where transfer syntax transitions occur (typically from BER to
   LDAP-specific [SYNTAX] and back to BER).  A straight application of
   DXER to an LDAP operation would inconveniently force any markup in
   XML formatted attribute values to be escaped.

   However, within the XED framework a deterministic transformation of
   the LDAP ASN.1 specification is applied to create a new specification
   without the discontinuities called the XML Lightweight Directory
   Access Protocol (XLDAP) [XLDAP].  Essentially, the bland OCTET STRING
   [X680] containers for directory data items in LDAP are replaced by
   the open types [X681] used by X.500.  Apart from the change in syntax
   XLDAP is semantically equivalent to LDAP.

   Since the XED protocols are algorithmically generated from the LDAP
   and X.500 specifications, all future extensions to LDAP and X.500
   automatically acquire a XED protocol representation.


7. Security Considerations

   Since XED is derived from LDAP and X.500 the security considerations
   that apply to LDAP and X.500 apply equally to XED.

   The XED protocols encode all attribute values using DXER, which does
   not necessarily enable the exact BER encoding of an attribute value
   to be recovered.  Such recovery is needed for the verification of
   digital signatures.  The XED protocols MUST NOT be used by
   applications requiring such recovery.

   When interpreting security-sensitive fields, and in particular fields
   used to grant or deny access, implementations MUST ensure that any
   comparisons are done on the underlying abstract value, regardless of
   the particular encoding used.


8. Acknowledgements

   This document and the technology it describes are a product of a
   joint research project between Adacel Technologies Limited and Deakin
   University on leveraging existing directory technology to produce an
   XML-based directory service.





Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


9. Normative References

   [TCP]     Postel, J., "TRANSMISSION CONTROL PROTOCOL", RFC 793,
             September 1981.

   [BCP14]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [LDAP]    Zeilenga, K., "LDAP: Technical Specification Road Map",
             draft-ietf-ldapbis-roadmap-xx.txt, a work in progress,
             March 2003.

   [DXER]    Legg, S. and D. Prager, "Directory XML Encoding Rules for
             ASN.1 Types", draft-legg-xed-dxer-xx.txt, a work in
             progress, August 2003.

   [GLUE]    Legg, S. and D. Prager, "XED: Schema Language Integration",
             draft-legg-xed-glue-xx.txt, a work in progress, August
             2003.

   [ASD]     Legg, S. and D. Prager, "ASN.1 Schema: An XML
             Representation for ASN.1 Specifications",
             draft-legg-xed-asd-xx.txt, a work in progress, August 2003.

   [CXSD]    Legg, S. and D. Prager, "Translation of ASN.1
             Specifications into XML Schema", draft-legg-xed-xsd-xx.txt,
             a work in progress, August 2003.

   [CRNG]    Legg, S. and D. Prager, "Translation of ASN.1
             Specifications into RELAX NG", draft-legg-xed-rng-xx.txt, a
             work in progress, August 2003.

   [XFER]    Legg, S., "LDAP: Transfer Encoding Options",
             draft-legg-ldap-transfer-xx.txt, a work in progress, August
             2003.

   [SCHEMA]  Legg, S. and D. Prager, "XED: Schema Operational
             Attributes", draft-legg-xed-schema-00.txt, a work in
             progress, August 2003.

   [MATCH]   Legg, S. and D. Prager, "XED: Matching Rules", draft-legg-
             xed-matching-00.txt, a work in progress, August 2003.

   [XLDAP]   Legg, S. and D. Prager, "XML Lightweight Directory Access
             Protocol", draft-legg-xed-xldap-xx.txt, a work in progress,
             August 2003.

   [X500]    ITU-T Recommendation X.500 (02/01) | ISO/IEC 9594-1:2001,



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


             Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The
             Directory: Overview of concepts, models and services

   [X519]    ITU-T Recommendation X.519 (02/01) | ISO/IEC 9594-5:2001,
             Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The
             Directory: Protocol specifications

   [XML]     Bray, T., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, M. and E. Maler,
             "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second Edition)",
             W3C Recommendation, http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/REC-
             xml-20001006, October 2000.

   [XMLNS]   Bray, T., Hollander, D. and A. Layman, "Namespaces in XML",
             http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-xml-names-19990114, January
             1999.


10. Informative References

   [BCP11]   Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in
             the IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October
             1996.

   [CMR]     Legg, S., "LDAP & X.500 Component Matching Rules", draft-
             legg-ldapext-component-matching-xx.txt, a work in progress,
             June 2003.

   [SYNTAX]  Legg, S. and K. Dally, "LDAP: Syntaxes and Matching Rules",
             draft-ietf-ldapbis-syntaxes-xx.txt, a work in progress,
             June 2003.

   [OSI]     ITU-T Recommendation X.200 (1994) | ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994,
             Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection -
             Basic Reference Model: The Basic Model.

   [X680]    ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (07/02) | ISO/IEC 8824-1:2002,
             Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One
             (ASN.1): Specification of basic notation.

   [X681]    ITU-T Recommendation X.681 (07/02) | ISO/IEC 8824-2,
             Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One
             (ASN.1): Information object specification.

   [X690]    ITU-T Recommendation X.690 (07/02) | ISO/IEC 8825-1:2002,
             Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules:
             Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical
             Encoding Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules
             (DER).



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


11. Intellectual Property Notice

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. [BCP11]
   Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementors or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


12. Copyright Notice

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004                [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT          The XML Enabled Directory         August 7, 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


13. Authors' Addresses

   Dr. Steven Legg
   Adacel Technologies Ltd.
   250 Bay Street
   Brighton, Victoria 3186
   AUSTRALIA

   Phone: +61 3 8530 7710
     Fax: +61 3 8530 7888
   EMail: steven.legg@adacel.com.au

   Dr. Daniel Prager
   C/o Professor Lynn Batten
   Department of Computing and Mathematics
   Deakin University
   Geelong, Victoria 3217
   AUSTRALIA

   EMail: dan@layabout.net
   EMail: lmbatten@deakin.edu.au


























Legg & Prager            Expires 7 February 2004               [Page 10]

