


Network Working Group                                    F. Templin, Ed.
Internet-Draft                              Boeing Research & Technology
Intended status: Informational                            March 12, 2014
Expires: September 13, 2014


 Delay Tolerant Networking Security Key Management - Problem Statement
                     draft-templin-dtnskmps-00.txt

Abstract

   Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking (DTN) introduces a network model
   in which communications may be subject to long delays and/or
   intermittent connectivity.  These challenges render traditional
   security key management mechanisms infeasible since round trip delays
   may exceed the operational limitations of the protocol.  This
   document therefore presents a problem statement for security key
   management in DTNs.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 13, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Templin                Expires September 13, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  DTNSKMPS                      March 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6




































Templin                Expires September 13, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  DTNSKMPS                      March 2014


1.  Introduction

   The Delay/Disruption Tolerant Network (DTN) architecture [RFC4838]
   introduces a data communications concept in which "bundles" of data
   are exchanged in store-and-forward fashion between endpoints that may
   be separated by long-delay or intermittently-connected paths.  The
   Bundle Protocol Specification [RFC5050] provides the bundle message
   format and operations, including convergence layer transmission,
   fragmentation and custody transfer.  Each bundle further may include
   extensions, among which may be security parameters designed to ensure
   confidentiality, integrity and authorization
   [RFC6257][I-D.irtf-dtnrg-sbsp].  These securing mechanisms, terms
   "Bundle Security Protocol", operate within the constraints imposed by
   various "ciphersuites".  Prominent among these are ciphersuites that
   rely on public/private key pairs where the public key is used to
   encrypt data and verify signatures while the private key is used to
   decrypt data and sign messages.  Like any other public/private key
   system, however, Delay Tolerant Networks require some form of Public
   Key Infrastructure (PKI) to ensure that private key holders are
   properly authorized to use them as attested by a trusted Certificate
   Authority (CA) [RFC4210].

   Public key cryptography in DTNs may be in some ways simpler than in
   traditional Internet security approaches.  In particular, some BSP
   ciphersuites impose no need for peers to establish a long-term secret
   "symmetric" session key to be applied across a stream of bundles in
   the way that protocols such as the Internet Key Exchange (IKE)
   [RFC5996] establishes a session key to be applied across a stream of
   packets.  Instead, per the provisions of these ciphersuites, each
   bundle carries its own secret symmetric key encrypted by the
   receiver's public key and used only once by the receiver to decrypt
   the bundle and verify its integrity.  This means that no inter-bundle
   security state is necessary, but comes at the penalty of transmission
   overhead for the carriage of a separate secret key for each bundle.

   While the operation of the DTN securing mechanisms themselves can be
   applied independently of the key management scheme, in their current
   incarnation they can only be used with pre-placed irrevocable keys
   since there are no published mechanisms for automated security key
   management.  On the surface, the use of standard PKI mechanisms would
   seem to be a natural fit, but traditional methods are not appropriate
   for long-delay and/or disrupted paths.  This issue has prompted
   earlier IRTF investigations into an automated key management scheme
   for DTN [I-D.farrell-dtnrg-km][I-D.irtf-dtnrg-sec-overview], and was
   also highlighted in "A Bundle of Problems" [WOOD08], Section 4.13 and
   "Security Analysis of DTN Architecture and Bundle Protocol
   Specification for Space-Based Networks" [IVAN09].




Templin                Expires September 13, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  DTNSKMPS                      March 2014


   Therefore, an automated system for the publication and revocation of
   public keys, certificates and Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs)
   will be necessary for many DTN applications, and must be designed to
   function in the presence of long delays and/or intermittent
   connectivity.  The system should provide timely publication of new
   public keys even though the delay inherent in the system may result
   in actual conveyance to DTN nodes at some time in the future.  In
   this document, we discuss the problem and highlight the need for a
   suitable solution.


2.  Discussion

   Traditional automated PKI key management protocols allow for subjects
   (aka "end entities") to create self-generated public/private key
   pairs and then register the public key with a trusted Certificate
   Authority (CA) [RFC4210].  However, these protocols expect a very
   short turnaround time from the point at which an end entity is
   granted a certificate until it is able to prove to the CA that it can
   sign a message using its private key.  Also, issues such as the
   publication of a new CA key pair can result in communication failures
   if end entities do not discover the new public key until some time
   after the old public key is deprecated.  Alternatives such as a "web
   of trust" (e.g., via Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) [RFC4880]) may have
   application in some DTNs, but this is for further study.

   An old adage that also needs to be addressed is whether there is a
   "one-size-fits-all" solution.  DTNs may come in various shapes and
   sizes, and various approaches may be better suited to some DTNs than
   others.  More specifically, in the future there may not be one "DTN"
   in the same way that there is one public Internet.  But rather, there
   may be many DTNs for public or private use - each with their own
   operational capabilities and constraints.

   There will likely be ways to accomplish public key publication in the
   presence of long delays and/or disruptions, since keys can be
   published to take effect at some point in the future.  However,
   timely certificate revocation may be infeasible due to the long
   delays inherent in many DTNs.  DTN subjects therefore must be
   vigilant in ascertaining the degree to which long-delay
   correspondents can be trusted.  These and many more issues must be
   carefully considered in any design.


3.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations for this document.




Templin                Expires September 13, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  DTNSKMPS                      March 2014


4.  Security Considerations

   Key management is a crucial aspect of DTN security, and must be fully
   addressed in any solution proposal.

   DTN security considerations are discussed in
   [RFC6257][I-D.irtf-dtnrg-sbsp].


5.  Acknowledgments

   Security key management has been discussed broadly in DTN mailing
   list discussions as well as in many of the documents cited in this
   publication.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              September 1981.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC4838]  Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L., Durst,
              R., Scott, K., Fall, K., and H. Weiss, "Delay-Tolerant
              Networking Architecture", RFC 4838, April 2007.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.farrell-dtnrg-km]
              Farrell, S., "DTN Key Management Requirements",
              draft-farrell-dtnrg-km-00 (work in progress), June 2007.

   [I-D.irtf-dtnrg-sbsp]
              Birrane, E., "Streamlined Bundle Security Protocol
              Specification", draft-irtf-dtnrg-sbsp-00 (work in
              progress), July 2013.

   [I-D.irtf-dtnrg-sec-overview]
              Farrell, S., Symington, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell,
              "Delay-Tolerant Networking Security Overview",
              draft-irtf-dtnrg-sec-overview-06 (work in progress),



Templin                Expires September 13, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  DTNSKMPS                      March 2014


              March 2009.

   [IVAN09]   Ivancic, W., "Security Analysis of DTN Architecture and
              Bundle Protocol Specification for Space-Based Networks",
              October 2009.

   [RFC4210]  Adams, C., Farrell, S., Kause, T., and T. Mononen,
              "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
              Management Protocol (CMP)", RFC 4210, September 2005.

   [RFC4880]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., Shaw, D., and R.
              Thayer, "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 4880, November 2007.

   [RFC5996]  Kaufman, C., Hoffman, P., Nir, Y., and P. Eronen,
              "Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2)",
              RFC 5996, September 2010.

   [RFC6257]  Symington, S., Farrell, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell,
              "Bundle Security Protocol Specification", RFC 6257,
              May 2011.

   [WOOD08]   Wood, L., Eddy, W., and P. Holliday, "A Bundle of
              Problems", December 2008.


Author's Address

   Fred L. Templin (editor)
   Boeing Research & Technology
   P.O. Box 3707
   Seattle, WA  98124
   USA

   Email: fltemplin@acm.org

















Templin                Expires September 13, 2014               [Page 6]

