


Network Working Group                                           O. Lendl
Internet-Draft                                                   enum.at
Expires: June 25, 2006                                 December 22, 2005


                     Publishing SIP Peering Policy
                   draft-lendl-sip-peering-policy-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 25, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This documents proposes the use of DNS entries to publish a SIP
   proxy's policy for accepting incoming calls.  Such published policies
   can be used to selectively establish peering relationships between
   VoIP service providers.








Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

   2.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

   3.   Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

   4.   Federations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

   5.   Publication of per-Domain Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

   6.   Resource Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1  Federation Membership  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2  Technical Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.3  Interpretation rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

   7.   The Big Picture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.1  Relation to Infrastructure ENUM  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.2  Call Processing Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     7.3  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

   8.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

   9.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

   10.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

   11.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     11.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     11.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  16
















Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


1.  Terminology

   This document uses the terminology as defined in
   draft-meyer-voipeer-terminology-01.txt [5].

   The acronym VSP will stand for "VoIP Service Provider".

   FIXME: Nothing in this document requires VSPs to be commercial
   service providers, the same principles and algorithms apply to
   enterprises and private SIP proxies as well.  Depending on the
   discussions in the SPEERMINT WG, later revisions of this draft may
   thus use the term Internet Telephony Administrative Domain (ITAD)
   instead of VSP.

2.  Introduction

   Open and standard-compliant SIP services on the Internet are per
   definition interoperable, hence 'interconnected'.  No extra work
   needs to be done to route calls between these services as long as the
   user is able to enter full SIP URIs.  If the user-interface is
   restricted (e.g. by using an analogue telephone adaptor in
   combination with a 12-key telephone) then ENUM as defined by RFC 3761
   [1] can be used to map telephone numbers to SIP URIs.

   PSTN replacement services usually use a sequence of digits as the
   dial-string and not SIP URIs.  These digits can be translated to
   E.164 [4] numbers, thus ENUM could be used to interconnect two such
   services on a VoIP basis.  Due to a variety of technical, political,
   and commercial reasons these services often do not assign public SIP
   URIs to their customers and do not accept incoming SIP calls from the
   Internet.  Such services usually use the PSTN as the default network
   for voice interconnection.

   Interconnecting two VoIP services via the PSTN is wasteful:
   o  Voice quality is degraded by repeated transcoding.
   o  Service limitation: IM, presence and video capabilities are lost
      during PSTN transit.
   o  PSTN transit is usually charged by the minute.

   The original SIP framework is similar to electronic mail: all SIP
   URIs are resolvable via DNS and the associated SIP servers are
   reachable via the public Internet.  As the model email shows, this is
   a powerful and open architecture which does not distinguish between
   the servers of a service-provider, an enterprise or a private person.
   This model has shown to have several drawbacks as well:






Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   SPAM

      As anybody can send email from any computer connected to the
      Internet unwanted communication of questionable motives are a
      plague.

   Sender Identity

      There is no technical protection build into the system which
      guarantees the authenticity of sender identity.  This is widely
      exploited both by email worms, phishing and other frauds.

   Right now, there is extensive work being done to combat these
   problems of the open email system.  These fixes usually work be
   restricting the openness of email and by adding cryptographic
   signatures to email.

   There are some interesting proposals regarding end-to-end
   authentication in the SIP context as well:
   draft-ietf-sip-identity-06.txt [6] is one example.

   The PSTN uses a different mode: carriers trust each other and each
   carrier is supposed to authenticate and police its own customers.

   As VoIP services are starting to build interconnections they are
   trying to avoid the pitfalls of a completely open interconnection
   regime.  Implementing User ENUM as described in RFC 3761 is a binary
   choice: Either you publish the SIP URIs and operate an open SIP
   server or you don't.  There is no middle ground where a service-
   provider can announce that he is willing to accept some incoming
   calls via SIP but will reject others.  The protocol described in this
   document is designed to publish such policy choices in an
   interoperable fashion by means of the DNS.

   Over the last years, a number of companies have established SIP
   peering fabrics based on either private ENUM trees or SIP redirect
   proxies.  These services solve the problem of interconnection between
   members but have scaling issues when a VSP wants to participate in
   more than one of such services.

   There is thus a need to introduce a generic approach to these ad-hoc
   peering solutions.  The main aim needs to be to avoid a sequential
   trying of peering fabrics.  Instead, a simple query needs to suffice
   to tell the originating network whether peering is possible and which
   peering framework it can use to route a call.






Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


3.  Requirements

   A system for selective VoIP interconnection needs to fulfill the
   following requirements:

   Unified solution for all peering policies

      The method shall be extensible to cover existing and future
      peering policies.  These start by a closed system which accepts
      only incoming calls from selected peers (i.e. a set of bilateral
      peerings) and include the model of membership in a number of
      peering fabrics or carrier clubs.  The case of an open SIP proxy
      should be covered as a special case as well.

   Domain Based

      Although the initial call routing may be based on E.164 numbers a
      generic peering method should not rely on numbers but rather on
      URIs.  We assume that all SIP URIs with the same domain-part share
      the same set of peering policies, thus the domain of the SIP URI
      may be used as the primary key to any information regarding the
      reachability of that SIP URI.

   No blocked calls

      An originating VSP shall be able to determine whether a SIP URI is
      open for direct interconnection without actually sending a SIP
      INVITE.  This is important as unsuccessful call attempts are
      highly undesirable as they can introduce high delays due to
      timeouts and can act as an unintended denial of service attack.
      (e.g. by repeated TLS handshakes)

   Scaling

      The maintenance of the system needs to scale beyond simple lists
      of peering partners.  It needs to incorporate aggregation
      mechanisms to avoid scaling with O(n*n), where n is the number of
      participating VoIP services.  Per-VSP opt-in without consultation
      of a centralized 'peering registry', but rather by publishing
      local configuration choices only is highly desirable.  The
      distributed management of DNS is a good example for the
      scalability of this approach.

   Independence of lower layers

      The system needs to be independent of details on what technologies
      are used route the call and which are used to ensure that only
      approved peering partner actually connect to the destination SIP



Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


      proxy.  It should not matter whether restrictions are implemented
      by private L3 connectivity ("walled gardens"), firewalls, TLS
      policies or SIP proxy configuration.

   Administrative and technical policies

      The reasons for declining vs. accepting incoming calls from a
      prospective peering partner can be both administrative
      (contractual, legal, commercial, or business decisions) and
      technical (certain QoS parameters, TLS keys, domainkeys, ...).
      The method should accommodate all conceivable policies.

   Minimal additional cost on call initiation

      Since each call setup implies execution of the proposed algorithm
      it should incur minimal overhead and delay, and employ caching
      wherever possible to avoid extra protocol roundtrips.

   Look beyond SIP

      The problem of selective peering is not limited to SIP-based
      communication.  Other protocols may benefit from a generic
      framework as well, such as SMTP mail.  The proposed system thus
      should be generic enough to encompass other protocols as well.


4.  Federations

   The proposed method is based upon the concept of a "Federation".  A
   federation in this context is defined as follows:

      A Federation is a group of VoIP service providers which
      *  agree to receive calls from each other via SIP,
      *  agree on a set of administrative rules for such calls
         (settlement, abuse-handling, ...), and
      *  agree on specific rules for the technical details of the
         interconnection.

   This document does not define what these rules can be and how they
   are communicated to all members of a federation.  There is no
   requirement to make those rules public.

   Federations shall use fully qualified domain names as their
   identifiers.

   All SIP service providers are assumed to be a member of a federation
   with the same name as their domain.




Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   The federation named "." (just a dot, the empty domain) stands for
   the public Internet.  A SIP service provider who announces his
   membership in "." will accept calls as defined in the generic SIP
   standard documents.

   FIXME: Or perhaps use URIs as in XML name-spaces instead of domains.

   Examples:

   o  A set of VoIP service providers form an association and agree to
      accept calls from each other via the public Internet as long as
      the SIP call uses TCP/TLS as transport protocol and presents a
      X.509 cert which was signed by the association's own CA.
   o  A set of VoIP service providers build a L3 network dedicated to
      VoIP peering ("walled garden", similar to the 3GPP GRX network).
      They agree to accept calls from all participants in that network
      and bill each other via a clearinghouse.
   o  A set of VoIP service providers agree to accept calls originating
      from within the same country.  They use a set of firewall rules to
      block calls from abroad.
   o  Peering fabric based on SIP: A company sets up a SIP proxy which
      acts as a forwarding proxy between the SIP proxies of all
      participating VSPs.  The group of these VSP form a federation
      whose technical rules state that calls have to be routed via that
      central proxy.

5.  Publication of per-Domain Policies

   The domain part of the destination SIP URI is the natural key for the
   peering policy of the SIP proxy serving that domain.  It is thus a
   sensible choice to publish the policy for incoming calls towards a
   SIP URI in the DNS zone of its domain.

   There are two types of policies a VSP may advertise:

   o  A list of federations which this domain belongs to.

      Federations are identified by domain names thus this is a list of
      domains.

      If a VSP announces its membership in a federation, it declares
      that it will accept calls originating from all other members of
      that federation.  There is no need to announce technical details,
      as members of that federation already are assumed to know how to
      talk to each other.






Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   o  Technical requirements for contacting the SIP proxy serving this
      domain.

      This is similar to RFC 3263 [3], but with an important
      distinction: The premise of RFC 3263 is universal connectivity
      between SIP services.  In that context, the aim is to select the
      best transport protocol for SIP and determine the correct IP
      address and port.  The aim here is different: universal
      connectivity is NOT assumed, rather the protocol is used to
      determine whether a connection is possible in the first place.
      There are no defaults to fall back to.

      Publishing technical requirements are a way of expressing "I don't
      usually accept calls from the Internet, but if you can do X or (Y
      and Z) then I'll accept your calls.".  Such policy announcements
      are independent of any federation rules: they cannot be used to
      alter the technical rules of a federation.

6.  Resource Records

   FIXME: the RRs described are here to illustrate the basic idea.
   Suggestions on the format are explicitly welcome.

   SIP proxies following the optional parts of RFC 3263 already query
   for NAPTR records in the destinations domain.  Adding SIP peering
   policy information in NAPTRs increases the size of the DNS response
   but does not incur an extra network roundtrip.

   To accomodate these larger DNS responses is it recommended that these
   lookups utilize EDNS0 to avoid fallbacks to TCP queries.  FIXME: make
   EDNS0 mandatory as in [8]?

6.1  Federation Membership

   The following NAPTR records indicate federation memberships of the
   SIP proxy serving this domain:















Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   ;      order pref flags service regexp replacement
     IN NAPTR 10 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" voip.vix.at.
     IN NAPTR 20 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" voip.example.com.
   ;
   ; Interpretation:
   ;
   ;   This VSP prefers calls under the rule of voip.vix.at but
   ;   will also accept calls from other members of the
   ;   voip.example.com federation.
   ;
   ;   Calls from the public Internet will not be accepted.
   ;

                                 Figure 1

   o  FIXME formal spec.
   o  FIXME flags? 'p' for "policy"
   o  FIXME service?  D2F stands for "domain to federation".  If we use
      URIs as namespace, then "D2U+FED:SIP" could be possible.
   o  FIXME do we want more than one federation in one NAPTR, e.g.
      "voip.vix.at+xconnect.com" to save space in he NS answer?  In that
      case we need to use the regexp field and not the replacement.
   o  FIXME if we use URIs for federation Ids, then they move into the
      regexp as well.

   The order/preference fields are used to indicate a preference under
   which federation's rules it prefers to receive the call.

6.2  Technical Restrictions

   RFC 3261 mandates support for TCP, TLS and UDP in all SIP proxies.
   RFC 3263 builds on that.  Quote:
      If a SIP proxy, redirect server, or registrar is to be contacted
      through the lookup of NAPTR records, there MUST be at least three
      records - one with a "SIP+D2T" service field, one with a "SIP+D2U"
      service field, and one with a "SIPS+D2T" service field.

   This "MUST" needs to be reconsidered in this context, as it forces
   VSP to accept calls over unsecured SIP transports.

   Parts of the technical policies (e.g. "we accept only calls via TCP/
   TLS") can be expressed with the means of RFC 3263, others (e.g.
   "domainkeys are required", "sip-indentity-signatures required")
   cannot.

   FIXME There needs to be a consensus on how to express which
   algorithms are required.  This name-space needs to be defined and
   administered.  (IANA?  URNs like in XML-DSIG?)



Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   The syntax must be expressive enough to say ((ALG1 and ALG2) or (ALG3
   and ALG4)).

   Proposed syntax:

   ;      order pref flags service regexp replacement
     IN NAPTR 10 50 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:identity!" .
     IN NAPTR 10 51 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:calist:THAWTE+FREECA!" .
     IN NAPTR 20 50 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:domainkeys!" .
     IN NAPTR 20 51 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:TLS!" .
   ;
   ; Interpretation:
   ;
   ;   This VSP will accept calls from the public Internet if
   ;   the request is signed according to SIP-Identity using certs
   ;   signed by THAWTE or FREECA.
   ;
   ;   Alternatively,
   ;
   ;   calls arriving via TLS and signed with domainskeys are
   ;   accepted as well.
   ;

                                 Figure 2

   o  FIXME formal spec.
   o  FIXME flags?  Still 'p' for policy?
   o  FIXME service?  D2P stands for "domain to policy".  As we use URNs
      as namespace, things like "D2U+POLICY:SIP" could be possible.
   o  FIXME RFC 3263 uses "SIP+D2U", "SIP+D2T" and "SIP+D2S".  ENUM uses
      the service in a reverse way, e.g.  "E2U+sip" or "E2U+H323".  Do
      we go with the ENUM example or the RFC3263 precedent?

6.3  Interpretation rules

   o  If no NAPTR records as defined by this document are found in the
      target domain, then the normal rules according to RFC 3263 apply.
   o  If a domain announces its memberships in the special federation
      "." then it will accept calls under the RFC 3263 regime.
   o  If a domain announces membership in multiple federations, then it
      will accept calls according to the rules of each federations.  If
      a VSP participates in one or several private peering fabrics and
      accepts calls from the public internet as well, then it needs to
      announce membership in those federations and in ".".
   o  For the purpose of the call routing algorithm, technical
      restrictions can be regarded as ad-hoc federation definitions.
      All entries with the same priority field taken together act as the
      definition of a federation which uses the public Internet as the



Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


      Layer 3 network and where SIP proxies conform to these
      restrictions.
   o  If technical restrictions and federation memberships are
      announced, then an originating VSP can use either the federation's
      rules or the public Internet with the appropriate protocols to
      make the call.
   o  RRs for technical restrictions cannot be used to modify the rules
      of a federation.

7.  The Big Picture

7.1  Relation to Infrastructure ENUM

   Private VoIP interconnection fabrics as they are in operation right
   now do a good job of facilitating the peering if the originating VSP
   selects the right fabric for each call.  As long a VSP only
   participates in two or three such fabrics sequential trying of these
   fabrics may be feasible.  The delays caused by unsuccessful dips add
   up and a disruption of any one such service can impact the overall
   call processing times.  Parallel querying of all peering systems is
   an option to cope with multiple peering system, but this does
   increase the complexity of the call processing.

   Each peering dip into any fabric's routing logic answers the
   following questions:

   1.  Is the destination reachable via SIP in the context of this
       fabric?
   2.  What call setup method and parameters should I use? (e.g. use
       TLS?  Which cert to present?  Route the call via a special SBC?
       Do some L3 magic to ensure QoS?)


   There is reason to assume that the proliferation of VoIP peering
   points will be similar to that of layer 3 peering points.  A larger
   VSP might thus be participating in a significant number of such
   fabrics.

   If we split up the dip from above into

   1.  Is the destination reachable via SIP at all?
   2.  Will the destination network accept calls from me?
   3.  What call setup method and parameters should I use?


   then the first two can be be implemented with a public lookup which
   is unified over all peering fabrics.  Infrastructure ENUM will take
   care of the first point.  This document defines a solution for the



Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   second.

   The third item can well be implemented in a propriety and private
   fashion.

7.2  Call Processing Algorithm

   E.164 Based calling:

   1.   Collect the dial-string from user
   2.   Apply the dial-plan to get an E.164 number
   3.   Use ENUM to map the number to a SIP URI (perhaps using
        draft-haberler-carrier-enum-01 [7])
   4.   Query for NAPTR records in the domain of the SIP URI
   5.   If neither "D2F+SIP" nor "D2P+SIP" entries are found, then the
        destination proxy does not support policy announcements as
        defined by this document.  Route the call according to RFC 3263
        (i.e. query for SRV, then A records).
   6.   Group all "D2P+SIP" entries by the order field.  Create a list
        containing these groups, a "D2F+SIP" entry with the
        destination's domain and order 0, and all "D2F+SIP" entries from
        the DNS.  Sort this list according to the order field.
   7.   Loop over this sorted list (lowest order first).  For each entry
        try:
   8.   If the entry is of type "D2F+SIP", check if the federation of
        this record is in the the originating SIP service provider's own
        list of federations (which includes "." if the originating VSP
        chooses to do termination to open SIP proxies).  If yes, try to
        complete the call according to the well-known rules of that
        federation.  If for some reason this does not work as
        advertised, continue with the algorithm.
   9.   If the entry is a group of "D2P+SIP" records, check if all
        technical restrictions can be met.  If yes, place the call using
        that specifications.  Once again, if this does not work as
        advertised, continue with the algorithm.
   10.  [end of loop]
   11.  If no usable entries have been found, then this call cannot be
        routed via SIP.

   URI based calls start with step 4.

7.3  Examples

   In all the following examples, a private peering arangement between
   the calling and the called VSP takes precedence over all other
   options.





Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   One federation


   $ORIGIN example.com

   ;      order pref flags service regexp replacement
     IN NAPTR 10 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" voip.vix.at.
     IN NAPTR 20 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" .
   ;

      In this case, example.com announces that it prefers calls via the
      "voip.vix.at" framework, but is also willing to accept calls from
      the Internet.

   Federations and technical restrictions

   ;      order pref flags service regexp replacement
     IN NAPTR 10 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" voip.vix.at.
     IN NAPTR 20 50 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:domainkeys!" .
   ;

      In order to contact the SIP proxy for example.com, the originating
      SIP proxy must either use the "voip.vix.at" framework (preferred)
      or use a domainkeys-signed request over the public Internet.

   Federations and complex technical restrictions

   ;      order pref flags service regexp replacement
     IN NAPTR 10 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" voip.vix.at.
     IN NAPTR 20 50 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:TLS!" .
     IN NAPTR 20 51 "p" "D2P+SIP" "!.*!urn:ietf:sip:calist:THAWTE!" .
     IN NAPTR 30 50 "p" "D2F+SIP" "" voip-exchange.example.org.
   ;

      In this example, the sending VSP has the following options:
      1.  Use the rules of "voip.vix.at" (preferred).
      2.  Connect via the public Internet using TLS with a cert signed
          by THAWTE.
      3.  Use the rules of "voip-exchange.example.org".

8.  Security Considerations

   The NAPTRs proposed here publish information which is not public if
   VSP just rely on private interconnection agreements.  These records
   are similar to the public routing registries for BGP4 as maintained
   by the RIRs.  They are just records indicating who peers with whom
   but do not hold details on how the interconnection is achieved.




Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   The published technical requirements for incoming calls could be used
   by malicious callers to find possible attack vectors.  This should be
   a non-issue for all VSP who do not rely on security-by-obscurity.

   The publishing of the peering policy via the DNS RR described in this
   draft will reduce the number of unwanted calls, as all well-meaning
   VSP will follow them, but these records cannot substitute measures to
   actually enforce the published peering policy.

9.  IANA Considerations

   FIXME: This document defines an IANA registry for the technical
   restrictions fields.

   FIXME: This document registers the protocol fields XXXX in NAPTRs.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Michael Haberler, Alexander Mayrhofer,
   Richard Stastny, and John Todd for their contributions.

11.  References

11.1  Normative References

   [1]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation Protocol
        (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263, June 2002.

11.2  Informative References

   [4]  ITU-T, "The international public telecommunication numbering
        plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997.

   [5]  Meyer, D., "Terminology for Describing VoIP Peering and
        Interconnect", draft-meyer-voipeer-terminology-01 (work in
        progress), October 2005.

   [6]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for Authenticated
        Identity Management in the Session Initiation  Protocol (SIP)",
        draft-ietf-sip-identity-06 (work in progress), October 2005.



Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


   [7]  Haberler, M. and R. Stastny, "Combined User and Carrier ENUM in
        the e164.arpa tree", draft-haberler-carrier-enum-01 (work in
        progress), October 2005.

   [8]  Conroy, L. and J. Reid, "ENUM Requirement for EDNS0 Support",
        draft-conroy-enum-edns0-01 (work in progress), October 2005.


Author's Address

   Otmar Lendl
   enum.at GmbH
   Karlsplatz 1/9
   Wien  A-1010
   Austria

   Phone: +43 1 5056416 33
   Email: otmar.lendl@enum.at
   URI:   http://www.enum.at/
































Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             SIP Peering Policy              December 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Lendl                     Expires June 25, 2006                [Page 16]

