Internet Draft                                                D. Pinkas
<draft-ietf-pkix-pr-tsa-04.txt>                                    Bull
Target Category: INFORMATIONAL                                  N. Pope
April 2003                                         Security & Standards
Expires in six months                                           J. Ross
                                                   Security & Standards

              Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities
                       <draft-ietf-pkix-pr-tsa-04.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered in accordance 
   with Section 10 of RFC 2026, and the authors do not provide the IETF
   with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-Draft.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as 
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines requirements for a baseline time-stamp policy 
   for Time-Stamping Authorities (TSAs) issuing time-stamp tokens, 
   supported by public key certificates, with an accuracy of one 
   second or better. A TSA may define its own policy which enhances 
   the policy defined in the current document. Such a policy shall 
   incorporate or further constrain the requirements identified in the 
   current document. 

   The contents of this Informational RFC is technically equivalent 
   to ETSI TS 102 023 V 1.2.1 (2002-06) [TS 102023]. The ETSI TS is 
   under the ETSI Copyright (C). Individual copies of this ETSI 
   deliverable can be downloaded from http://www.etsi.org

Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 1]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Table of Contents

1. Introduction                                                      4

2. Overview                                                          5

3. Definitions and abbreviations                                     5

  3.1. Definitions                                                   5
  3.2. Abbreviations                                                 7

4. General concepts                                                  7

  4.1. Time-stamping services                                        7
  4.2. Time-stamping authority                                       7
  4.3. Subscriber                                                    8
  4.4. Time-stamp policy and TSA practice statement                  8
    4.4.1. Purpose                                                   8
    4.4.2. Level of specificity                                      8
    4.4.3. Approach                                                  9

5. Time-stamp Policies                                               9

  5.1. Overview                                                      9
  5.2. Identification                                                9
  5.3. User Community and applicability                             10
  5.4. Conformance                                                  10

6. Obligations and liability                                        10

  6.1. TSA obligations                                              10
    6.1.1. General                                                  10
    6.1.2. TSA obligations towards subscribers                      11
  6.2. Subscriber obligations                                       11
  6.3. Relying party obligations                                    11
  6.4. Liability                                                    11

7. Requirements on TSA practices                                    11

  7.1. Practice and Disclosure Statements                           12
    7.1.1.  TSA Practice statement                                  12
    7.1.2.  TSA disclosure Statement                                13
  7.2. Key management life cycle                                    14
    7.2.1. TSU key generation                                       14
    7.2.2. TSU private key protection                               15
    7.2.3. TSU public key Distribution                              15
    7.2.4. Rekeying TSU's Key                                       16
    7.2.5. End of TSU key life cycle                                16
    7.2.6. Life cycle management of the cryptographic module 
           used to sign time-stamps                                 17




Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 2]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


  7.3. Time-stamping                                                17

    7.3.1. Time-stamp token                                         17
    7.3.2. Clock Synchronization with UTC                           18

  7.4. TSA management and operation                                 19

    7.4.1. Security management                                      19
    7.4.2. Asset classification and management                      20
    7.4.3. Personnel security                                       20
    7.4.4. Physical and environmental security                      22
    7.4.5. Operations management                                    23
    7.4.6. System Access Management                                 24
    7.4.7. Trustworthy Systems Deployment and Maintenance           25
    7.4.8. Compromise of TSA Services                               25
    7.4.9. TSA termination                                          26
    7.4.10. Compliance with Legal Requirements                      27
    7.4.11. Recording of Information Concerning Operation 
            of Time-stamping Services                               27
  7.5. Organizational                                               28

8. Security considerations                                          29

9. Acknowledgments                                                  30

10. References                                                      30

10.1. Normative References                                          30
10.2. Non-normative References                                      30

11. Authors' addresses                                              31

Annex A (informative): Coordinated Universal Time                   33

Annex B (informative): Possible for Implementation Architectures and  
                       Time-Stamping Services                       35

Annex C (informative): Long Term Verification of time-stamp tokens  37

Annex D (informative): Model TSA disclosure statement               38

Full Copyright Statement                                            40












Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 3]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

1.  Introduction

In creating reliable and manageable digital evidence it becomes 
necessary to have an agreed upon method of associating time data to 
transaction so that they might be compared to each other at some later 
time. The quality of this evidence is based in the process of creating 
and managing the data structure that represent the events and the 
quality of the parametric data points that anchor them to the real 
world. In this instance this being the time data and how it was 
applied.

A typical transaction is a digitally signed document, where it is 
necessary to prove that the digital signature from the signer was 
applied when the signer's certificate was valid. 

A timestamp or a time mark (which is an audit record kept in a secure 
audit trail from a trusted third party) applied to a digital signature 
value proves that the digital signature was created before the date 
included in the time-stamp or time mark.

To prove the digital signature was generated while the signer's 
certificate was valid, the digital signature must be verified and 
the following conditions satisfied:

     1. the time-stamp (or time mark) has been applied before the end 
        of the validity period of the signer's certificate, 

     2. the time-stamp (or time mark) has been applied either 
        while the signer's certificate was not revoked or 
        before the revocation date of the certificate.

Thus a time-stamp (or time mark) applied in this manner proves that the 
digital signature was created while the signer's certificate was valid. 
This concept can be extended to prove the validity of a digital 
signature over the whole of any certificate chain.

Policy requirements to cover that case is the primary reason of the 
present document. However, it should be observed that these policy 
requirements allow to address other needs. 

The electronic time stamp is gaining an increasing interest by the 
business sector and is becoming an important component of electronic 
signatures, also featured by the ETSI Electronic Signature Format 
standard [TS 101733] or Electronic Signature Formats for long term 
electronic signatures [RFC 3126], built upon the Time-Stamp Protocol 
[RFC 3161]. Agreed minimum security and quality requirements are 
necessary in order to ensure trustworthy validation of long-term 
electronic signatures.

The European Directive 1999/93/EC [Dir 99/93/EC] defines certification 
service provider as "an entity or a legal or natural person who issues 
certificates or provides other services related to electronic 
signatures". One example of a certification-service-provider is a 
Time-Stamping Authority. 

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 4]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


2. Overview

These policy requirements are primarily aimed at time-stamping services 
used in support of qualified electronic signatures (i.e. in line with 
article 5.1 of the European Directive on a community framework for 
electronic signatures) but may be applied to any application requiring 
to prove that a datum existed before a particular time.

These policy requirements are based upon the use of public key 
cryptography, public key certificates and reliable time sources. 
The present document may be used by independent bodies as the basis for 
confirming that a TSA may be trusted for providing time-stamping 
services.

The current document addresses requirements for TSAs issuing time-stamp 
tokens which are synchronized with Coordinated universal time (UTC) and 
digitally signed by TSUs.

Subscriber and relying parties should consult the TSA's practice 
statement to obtain further details of precisely how this time-stamp 
policy is implemented by the particular TSA (e.g. protocols used in 
providing this service).

The current document does not specify:

   - protocols used to access the TSUs; 

NOTE 1: A time-stamping protocol is defined in RFC 3161 [RFC 3161] and 
profiled in TS 101 861 [TS 101861]. 

   - how the requirements identified herein may be assessed by an 
     independent body; 

   - requirements for information to be made available to such 
     independent bodies; 

   - requirements on such independent bodies.

NOTE 2: See CEN Workshop Agreement 14172 "EESSI Conformity Assessment 
Guidance" [CWA 14172].

3. Definitions and abbreviations

3.1. Definitions

For the purposes of the present document, the following terms and 
definitions apply:

NOTE: Where a definition is copied from a referenced document this is 
indicated by inclusion of the reference identifier number at the end of 
the definition.



Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 5]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


relying party: recipient of a time-stamp token who relies on that 
time-stamp token.

subscriber: entity requiring the services provided by a TSA and which 
has explicitly or implicitly agreed to its terms and conditions.

time-stamp token: data object that binds a representation of a datum to 
a particular time, thus establishing evidence that the datum existed 
before that time.

time-stamping authority: authority which issues time-stamp tokens.

TSA Disclosure statement: set of statements about the policies and 
practices of a TSA that particularly require emphasis or disclosure to 
subscribers and relying parties, for example to meet regulatory 
requirements.

TSA practice statement: statement of the practices that a TSA employs 
in issuing time-stamp tokens.

TSA system: composition of IT products and components organized to 
support the provision of time-stamping services.

time-stamp policy: named set of rules that indicates the applicability 
of a time-stamp token to a particular community and/or class of 
application with common security requirements.

time-stamping unit: set of hardware and software which is managed as a 
unit and has a single time-stamp token signing key active at a time.

Coordinated Universal Time (UTC): Time scale based on the second as 
defined in ITU-R Recommendation TF.460-5 [TF.460-5] .

NOTE: For most practical purposes UTC is equivalent to mean solar time 
at the prime meridian (0ù). More specifically, UTC is a compromise 
between the highly stable atomic time (Temps Atomique International 
 - TAI) and solar time derived from the irregular Earth rotation 
(related to the Greenwich mean sidereal time (GMST) by a conventional 
relationship). (See annex A for more details).

UTC(k): Time-scale realized by the laboratory "k" and kept in close 
agreement with UTC, with the goal to reach plus or minus 100 ns. 
(See ITU-R Recommendation TF.536-1 [TF.536-1]).

NOTE:  A list of UTC(k) laboratories is given in section 1 of 
Circular T disseminated by BIPM and available from the BIPM website 
(http://www.bipm.org/).

3.2. Abbreviations

For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations 
apply:


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 6]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


   TSA  Time-Stamping Authority
   TSU  Time-Stamping Unit
   TST  Time-Stamp Token
   UTC  Coordinated Universal Time

4. General concepts

4.1 Time-stamping services

The provision of time-stamping services is broken down in the present 
document into the following component services for the purposes of 
classifying requirements:

   - Time-stamping provision: This service component generates 
     time-stamp tokens.

   - Time-stamping management: The service component that monitors and 
     controls the operation of the time-stamping services to ensure 
     that the service provided is as specified by the TSA. This service 
     component has responsibility for the installation and 
     de-installation of the time-stamping provision service. For example, 
     time-stamping management ensures that the clock used for 
     time-stamping is correctly synchronized with UTC.

This subdivision of services is only for the purposes of clarifying the 
requirements specified in the current document and places no 
restrictions on any subdivision of an implementation of time-stamping 
services.

4.2 Time-stamping authority

The authority trusted by the users of the time-stamping services (i.e. 
subscribers as well as relying parties) to issue time-stamp tokens is 
called the Time-Stamping Authority (TSA). The TSA has overall 
responsibility for the provision of the time-stamping services 
identified in clause 4.1. The TSA has responsibility for the operation 
of one or more TSU's which creates and signs on behalf of the TSA. The 
TSA responsible for issuing a time-stamp token is identifiable (see 
7.3.1 h).

The TSA may make use of other parties to provide parts of the 
Time-Stamping Services. However, the TSA always maintains overall 
responsibility and ensures that the policy requirements identified in 
the present document are met.  For example, a TSA may sub-contract all 
the component services, including the services which generate 
time-stamp tokens using the TSU's keys. However, the private key or 
keys used to generate the time-stamp tokens are identified as 
belonging to the TSA which maintains overall responsibility for 
meeting the requirements defined in the current document.

A TSA may operate several identifiable time-stamping units. Each unit 
has a different key. See Annex B for possible implementations.


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 7]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

A TSA is a certification-service-provider, as defined in the EU 
Directive on Electronic Signatures (see article 2(11)), which issues 
time-stamp tokens.

4.3 Subscriber

The subscriber may be an organization comprising several end-users or 
an individual end-user. 

When the subscriber is an organization, some of the obligations that 
apply to that organization will have to apply as well to the end-users. 
In any case the organization will be held responsible if the 
obligations from the end-users are not correctly fulfilled and 
therefore the such an organization is expected to suitably inform its 
end users.

When the subscriber is an end-user, the end-user will be held directly 
responsible if its obligations are not correctly fulfilled.

4.4 Time-stamp policy and TSA practice statement

This section explains the relative roles of Time-stamp policy and TSA 
practice statement. It places no restriction on the form of a 
time-stamp policy or practice statement specification.

4.4.1 Purpose

In general, the time-stamp policy states "what is to be adhered to," 
while a TSA practice statement states "how it is adhered to", i.e., the 
processes it will use in creating time-stamps and maintaining the 
accuracy of its clock. The relationship between the time-stamp policy 
and TSA practice statement is similar in nature to the relationship of 
other business policies which state the requirements of the business, 
while operational units define the practices and procedures of how 
these policies are to be carried out.

The present document specifies a time-stamp policy to meet general 
requirements for trusted time-stamping services. TSAs specify in TSA 
practice statements how these requirements are met.

4.4.2 Level of specificity

A time-stamp policy is a less specific document than a TSA practice 
statement. A TSA practice statement is a more detailed description of 
the terms and conditions as well as business and operational practices 
of a TSA in issuing and otherwise managing time-stamping services. The 
TSA practice statement of a TSA enforces the rules established by a 
time-stamp policy. A TSA practice statement defines how a specific TSA 
meets the technical, organizational and procedural requirements 
identified in a time-stamp policy.

NOTE: Even lower-level internal documentation may be appropriate for a 
TSA detailing the specific procedures necessary to complete the 
practices identified in the TSA practice statement. 

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 8]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

4.4.3 Approach

The approach of a time-stamp policy is significantly different from a 
TSA practice statement. A time-stamp policy is defined independently of 
the specific details of the specific operating environment of a TSA, 
whereas a TSA practice statement is tailored to the organizational 
structure, operating procedures, facilities, and computing environment 
of a TSA. A time-stamp policy may be defined by the user of times-stamp 
services, whereas the TSA practice statement is always defined by the 
provider.

5 Time-stamp Policies

5.1 Overview

A time-stamp policy is a "named set of rules that indicates the 
applicability of a time-stamp token to a particular community and/or 
class of application with common security requirements" (see clauses 
3.1 and 4.4).

The present document defines requirements for a baseline time-stamp 
policy for TSAs issuing time-stamp tokens, supported by public key 
certificates, with an accuracy of 1 second or better.

NOTE 1: Without additional measures the relying party may not be able 
to ensure the validity of a time-stamp token beyond the end of the 
validity period of the supporting certificate. See annex C on 
verification of the validity of a time-stamp token beyond the validity 
period of the TSU's certificate.

A TSA may define its own policy which enhances the policy defined in 
the current document. Such a policy shall incorporate or further 
constrain the requirements identified in the current document.

If an accuracy of better than 1 second is provided by a TSA then, if 
all the TSUs have that same characteristics, the accuracy shall be 
indicated in the TSA's disclosure statement (see section 7.1.2) 
otherwise in each time-stamp token issued with an accuracy of 
better than 1 second.

NOTE 2: It is required that a time-stamp token includes an identifier 
for the applicable policy (see section 7.3.1).

5.2 Identification

The object-identifier of the baseline time-stamp policy is:
itu-t(0) identified-organization(4) etsi(0) time-stamp-policy(2023) 
policy-identifiers(1) baseline-ts-policy (1)

A TSA shall also include the identifier for the time-stamp policy being 
supported in the TSA disclosure statement made available to subscribers 
and relying parties to indicate its claim of conformance.



Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                   [Page 9]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

5.3 User Community and applicability

This policy is aimed at meeting the requirements of time-stamping 
qualified electronic signatures (see European Directive on Electronic 
Signatures) for long term validity (e.g. as defined in TS 101 733 
[TS 101733]) but is generally applicable to any use which has a 
requirement for equivalent quality.

This policy may be used for public time-stamping services or 
time-stamping services used within a closed community.

5.4 Conformance

The TSA shall use the identifier for the time-stamp policy in 
time-stamp tokens as given in section 5.2, or define its own time-stamp
policy that incorporates or further constrains the requirements 
identified in the present document:

a) if the TSA claims conformance to the identified time-stamp policy 
and makes available to subscribers and relying parties on request the 
evidence to support the claim of conformance; or

b) if the TSA has been assessed to be conformant to the identified 
time-stamp policy by an independent party.

A conformant TSA must demonstrate that:

a) it meets its obligations as defined in section 6.1;
b) it has implemented controls which meet the requirements specified in 
section 7.

6 Obligations and liability

6.1 TSA obligations

6.1.1 General

The TSA shall ensure that all requirements on TSA, as detailed in 
section 7, are implemented as applicable to the selected trusted 
time-stamp policy.

The TSA shall ensure conformance with the procedures prescribed in this 
policy, even when the TSA functionality is undertaken by 
sub-contractors.

The TSA shall also ensure adherence to any additional obligations 
indicated in the time-stamp either directly or incorporated by 
reference.

The TSA shall provide all its time-stamping services consistent with 
its practice statement.




Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 10]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

6.1.2 TSA obligations towards subscribers

The TSA shall meet its claims as given in its terms and conditions 
including the availability and accuracy of its service.

6.2 Subscriber obligations

The current document places no specific obligations on the subscriber 
beyond any TSA specific requirements stated in the TSA's terms and 
condition.

NOTE:  It is advisable that, when obtaining a time-stamp token, the 
subscriber verifies that the time-stamp token has been correctly signed 
and that the private key used to sign the time-stamp token has not been 
compromised.

6.3 Relying party obligations

The terms and conditions made available to relying parties (see section 
7.1.2) shall include an obligation on the relying party that, when 
relying on a time-stamp token, it shall:

a) verify that the time-stamp token has been correctly signed and that 
the private key used to sign the time-stamp has not been compromised 
until the time of the verification; 

NOTE: During the TSU's certificate validity period, the validity of the 
signing key can be checked using current revocation status for the 
TSU's certificate. If the time of verification exceeds the end of the 
validity period of the corresponding certificate, see annex C for 
guidance.

b) take into account any limitations on the usage of the time-stamp 
indicated by the time-stamp policy;

c) take into account any other precautions prescribed in agreements or 
elsewhere.

6.4 Liability

The present document does not specify any requirement on liability. In 
particular, it should be noticed that a TSA may disclaim or limit any 
liability unless otherwise stipulated by the applicable law.

7 Requirements on TSA practices

The TSA shall implement the controls that meet the following 
requirements.

These policy requirements are not meant to imply any restrictions on 
charging for TSA services.




Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 11]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

The requirements are indicated in terms of the security objectives 
followed by more specific requirements for controls to meet those 
objectives where considered necessary to provide the necessary 
confidence that those objective will be met. 

NOTE: The details of controls required to meet an objective is a 
balance between achieving the necessary confidence whilst minimizing 
the restrictions on the techniques that a TSA may employ in issuing 
time-stamp tokens. In case of section 7.4 (TSA management and 
operation) reference is made to other more general standards which may 
be used as a source of more detailed control requirements. Due to these 
factors the specificity of the requirements given under a given topic 
may vary.

The provision of a time-stamp token in response to a request is at the 
discretion of the TSA depending on any service level agreements with 
the subscriber.

7.1 Practice and Disclosure Statements

7.1.1 TSA Practice statement

The TSA shall ensure that it demonstrates the reliability necessary for 
providing time-stamping services. 

In particular:

a) The TSA shall have a risk assessment carried out in order to 
evaluate business assets and threats to those assets in order to 
determine the necessary security controls and operational procedures.

b) The TSA shall have a statement of the practices and procedures used 
to address all the requirements identified in this time-stamp policy.

NOTE 1: This policy makes no requirement as to the structure of the TSA 
practice statement.

c) The TSA's practice statement shall identify the obligations of all 
external organizations supporting the TSA services including the 
applicable policies and practices.

d) The TSA shall make available to subscribers and relying parties its 
practice statement, and other relevant documentation, as necessary to 
assess conformance to the time-stamp policy. 

NOTE 2: The TSA is not generally required to make all the details of 
its practices public.

e) The TSA shall disclose to all subscribers and potential relying 
parties the terms and conditions regarding use of its time-stamping 
services as specified in section 7.1.2.

f) The TSA shall have a high level management body with final authority 
for approving the TSA practice statement. 

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 12]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


g) The senior management of the TSA shall ensure that the practices are 
properly implemented.

h) The TSA shall define a review process for the practices including 
responsibilities for maintaining the TSA practice statement.

i) The TSA shall give due notice of changes it intends to make in its 
practice statement and shall, following approval as in (f) above, make 
the revised TSA practice statement immediately available as required 
under (d) above.

7.1.2 TSA disclosure Statement

The TSA shall disclose to all subscribers and potential relying parties 
the terms and conditions regarding use of its time-stamping services.
This statement shall at least specify for each time-stamp policy 
supported by the TSA: 

a) The TSA contact information.

b) The time-stamp policy being applied. 

c) At least one hashing algorithm which may be used to represent the 
   datum being time-stamped.

d) The expected life-time of the signature used to sign the time-stamp 
   token (depends on the hashing algorithm being used, the signature 
   algorithm being used and the private key length).

e) The accuracy of the time in the time-stamp tokens with respect to 
   UTC.

f) Any limitations on the use of the time-stamping service.

g) The subscriber's obligations as defined in section 6.2, if any.

h) The relying party's obligations as defined in section 6.3.

i) Information on how to verify the time-stamp token such that the 
   relying party is considered to "reasonably rely" on the time-stamp 
   token (see section 6.3) and any possible limitations on the validity 
   period.

j) The period of time during which TSA event logs (see section 7.4.10) 
   are retained.

k) The applicable legal system, including any claim to meet the 
   requirements on time-stamping services under national law.

l) Limitations of liability.

m) Procedures for complaints and dispute settlement. 


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 13]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


n) If the TSA has been assessed to be conformant with the identified 
   time-stamp policy, and if so by which independent body.

NOTE 1: It is also recommended that the TSA includes in its 
time-stamping disclosure statement availability of its service, for 
example the expected mean time between failure of the time-stamping 
service, the mean time to recovery following a failure and provisions 
made for disaster recovery including back-up services;

This information shall be available through a durable means of 
communication. This information shall be available in a readily 
understandable language. It may be transmitted electronically.

NOTE 2: A model TSA disclosure statement which may be used as the basis 
of such a communication is given in annex D. Alternatively this may be 
provided as part of a subscriber / relying party agreement. These TSA 
disclosure statement may be included in a TSA practice statement 
provided that they are conspicuous to the reader.

7.2 Key management life cycle

7.2.1 TSA key generation

The TSA shall ensure that any cryptographic keys are generated in under 

controlled circumstances. 

In particular:

a) The generation of the TSU's signing key(s) shall be undertaken in a 
physically secured environment (see section 7.4.4) by personnel in 
trusted roles (see section 7.4.3) under, at least, dual control. The 
personnel authorized to carry out this function shall be limited to 
those requiring to do so under the TSA's practices.

b) The generation of the TSU's signing key(s) shall be carried out 
within a cryptographic module(s) which either:

    - meets the requirements identified in FIPS 140-1 [FIPS 140-1] 
      level 3 or higher, or

    - meets the requirements identified in CEN Workshop Agreement 
      14167-2 [CWA 14167-2], or

    - is a trustworthy system which is assured to EAL 4 or higher in 
      accordance to ISO 15408 [ISO 15408], or equivalent security 
      criteria. This shall be to a security target or protection 
      profile which meets the requirements of the current document, 
      based on a risk analysis and taking into account physical and 
      other non-technical security measures.





Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 14]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


c) The TSU key generation algorithm, the resulting signing key length 
and signature algorithm used for signing time-stamp tokens key shall be 
recognized by any national supervisory body, or in accordance with 
existing current state of art, as being fit for the purposes of 
time-stamp tokens as issued by the TSA.

7.2.2 TSU private key protection

The TSA shall ensure that TSU private keys remain confidential and 
maintain their integrity. 

In particular:

a) The TSU private signing key shall be held and used within a 
   cryptographic module which:

- meets the requirements identified in FIPS 140-1 [FIPS 140-1] level 3 
  or higher; or

- meets the requirements identified in CEN Workshop Agreement 
  14167-2 [CWA 14167-2]; or

- is a trustworthy system which is assured to EAL 4 or higher in 
  accordance to ISO 15408 [ISO 15408], or equivalent security criteria. 
  This shall be to a security target or protection profile which meets 
  the requirements of the current document, based on a risk analysis 
  and taking into account physical and other non-technical security 
  measures. 

NOTE: Backup of TSU private keys is deprecated in order to minimize 
risk of key compromise.

b) If TSU private keys are backed up, they shall be copied, stored 
and recovered only by personnel in trusted roles using, at least, dual 
control in a physically secured environment. (see section 7.4.4). The 
personnel authorized to carry out this function shall be limited to 
those requiring to do so under the TSA's practices.

c) Any backup copies of the TSU private signing keys shall be protected 
to ensure its confidentiality by the cryptographic module before being 
stored outside that device. 

7.2.3 TSU public key Distribution

The TSA shall ensure that the integrity and authenticity of the TSU 
signature verification (public) keys and any associated parameters are 
maintained during its distribution to relying parties. 

In particular:

a) TSU signature verification (public) keys shall be made available to 
relying parties in a public key certificate. 


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 15]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003



NOTE: For example, TSU's certificates may be issued by a certification 
authority operated by the same organization as the TSA, or issued by 
another authority. 

b) The TSU's signature verification (public) key certificate shall be 
issued by a certification authority operating under a certificate 
policy which provides a level of security equivalent to, or higher 
than, this time-stamping policy.

7.2.4 Rekeying TSU's Key

The life-time of TSU's certificate shall be not longer than the period 
of time that the chosen algorithm and key length is recognized as being 
fit for purpose (see section 7.2.1c)).

NOTE 1: The following additional considerations apply when limiting 
that lifetime:

- Section 7.4.10 requires that records concerning time-stamping 
  services shall be held for a period of time as appropriate for at 
  least 1 year after the expiration of the validity of the TSU's 
  signing keys. The longer the validity period of the TSU certificates 
  will be, the longer the size of the records to be kept will be. 

- Should a TSU private key be compromised, then the longer the 
  life-time, the more affected time-stamp tokens there will be.

NOTE 2: TSU key compromise does not only depend on the characteristics 
of the cryptographic module being used but also on the procedures being 
used at system initialization and key export (when that function is 
supported).

7.2.5 End of TSU key life cycle

The TSA shall ensure that TSU private signing keys are not used beyond 
the end of their life cycle.

In particular:

a) Operational or technical procedures shall be in place to ensure that 
   a new key is put in place when a TSU's key expires.

b) The TSU private signing keys, or any key part, including any copies 
   shall be destroyed such that the private keys cannot be retrieved.

c) The TST generation system SHALL reject any attempt to issue TSTs if 
   the signing private key has expired.






Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 16]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


7.2.6 Life cycle management of the cryptographic module used to sign 
      time-stamps

The TSA shall ensure the security of cryptographic hardware throughout 
its lifecycle. 

In particular the TSA shall ensure that:

a) Time-stamp token signing cryptographic hardware is not tampered with 
during shipment;

b) Time-stamp token signing cryptographic hardware is not tampered with 
while stored;

c) Installation, activation and duplication of TSU's signing keys in 
cryptographic hardware shall be done only by personnel in trusted roles 
using, at least, dual control in a physically secured environment. 
(see section 7.4.4);

d) Time-stamp token signing cryptographic hardware is functioning 
correctly; and

e) TSU private signing keys stored on TSU cryptographic module are 
erased upon device retirement.

7.3 Time-stamping 

7.3.1 Time-stamp token

The TSA shall ensure that time-stamp tokens are issued securely and 
include the correct time. 

In particular:

a) The time-stamp token shall include an identifier for the time-stamp 
   policy;

b) Each time-stamp token shall have a unique identifier;

c) The time values the TSU uses in the time-stamp token shall be 
   traceable to at least one of the real time values distributed by a 
   UTC(k) laboratory.

NOTE 1: The Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM) computes 
UTC on the basis of its local representations UTC(k) from a large 
ensemble of atomic clocks in national metrology institutes and national 
astronomical observatories round the world. The BIPM disseminates UTC 
through its monthly Circular T [list 1]. This is available on the BIPM 
website (www.bipm.org) and it officially identifies all those 
institutes having recognized UTC(k) time scales.




Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 17]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

d) The time included in the time-stamp token shall be synchronized with 
UTC within the accuracy defined in this policy and, if present, within 
the accuracy defined in the time-stamp token itself;

e) If the time-stamp provider's clock is detected (see section 7.3.2c)) 
as being out of the stated accuracy (see section 7.1.2e)) then 
time-stamp tokens shall not be issued.

f) The time-stamp token shall include a representation (e.g. hash 
value) of the datum being time-stamped as provided by the requestor;

g) The time-stamp token shall be signed using a key generated 
exclusively for this purpose.

NOTE 2: A protocol for a time-stamp token is defined in RFC 3631 and 
profiled in TS 101 861 [TS 101861].

NOTE 3: In the case of a number of requests at approximately the same 
time, the ordering of the time within the accuracy of the TSU clock is 
not mandated.

h) The time-stamp token shall include:

- where applicable, an identifier for the country in which the TSA 
  is established;

- an identifier for the TSA;

- an identifier for the unit which issues the time-stamps.

7.3.2 Clock Synchronization with UTC

The TSA shall ensure that its clock is synchronized with UTC within the 
declared accuracy.

In particular:

a) The calibration of the TSU clocks shall be maintained such that the 
clocks shall not be expected to drift outside the declared accuracy.

b) The TSU clocks shall be protected against threats which could result 
in an undetected change to the clock that takes it outside its 
calibration.

NOTE 1: Threats may include tampering by unauthorized personnel, radio 
or electrical shocks.

c) The TSA shall ensure that, if the time that would be indicated in a 
time-stamp token drifts or jumps out of synchronization with UTC, this 
will be detected (see also 7.3.1e)). 

NOTE 2: Relying parties are required to be informed of such events 
(see section 7.4.8).


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 18]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

d) The TSA shall ensure that clock synchronization is maintained when a 
leap second occurs as notified by the appropriate body. The change to 
take account of the leap second shall occur during the last minute of 
the day when the leap second is scheduled to occur. A record shall be 
maintained of the exact time (within the declared accuracy) when this 
change occurred. See annex A for more details.

NOTE 3: A leap second is an adjustment to UTC by skipping or adding an 
extra second on the last second of a UTC month. First preference is 
given to the end of December and June, and second preference is given 
to the end of March and September.

7.4 TSA management and operation

7.4.1 Security management

The TSA shall ensure that administrative and management procedures are 
applied which are adequate and correspond to recognized best practice.

In particular:

TSA General

a) The TSA shall retain responsibility for all aspects of the provision 
of time-stamping services within the scope of this time-stamp policy, 
whether or not functions are outsourced to subcontractors. 
Responsibilities of third parties shall be clearly defined by the TSA 
and appropriate arrangements made to ensure that third parties are 
bound to implement any controls required by the TSA. The TSA shall 
retain responsibility for the disclosure of relevant practices of all 
parties.

b) The TSA management shall provide direction on information security 
through a suitable high level steering forum that is responsible for 
defining the TSA's information security policy. The TSA shall ensure 
publication and communication of this policy to all employees who are 
impacted by it.

c) The information security infrastructure necessary to manage the 
security within the TSA shall be maintained at all times. Any changes 
that will impact on the level of security provided shall be approved by 
the TSA management forum.

NOTE 1: See ISO/IEC 17799 [ISO 17799] for guidance on information 
security management including information security infrastructure, 
management information security forum and information security 
policies.

d) The security controls and operating procedures for TSA facilities, 
systems and information assets providing the time-stamping services 
shall be documented, implemented and maintained.




Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 19]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


NOTE 2: The present documentation (commonly called a system security 
policy or manual) should identify all relevant targets, objects and 
potential threats related to the services provided and the safeguards 
required to avoid or limit the effects of those threats, consistent 
with the Risk Assessment required under section 7.1.1a). It should 
describe the rules, directives and procedures regarding how the 
specified services and the associated security assurance are granted in 
addition to stating policy on incidents and disasters.

e) TSA shall ensure that the security of information is maintained when 
the responsibility for TSA functions has been outsourced to another 
organization or entity.

7.4.2 Asset classification and management

The TSA shall ensure that its information and other assets receive an 
appropriate level of protection.

In particular:

 - The TSA shall maintain an inventory of all assets and shall assign a 
classification for the protection requirements to those assets 
consistent with the risk analysis.

7.4.3 Personnel security

The TSA shall ensure that personnel and hiring practices enhance and 
support the trustworthiness of the TSA's operations. 

In particular (TSA general):

a) The TSA shall employ personnel which possess the expert knowledge, 
experience and qualifications necessary for the offered services and as 
appropriate to the job function.

NOTE 1: TSA personnel should be able to fulfil the requirement of 
"expert knowledge, experience and qualifications" through formal 
training and credentials, actual experience, or a combination of the 
two.

NOTE 2: Personnel employed by a TSA include individual personnel 
contractually engaged in performing functions in support of the TSA's 
time-stamping services. Personnel who may be involved in monitoring the 
TSA services need not be TSA personnel.

b) Security roles and responsibilities, as specified in the TSA's 
security policy, shall be documented in job descriptions. Trusted 
roles, on which the security of the TSA's operation is dependent, shall 
be clearly identified.





Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 20]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

c) TSA personnel (both temporary and permanent) shall have job 
descriptions defined from the view point of separation of duties and 
least privilege, determining position sensitivity based on the duties 
and access levels, background screening and employee training and 
awareness. Where appropriate, these shall differentiate between general 
functions and TSA specific functions. These should include skills and 
experience requirements.

d) Personnel shall exercise administrative and management procedures 
and processes that are in line with the TSA's information security 
management procedures (see section 7.4.1).

NOTE 3: See ISO/IEC 17799 [ISO 17799] for guidance.

The following additional controls shall be applied to time-stamping 
management:

e) Managerial personnel shall be employed who possess:

- knowledge of time-stamping technology; and 
- knowledge of digital signature technology; and
- knowledge of mechanisms for calibration or synchronization the 
  TSU clocks with UTC; and
- familiarity with security procedures for personnel with security 
  responsibilities; and
- experience with information security and risk assessment. 

f) All TSA personnel in trusted roles shall be free from conflict of 
interest that might prejudice the impartiality of the TSA operations. 

g) Trusted roles include roles that involve the following 
responsibilities:

- Security Officers: Overall responsibility for administering the 
  implementation of the security practices. 

- System Administrators: Authorized to install, configure and 
  maintain the TSA trustworthy systems for time-stamping management. 

- System Operators: Responsible for operating the TSA trustworthy 
  systems on a day-to-day basis. Authorized to perform system backup 

  and recovery.

- System Auditors: Authorized to view archives and audit logs of 
  the TSA trustworthy systems.

h) TSA personnel shall be formally appointed to trusted roles by senior 
management responsible for security.

i) The TSA shall not appoint to trusted roles or management any person 
who is known to have a conviction for a serious crime or other offence 
which affects his/her suitability for the position. Personnel shall not 
have access to the trusted functions until any necessary checks are 
completed.

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 21]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

NOTE 4: In some countries it may not be possible for TSA to obtain 
information on past convictions without the collaboration of the 
candidate employee. 

7.4.4 Physical and environmental security

The TSA shall ensure that physical access to critical services is 
controlled and physical risks to its assets minimized. 

In particular (general):

a) For both the time-stamping provision and the time-stamping 
management:

- physical access to facilities concerned with time-stamping services 
  shall be limited to properly authorized individuals;
- controls shall be implemented to avoid loss, damage or compromise of 
  assets and interruption to business activities; and 
- controls shall be implemented to avoid compromise or theft of 
  information and information processing facilities.

b) Access controls shall be applied to the cryptographic module to meet 
the requirements of security of cryptographic modules as identified in 
clauses 7.2.1 and 7.2.2.

c) The following additional controls shall be applied to time-stamping 
management:

 - The time-stamping management facilities shall be operated in an 
   environment which physically protects the services from compromise 
   through unauthorized access to systems or data. 

 - Physical protection shall be achieved through the creation of 
   clearly defined security perimeters (i.e. physical barriers) around 
   the time-stamping management. Any parts of the premises shared with 
   other organizations shall be outside this perimeter.

 - Physical and environmental security controls shall be implemented to 
   protect the facility that houses system resources, the system 
   resources themselves, and the facilities used to support their 
   operation. The TSA's physical and environmental security policy for
   systems concerned with time-stamping management shall address as a 
   minimum the physical access control, natural disaster protection, 
   fire safety factors, failure of supporting utilities (e.g. power, 
   telecommunications), structure collapse, plumbing leaks, protection 
   against theft, breaking and entering, and disaster recovery.

-  Controls shall be implemented to protect against equipment, 
   information, media and software relating to the time-stamping
   services being taken off-site without authorization.

NOTE 1: See ISO/IEC 17799 [ISO 17799] for guidance on physical and 
environmental security.


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 22]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


NOTE 2: Other functions may be supported within the same secured area 
provided that the access is limited to authorized personnel.

7.4.5 Operations management

The TSA shall ensure that the TSA system components are secure and 
correctly operated, with minimal risk of failure:

In particular (general):

a) The integrity of TSA system components and information shall be 
protected against viruses, malicious and unauthorized software.

b) Incident reporting and response procedures shall be employed in such 
a way that damage from security incidents and malfunctions shall be 
minimized.

c) Media used within the TSA trustworthy systems shall be securely 
handled to protect media from damage, theft, unauthorized access and 
obsolescence.

NOTE 1: Every member of personnel with management responsibilities is 
responsible for planning and effectively implementing the time-stamp 
policy and associated practices as documented in the TSA practice 
statement. 

d) Procedures shall be established and implemented for all trusted and 
administrative roles that impact on the provision of time-stamping 
services.

 Media handling and security

e) All media shall be handled securely in accordance with requirements 
of the information classification scheme (see section 7.4.2). Media 
containing sensitive data shall be securely disposed of when no longer 
required.

 System Planning

f) Capacity demands shall be monitored and projections of future 
capacity requirements made to ensure that adequate processing power and 
storage are available. 

 Incident reporting and response

g) The TSA shall act in a timely and coordinated manner in order to 
respond quickly to incidents and to limit the impact of breaches of 
security. All incidents shall be reported as soon as possible after the 
incident.

The following additional controls shall be applied to time-stamping 
management:


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 23]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


 Operations procedures and responsibilities

h) TSA security operations shall be separated from other operations.

NOTE 2: TSA security operations' responsibilities include:
   - operational procedures and responsibilities; 
   - secure systems planning and acceptance;
   - protection from malicious software; 
   - housekeeping;
   - network management;
   - active monitoring of audit journals, event analysis and follow-up;
   - media handling and security;
   - data and software exchange.

These operations shall be managed by TSA trusted personnel, but, may 
actually be performed by, non-specialist, operational personnel (under 
supervision), as defined within the appropriate security policy, and, 
roles and responsibility documents.

7.4.6 System Access Management 

The TSA shall ensure that TSA system access is limited to properly 
authorized individuals. 

In particular (general):

a) Controls (e.g., firewalls) shall be implemented to protect the TSA's 
internal network domains from unauthorized access including access by 
subscribers and third parties. 

NOTE 1: Firewalls should also be configured to prevent all protocols 
and accesses not required for the operation of the TSA.

b) The TSA shall ensure effective administration of user (this includes 
operators, administrators and auditors) access to maintain system 
security, including user account management, auditing and timely 
modification or removal of access.

c) The TSA shall ensure that access to information and application 
system functions is restricted in accordance with the access control 
policy and that the TSA system provides sufficient computer security 
controls for the separation of trusted roles identified in TSA's 
practices, including the separation of security administrator and 
operation functions. Particularly, use of system utility programs is 
restricted and tightly controlled.

d) TSA personnel shall be properly identified and authenticated before 
using critical applications related to time-stamping.

e) TSA personnel shall be accountable for their activities, for example 
by retaining event logs (see section 7.4.10).



Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 24]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


The following additional controls shall be applied to time-stamping 
management:

f) The TSA shall ensure that local network components (e.g. routers) 
are kept in a physically secure environment and that their 
configurations are periodically audited for compliance with the 
requirements specified by the TSA.

g) Continuous monitoring and alarm facilities shall be provided to 
enable the TSA to detect, register and react in a timely manner upon 
any unauthorized and/or irregular attempts to access its resources.

NOTE 2: This may use, for example, an intrusion detection system, 
access control monitoring and alarm facilities.

7.4.7 Trustworthy Systems Deployment and Maintenance

The TSA shall use trustworthy systems and products that are protected 
against modification. 


NOTE: The risk analysis carried out on the TSA's services (see section 
7.1.1) should identify its critical services requiring trustworthy 
systems and the levels of assurance required.

In particular:

a) An analysis of security requirements shall be carried out at the 
design and requirements specification stage of any systems development 
project undertaken by the TSA or on behalf of the TSA to ensure that 
security is built into IT systems. 

b) Change control procedures shall be applied for releases, 
modifications and emergency software fixes of any operational software.

7.4.8 Compromise of TSA Services

The TSA shall ensure in the case of events which affect the security of 
the TSA's services, including compromise of TSU's private signing keys 
or detected loss of calibration, that relevant information is made 
available to subscribers and relying parties.

In particular:

a) The TSA's disaster recovery plan shall address the compromise or 
suspected compromise of TSU's private signing keys or loss of 
calibration of a TSU clock, which may have affected time-stamp tokens 
which have been issued.

b) In the case of a compromise, or suspected compromise or loss of 
calibration the TSA shall make available to all subscribers and relying 
parties a description of compromise that occurred.


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 25]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


c) In the case of compromise to a TSU's operation (e.g. TSU key 
compromise), suspected compromise or loss of calibration the TSU shall 
not issue time-stamp tokens until steps are taken to recover from the 
compromise

d) In case of major compromise of the TSA's operation or loss of 
calibration, wherever possible, the TSA shall make available to all 
subscribers and relying parties information which may be used to 
identify the time-stamp tokens which may have been affected, unless 
this breaches the privacy of the TSAs users or the security of the TSA 
services.

NOTE:  In case the private key does become compromised, an audit trail 
of all tokens generated by the TSA may provide a means to discriminate 
between genuine and false backdated tokens. Two time-stamp tokens from 
two different TSAs may be another way to address this issue.

7.4.9 TSA termination

The TSA shall ensure that potential disruptions to subscribers and 
relying parties are minimized as a result of the cessation of the TSA's 
time-stamping services, and in particular ensure continued maintenance 
of information required to verify the correctness of time-stamp tokens.

In particular:

a) Before the TSA terminates its time-stamping services the following 
procedures shall be executed as a minimum:

- the TSA shall make available to all subscribers and relying 
  parties information concerning its termination;

- TSA shall terminate authorization of all subcontractors to act on 
  behalf of the TSA in carrying out any functions relating to the 
  process of issuing time-stamp tokens;

- the TSA shall transfer obligations to a reliable party for 
  maintaining event log and audit archives (see section 7.4.10) 
  necessary to demonstrate the correct operation of the TSA for a
  reasonable period;

- the TSA shall maintain or transfer to a reliable party its 
  obligations to make available its public key or its certificates to 
  relying parties for a reasonable period;

- TSU private keys, including backup copies, shall be destroyed in 
  a manner such that the private keys cannot be retrieved.

b) The TSA shall have an arrangement to cover the costs to fulfil these 
minimum requirements in case the TSA becomes bankrupt or for other 
reasons is unable to cover the costs by itself.



Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 26]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


c) The TSA shall state in its practices the provisions made for 
termination of service. This shall include:

- notification of affected entities;
- transferring the TSA obligations to other parties.

d) The TSA shall take steps to have the TSU's certificates revoked.

7.4.10 Compliance with Legal Requirements

The TSA shall ensure compliance with legal requirements.

In particular:

a) The TSA shall ensure that the requirements of the European data 
protection Directive [Dir 95/46/EC], as implemented through national 
legislation, are met.

b) Appropriate technical and organizational measures shall be taken 
against unauthorized or unlawful processing of personal data and 
against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal data.

c) The information contributed by users to the TSA shall be completely 
protected from disclosure unless with their agreement or by court order 
or other legal requirement.

7.4.11 Recording of Information Concerning Operation of Time-stamping 
       Services

The TSA shall ensure that all relevant information concerning the 
operation of time-stamping services is recorded for a defined period of 
time, in particular for the purpose of providing evidence for the 
purposes of legal proceedings. 

In particular:

General

a) The specific events and data to be logged shall be documented by the 
TSA.

b) The confidentiality and integrity of current and archived records 
concerning operation of time-stamping services shall be maintained. 

c) Records concerning the operation of time-stamping services shall be 
completely and confidentially archived in accordance with disclosed 
business practices. 

d) Records concerning the operation of time-stamping services shall be 
made available if required for the purposes of providing evidence of 
the correct operation of the time-stamping services for the purpose of 
legal proceedings. 


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 27]



    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

e) The precise time of significant TSA environmental, key management 
and clock synchronization events shall be recorded. 

f) Records concerning time-stamping services shall be held for a period 
of time after the expiration of the validity of the TSU's signing keys 
as appropriate for providing necessary legal evidence and as notified 
in the TSA disclosure statement (see section 7.1.2).

g) The events shall be logged in a way that they cannot be easily 
deleted or destroyed (except if reliably transferred to long-term 
media) within the period of time that they are required to be held.

NOTE: This may be achieved, for example, through the use of write-only 
media, a record of each removable media used and the use of off-site 
backup.

h) Any information recorded about subscribers shall be kept 
confidential except as where agreement is obtained from the subscriber 
for its wider publication.

TSU key management

i) Records concerning all events relating to the life-cycle of TSU keys 
shall be logged.

j) Records concerning all events relating to the life-cycle of TSU 
certificates (if appropriate) shall be logged.
Clock Synchronization

k) Records concerning all events relating to synchronization of a 
TSU's clock to UTC shall be logged. This shall include information 
concerning normal re-calibration or synchronization of clocks use in 
time-stamping.

l) Records concerning all events relating to detection of loss of 
synchronization shall be logged.

7.5 Organizational

The TSA shall ensure that its organization is reliable. 

In particular that:

a) Policies and procedures under which the TSA operates shall be 
non-discriminatory.

b) The TSA shall make its services accessible to all applicants whose 
activities fall within its declared field of operation and that agree 
to abide by their obligations as specified in the TSA disclosure 
statement.

c) The TSA is a legal entity according to national law. 


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 28]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

d) The TSA has a system or systems for quality and information security 
management appropriate for the time-stamping services it is providing.

e) The TSA has adequate arrangements to cover liabilities arising from 
its operations and/or activities.

f) It has the financial stability and resources required to operate in 
conformity with this policy.

NOTE 1: This includes requirements for TSA termination identified in 
section 7.4.9.

g) It employs a sufficient number of personnel having the necessary 
education, training, technical knowledge and experience relating to the 
type, range and volume of work necessary to provide time-stamping 
services.

NOTE 2: Personnel employed by a TSA include individual personnel 
contractually engaged in performing functions in support of the TSA's 
time-stamping services. Personnel who may be involved only in 
monitoring the TSA services need not be TSA personnel.

h) It has policies and procedures for the resolution of complaints and 
disputes received from customers or other parties about the 
provisioning of the time-stamping services or any other related 
matters.

i) It has a properly documented agreement and contractual relationship 
in place where the provisioning of services involves subcontracting, 
outsourcing or other third party arrangements.

8. Security Considerations

When verifying time-stamp tokens it is necessary for the verifier to 
ensure that the TSU certificate is trusted and not revoked. This means 
that the security is dependent upon the security of the CA that has 
issued the TSU certificate for both issuing the certificate and 
providing accurate revocation status information for that certificate. 

When a time-stamp is verified as valid at a given point of time, this 
does not mean that it will necessarily remain valid later on. Every 
time, a timeûstamp token is verified during the validity period of 
the TSU certificate, it must be verified again against the current 
revocation status information, since in case of compromise of a TSU 
private key, all the time-stamp tokens generated by that TSU become 
invalid. Annex C provides guidance about the long term verification 
of time-stamp tokens. 

In applying time-stamping to applications, consideration also needs 
to be given to the security of the application. In particular, when 
applying time-stamps it is necessary to ensure that the integrity of 
data is maintained before the time-stamp is applied. The requester 
ought to really make sure that the hash value included in the 
time-stamp token matches with the hash of the data.

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 29]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

9.  Acknowledgments

   The development of this document was supported by ETSI and the 
   European Commission. Special thanks are due to Franco Ruggieri 
   for his valuable inputs.

10. References

10.1. Normative References

  [RFC 2119]     Bradner, S. "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                 Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

  [TF.460-5]     ITU-R Recommendation TF.460-5 (1997): 
                 Standard-frequency and time-signal emissions.

  [TF.536-1]     ITU-R Recommendation TF.536-1 (1998): 
                 Time-scale notations.

  [CWA 14167-2]  CEN Workshop Agreement 14167-2: Cryptographic Module 
                 for CSP Signing Operations - Protection Profile 
                 (MCSO-PP).

  [FIPS 140-1]   FIPS PUB 140-1 (1994): Security Requirements for 
                 Cryptographic Modules.

  [ISO 15408]    ISO/IEC 15408 (1999) (parts 1 to 3): 
                 Information technology - Security techniques and 
                 Evaluation criteria for IT security.

10.2. Non-normative References

  [CWA 14172]    CEN Workshop Agreement 14172: EESSI Conformity 
                 Assessment Guidance.

  [Dir 95/46/EC] Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and 
                 of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection 
                 of individuals with regard to the processing of 
                 personal data and on the free movement of such data.

  [Dir 99/93/EC] Directive 1999/93/EC of the European Parliament and 
                 of the Council of 13 December 1999 on a Community 
                 framework for electronic signatures.

  [ISO 17799]    ISO/IEC 17799: Information technology  
                 Code of practice for information security management

  [RFC 3126]     D. Pinkas, J. Ross, N. Pope. "Electronic Signature 
                 Formats for long term electronic signatures". 
                 RFC 3126. September 2001.

  [RFC 3161]     Adams, C., Cain, P., Pinkas, D. and R. Zuccherato,
                 "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Time-Stamp
                 Protocol (TSP)", RFC 3161, August 2001.

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 30]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


  [TS 101733]    ETSI Technical Standard TS 101 733 V.1.2.2 (2000-12) 
                 Electronic Signature Formats.  Note: copies of ETSI 
                 TS 101 733 can be freely downloaded from the ETSI web 
                 site www.etsi.org.

  [TS 101861]    ETSI Technical Standard TS 101 861 V1.2.1. (2001-11). 
                 Time stamping profile. Note: copies of ETSI TS 101 861 
                 can be freely downloaded from the ETSI web site 
                 www.etsi.org.

  [TS 102023]    ETSI Technical Standard TS 102 023. 
                 Policy requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities.  
                 Note: copies of ETSI TS 102 023 can be freely 
                 downloaded from the ETSI web site www.etsi.org.

11. Authors' addresses

      Denis Pinkas
      Bull
      Rue Jean Jaures,
      78340 Les Clayes CEDEX
      FRANCE

      EMail: Denis.Pinkas@bull.net

      Nick Pope
      Security & Standards
      192 Moulsham Street
      Chelmsford, Essex
      CM2 0LG
      United Kingdom

      EMail: pope@secstan.com

      John Ross
      Security & Standards
      192 Moulsham Street
      Chelmsford, Essex
      CM2 0LG
      United Kingdom

      EMail: ross@secstan.com


   This Informational RFC has been produced in ETSI ESI.

      ETSI
      F-06921 Sophia Antipolis, Cedex - FRANCE
      650 Route des Lucioles - Sophia Antipolis
      Valbonne - France
      Tel: +33 4 92 94 42 00  Fax: +33 4 93 65 47 16
      secretariat@etsi.fr
      http://www.etsi.org

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 31]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

   Contact Point

      Gerry Mc Auley
      ETSI
      650 Route des Lucioles
      F-06921 Sophia Antipolis, Cedex
      FRANCE

      EMail: Gerry.McAuley@etsi.fr














































Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 32]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Annex A (informative): Coordinated Universal Time

Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) is the international time standard 
that became effective on January 1, 1972. UTC has superseded Greenwich 
Mean Time (GMT), but in practice they are never more than 1 second 
different. Hence many people continue to refer to GMT when in fact they 
operate to UTC.

Zero (0) hours UTC is midnight in Greenwich, England, which lies on the 
zero longitudinal meridian. Universal time is based on a 24 hour clock, 
therefore, afternoon hours such as 4 pm UTC are expressed as 16:00 UTC 
(sixteen hours, zero minutes).

International Atomic Time (TAI) is calculated by the Bureau 
International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM) from the readings of more 
than 200 atomic clocks located in metrology institutes and 
observatories in more than 30 countries around the world. Information 
on TAI is made available every month in the BIPM Circular T 
(ftp://62.161.69.5/pub/tai/publication). It is that TAI does not lose 
or gain with respect to an imaginary perfect clock by more than about 
one tenth of a microsecond (0.0000001 second) per year.

Coordinated Universal Time (UTC): Time scale, based on the second, as 
defined and recommended by the International Telecommunications Radio 
Committee (ITU-R), and maintained by the Bureau International des Poids 
et Mesures (BIPM). The maintenance by BIPM includes cooperation among 
various national laboratories around the world. The full definition of 
UTC is contained in ITU-R Recommendation TF.460-4.

Atomic Time, with the unit of duration the Systeme International (SI) 
second defined as the duration of 9 192 631 770 cycles of radiation, 
corresponds to the transition between two hyperfine levels of the 
ground state of caesium 133. TAI is the International Atomic Time 
scale, a statistical timescale based on a large number of atomic 
clocks. 

Universal Time (UT) is counted from 0 hours at midnight, with unit of 
duration the mean solar day, defined to be as uniform as possible 
despite variations in the rotation of the Earth. 

   - UT0 is the rotational time of a particular place of observation. 
     It is observed as the diurnal motion of stars or extraterrestrial 
     radio sources. 

   - UT1 is computed by correcting UT0 for the effect of polar motion 
     on the longitude of the observing site. It varies from uniformity 
     because of the irregularities in the Earth's rotation. 
     UT1, is based on the somewhat irregular rotation of the Earth. 
     Rotational irregularities usually result in a net decrease in the 
     Earth's average rotational velocity, and ensuing lags of UT1 with 
     respect to UTC. 



Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 33]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) is the basis for international 
time-keeping and follows TAI exactly except for an integral number of 
seconds, 32 in year 2001. These leap seconds are inserted on the advice 
of the International Earth Rotation Service (IERS) 
(http://hpiers.obspm.fr/) to ensure that, having taken into account 
irregularities, the Sun is overhead within 0,9 seconds of 12:00:00 UTC 
on the meridian of Greenwich. UTC is thus the modern successor of 
Greenwich Mean Time, GMT, which was used when the unit of time was the 
mean solar day.

Adjustments to the atomic, i.e., UTC, time scale consist of an 
occasional addition or deletion of one full second, which is called a 
leap second. Twice yearly, during the last minute of the day of June 30 
and December 31, Universal Time, adjustments may be made to ensure that 
the accumulated difference between UTC and UT1 will not exceed 0,9 s 
before the next scheduled adjustment. Historically, adjustments, when 
necessary, have usually consisted of adding an extra second to the UTC 
time scale in order to allow the rotation of the Earth to "catch up." 
Therefore, the last minute of the UTC time scale, on the day when an 
adjustment is made, will have 61 seconds. Adjustments dates are 
typically announced several months in advance in IERS Bulletin C: 
ftp://hpiers.obspm.fr/iers/bul/bulc/bulletinc.dat.

Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) differs thus from TAI by an integral 
number of seconds. UTC is kept within 0,9 s of UT1 by the introduction 
of one-second steps to UTC, the "leap second." To date these steps have 
always been positive.



























Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 34]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Annex B (informative): Possible for Implementation Architectures and
                       Time-stamping Services

B.1 Managed Time-stamping Service

Some organizations may be willing to host one or more Time-Stamping 
Units in order to take advantage of both the proximity and the quality 
of the Time-Stamping Service, without being responsible for the 
installation, operation and management of these Time-Stamping 
Units. 

This can be achieved by using units that are installed in the premises 
from the hosting organization and then remotely managed by a 
Time-Stamping Authority that takes the overall responsibility of the 
quality of the service delivered to the hosting organization.


 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 +                                                                   + 
 +                      Time-Stamping Authority                      + 
 +                                                                   + 
 +                                                                   + 
 +_____________              _____________              _____________+ 
|+ __________  |            |             |            |  __________ +|
|+|          | |            |    Time -   |            | |          |+|
|+|   Time - |<-------------|   Stamping  |------------->|   Time - |+|
|+| Stamping | | Install.   |  Management | Install.   | | Stamping |+|
|+|   Unit   | | Management |             | Management | |   Unit   |+|
|+|__________| |            |_____________|            | |__________|+|
|+             |                                       |             +|
|+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++|
|   Hosting    |                                       |   Hosting    |
| Organization |                                       | Organization |
|______________|                                       |______________|



              Figure B.1: Managed Time-stamping Service

The requirements for time-stamping services described in the current 
document includes requirements on both the time-stamping management and 
for the operation of the unit which issues the time-stamp tokens. The 
TSA, as identified in the time-stamp token, has the responsibility to 
ensure that these requirements are met (for example through contractual 
obligations). 

It should be clear that the hosting organization will generally want to 
be able to monitor the use of the service and, at a minimum, know 
whether the service is working or not and even be able to measure the 
performances of the service, e.g. the number of time-stamps generated 
during some period of time. Such monitoring can be considered to be 
outside of TSA's time-stamping authority. 


Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 35]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Therefore the description of the management operation described in the 
main body of the document is not limitative. Monitoring operations, if 
performed directly on the unit, may be permitted by the Time-Stamping 
service provider.

B.2 Selective Alternative Quality

Some relying parties may be willing to take advantage of particular 
characteristics from a time-stamp token such as a specific signature 
algorithm and/or key length or a specific accuracy for the time 
contained in the time stamp token. These parameters can be considered 
as specifying a "quality" for the time stamp token. 

Time stamp tokens with various qualities may be issued by different 
time-stamping units operated by the same or different TSAs.

A particular time-stamping unit will only provide one combination of 
algorithm and key length (since a time-stamping unit is a set of 
hardware and software which is managed as a unit and has a single 
time-stamp token signing key). In order to obtain different 
combinations of algorithm and key length, different time-stamping 
units shall be used.

A particular time-stamping unit may provide a fixed accuracy for the 
time contained in the time stamp token or different accuracy if 
instructed to do so either by using a specific mode of access (e.g. 
e-mail or http) or by using specific parameters in the request. 




























Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 36]



    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Annex C (informative): Long Term Verification of time-stamp tokens

Usually, a time-stamp token becomes unverifiable beyond the end of the 
validity period of the certificate from the TSU, because the CA that 
has issued the certificate does not warrant any more that it will 
publish revocation data, including data about revocations due to key 
compromises. However, verification of a time-stamp token might still be 
performed beyond the end of the validity period of the certificate from 
the TSU, if, at the time of verification, it can be known that:

   - the TSU private key has not been compromised at any time up to the 
     time that a relying part verifies a time-stamp token;

   - the hash algorithms used in the time-stamp token exhibits no 
     collisions at the time of verification;

   - the signature algorithm and signature key size under which the 
     time-stamp token has been signed is still beyond the reach of 
     cryptographic attacks at the time of verification.

If these conditions cannot be met, then the validity may be maintained 
by applying an additional time-stamp to protect the integrity of the 
previous one.

The present document does not specify the details of how such 
protection may be obtained. For the time being, and until some 
enhancements are defined to support these features, the information may 
be obtained using-out-of bands means or alternatively in the context of 
closed environments. As an example, should a CA guaranty to maintain 
the revocation status of TSU certificates after the end of its validity 
period, this would fulfil the first requirement.

NOTE 1: An alternative to Time-Stamping is for a Trusted Service 
Provider to record a representation of a datum bound to a particular 
time in an audit trail, thus establishing evidence that the datum 
existed before that time. This technique, which is called Time-Marking, 
can be a valuable alternative for checking the long term validity of 
signatures.

NOTE 2: The TSA or other trusted third party service provider may 
support the verification of time-stamp tokens.













Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 37]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003

Annex D (informative): Model TSA disclosure statement structure.

The TSA disclosure statement contains a section for each defined 
statement type. Each section of a TSA disclosure statement contains a 
descriptive statement, which MAY include hyperlinks to the relevant 
certificate policy/certification practice statement sections.

D.1. STATEMENT TYPE: Entire agreement

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: A statement indicating that the disclosure 
     statement is not the entire agreement, but only a part of it. 

D.2. STATEMENT TYPE: TSA contact info

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: The name, location and relevant contact 
     information for the TSA.

D.3. STATEMENT TYPE: time-stamp token types and usage

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: A description of each class/type of
     time-stamp tokens issued by the TSA (in accordance with each 
     time-stamp policy) and any restrictions on time-stamp usage.

     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: Indication of the policy being applied, 
     including the contexts for which the time-stamp token can be used 
     (e.g. only for use with electronic signatures), the hashing
     algorithms, the expected life time of the time-stamp token 
     signature, any limitations on the use of the time-stamp token and 
     information on how to verify the time-stamp token.

D.4. STATEMENT TYPE: Reliance limits.

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: reliance limits, if any.

     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: Indication of the accuracy of the time in 
     the time-stamp token, and the period of time for which TSA event 
     logs (see section 7.4.10) are maintained (and hence are available 
     to provide supporting evidence).

D.5. STATEMENT TYPE: Obligations of subscribers.

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: The description of, or reference to, the 
     critical subscriber obligations.

     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: No specific requirements identified in the 
     current document. Where applicable the TSA may specify additional 
     obligations.

D.6. STATEMENT TYPE: TSU public key status checking obligations of 
     relying parties.

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: The extent to which relying parties are 
     obligated to check the TSU public key status, and references to 
     further explanation.

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 38]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: Information on how to validate the TSU 
     public key status, including requirements to check the revocation 
     status of TSU public key, such that the relying party is 
     considered to "reasonably rely" on the time-stamp token (see 
     section 6.3).

D.7. STATEMENT TYPE: Limited warranty and disclaimer/Limitation of 
     liability.

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: Summary of the warranty, disclaimers, 
     limitations of liability and any applicable warranty or insurance 
     programs

     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: Limitations of liability (see section 6.4).

D.8. STATEMENT TYPE: Applicable agreements and practice statement.

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: Identification and references to applicable 
     agreements, practice statement, time-stamp policy and other 
     relevant documents.

D.9. STATEMENT TYPE: Privacy policy.

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: A description of and reference to the 
     applicable privacy policy.

     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: Note: TSA's under this policy are required 
     to comply with the requirements of Data Protection Legislation.

D.10. STATEMENT TYPE: Refund policy

     STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: A description of and reference to the 
     applicable refund policy.

D.11. STATEMENT TYPE: Applicable law, complaints and dispute resolution 
      mechanisms.

      STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: Statement of the choice of law, complaints 
      procedure and dispute resolution mechanisms.

      SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: The procedures for complaints and dispute 
      settlements. The applicable legal system.

D.12. STATEMENT TYPE: TSA and repository licenses, trust marks, and 
      audit.

      STATEMENT DESCRIPTION: Summary of any governmental licenses, seal 
      programs; and a description of the audit process and if 
      applicable the audit firm.

      SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT: If the TSA has been assessed to be 
      conformant with the identified time-stamp policy, and if so 
      through which independent party.

Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 39]


    Policy Requirements for Time-Stamping Authorities        April 2003


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.






















Pinkas, Pope, Ross             Informational                  [Page 40]
