Network Working Group                                           HF Zhu
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                UTAustin
Expire in six months                                    November, 1997


        Framework for Interconnecting Internet with Public
                  Circuit-Switching Network
            <draft-zhu-public-circuit-switch-00.txt>       

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet Drafts.  Internet Drafts are draft
documents valid for a maximum of six months.  Internet Drafts may be
updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is
not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to
cite them other than as a ``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''
Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet Draft
directory to learn the current status of this or any other Internet
Draft.

Abstract

Recently there are a number of efforts trying to connect the packet-
switching network with circuit-switching network, especially the 
Internet with public telephone networks.  The first problem of such 
interconnection is naming and addressing, which are described in some 
other drafts ([dnsurl], [telurl1], [faxemail]).  This draft gives a 
brief framework on what the problems we may have in architecture and 
technology when connecting these two networks, and the possible 
solutions for these problems.

1. Requirements

   Requirements are indicated as specified in [RFC2119].
  
2. Possible Structures

When we connect IP networks with circuit-switching networks (shortened 
as CSW below), there may be two kinds of "connection points": server 
and gateway (router), run by different providers.  Roughly, the server 
here means the host that can support many high level applications in 
the Internet, e.g. a Web server.  The gateway/router here means some 
companies may provide high performance routers that only support IP 
layer (or a bit more when necessary) to allow large traffic, which is 
possible in the future of Internet.

Considering the two big networks (Internet and CSW networks) where 
Internet is made of IP clouds, there may be boundaries among the IP 
clouds and different CSW networks.  The boundary here means the place 
where different policies (including pricing, etc.) may be applied. 
Here, we use public telephone switching network as a model in 
discussing CSW networks (although they are a bit different).  A data 
flow going between Internet and the devices of CSW networks will across 
the boundaries within Internet and the connection points of the 
Internet and the CSW networks.  The situation is like:

Host + IP cloud + ... + IP cloud + Connection Point + CSW network + ... 
+ CSW network + End User of Tel/fax, etc.

Logically, it is also possible for the "CSW networks" to appear within 
"IP cloud + ... + IP cloud" and IP cloud to appear within "CSW network 
+ ... + CSW network".  However, when a CSW network appears among IP 
cloud, they often support IP interface so it can still be regarded a 
whole IP network.   This draft discusses the situation of "IP cloud + 
... + IP cloud (which is Internet) + Connection Point + CSW network".  
It can be used to solve the problem of other situations by applying it 
repeatedly.  On the boundaries, the information about price, QoS, 
policies, etc. at each "+" point may need to be obtained or exchanged 
by protocols or applications.

A typical example is:  Internet + Connection Point + Local CSW network 
+ End User of Tel/fax, etc.. This means, the connection point is local 
to the end user (say, in the same city) where fixed low costs are paid 
by the end users.  This is already adopted in many implementations.

3. Current Related Research

3.1 MMUSIC of IETF

There is an expectation in associating the use of telephone and some 
other devices in the telephone networks (such as visual phones, etc.) 
with the multimedia conferencing service in the Internet, or vice 
versa.

The Multiparty Multimedia Session Control Working Group (MMUSIC) of 
IETF has been developing a set of protocols [confarch] [sdp] [sip] 
[rtsp] [sap-sec] that allow multiparty multimedia conferencing over 
Internet.

The protocols are based on IP hosts, and also allow connection with 
entities with H.323 [h.323], a standard for multimedia conferencing for 
various packet-switching networks defined by ITU (International 
Telecommunication Union).

3.2 ITU H.323

H. 323 is defined within ITU, to support multimedia conferencing on 
packet-switch networks.  It specifies two abstract roles: Gatekeeper 
and Gateway, which are respectively responsible for address translation 
and communication between H.323 terminals and packet-switched network 
or other ITU terminals on a circuit-switched network.  However, it does 
not give a technology that is efficient in IP networks.

3.3 Some Internet Drafts

There are a number of efforts related with a certain degree of 
integrating services from circuit-switched networks, such as telephony 
(including fax), into Internet.  IETF currently has PINT and IETF-FAX 
WG working on similar topics. PINT gives a service model based on Web 
server and mainly devotes efforts towards the interface between this 
Web server and elements in Intelligent Network (IN).  IETF-FAX is 
working on fax service based on email systems.

4. Frameworks

There are some problems needed to solve in order to support real 
interconnection of Internet and CSW networks, to provide a certain 
degree of service integration.

4.1 Directory Lookup

Since it is impossible to allow only one provider to cover all the 
interconnection services, directory service is inevitable.  In fact, 
interconnection services may be a very hot area and many providers may 
join when technical problems are solved.

Basic directory service required is: for a certain tel/fax number, or a 
group of tel/fax numbers, list all the IP addresses of the connection 
points (servers, routers, gateways) that can reach it or them.  The 
information listed may be along with the services offered by these 
points (together with prices, QoS, and optional items for extended 
uses). The QoS parameters can be those defined in RFC 2210 [RFC 2210] 
or others.  It must allow many different new services.  An examples can 
be: someone can leave a message or several messages on the phone and 
give different access permissions for those messages to different 
people, etc. .  Almost all the services that are being provided by 
current telephone companies can be offered, and more.  Therefore, a 
protocol providing a bit more flexible query service may be needed (can 
be one of the current protocols or its extension), please refer to 
[dnsurl].  The protocol should be able to work with protocols for 
conferencing currently developed within IETF-MMUSIC, such as SIP.

The directory service should be distributed so that the lookup action 
can be done quickly.  It should also be dynamic and well-controlled.  
Being dynamic allows connection points and the tel/fax numbers they 
support (very probably be their customers) to be changed dynamically. 
Some services may have different prices when time changes during a day 
or a week, etc..  Being well-controlled means the information of these 
services must be ensured to be correct, which is a problem of both 
administration and security.

4.2 Choice of connection points and the routing problems

4.2.1 From the eye of a host in the Internet

When a user in the Internet wants to connect to a specific tel/fax 
number, there are several factors that affect the choice of the 
"connection point" if there are more than one choice for that number.  
They are the services that the connection point provides, the route to 
that point, and the policies of that point or the owner of that tel/fax 
number.   For example, someone may prefer telling some friends to use a 
certain service while other people not to use that service, or give a 
default choice among these providers, etc.. Extension should be allowed 
here to provide more factors.  A broker like function is needed here.

However, the choice of connection point will affect routing.  Different 
choice of connection point may lead to different route and the QoS 
along that route maybe different or very different.  Routing may also 
need to be dynamically adapted to the load of the Internet if a lot of 
users are using it, e.g. attending multimedia conferencing in the 
MBone.  Efficiency of routing is important under such circumstance 
because the traffic is real-time.  If a company provides several 
interconnection routers/gateways on several different ISPs, packets go 
into different routers/gateways can be transferred to the same tel/fax 
during one session with that tel/fax.  Under such circumstance, the 
connection point can be changed during one session.

Here, we define the "basic requirement" of routing and connection point 
decision to be that once the connection point is chosen and a session 
begins, we will not change that connection point we chose before the 
session is over.  The "advanced requirement" is that the connection 
point can be changed during one session.  

Meeting the advanced requirement among routers/gateways of different 
interconnection providers may need to route through intelligent 
networks, if they don't build specific network to connect them for this 
purpose.  In this case, routing among them won't be used for voice or 
video services unless the connection re-setup speed is quick enough in 
IN (say, with in 100 ms, which is significant to real-time traffic).  
Although this may not easy to obtain currently, extension should be 
allowed for the future Internet.

4.2.2 QoS Test and Estimation

Test of QoS is needed according to the above.  Several scopes can be 
defined here: 1. QoS test between two ends;  2. QoS test under 
multicast;  3.  QoS at end points (such as connection points).  The 
solutions should rely as much as possible on the intelligence of end 
points (hosts or connection points here), or if necessary, adding 
appropriate servers making use of current Internet routing facilities.  
For example, There are a lot of mechanisms can be used to test the QoS 
from one IP address to the other.  The simplest method for testing 
delay can be using ICMP ping messages, or algorithms like 
Jacobson/Karels or Karn/Partridge used in TCP for estimation especially 
the traffic is transferred by TCP.  Novel methods are encouraged.

QoS routing [qosroute] or reservation [rsvp] also preferred in order to 
obtain a better performance.  The work may need to be done with related 
working-group of IETF (i.e.: working groups of QoS routing, IP 
Performance Metrics and Benchmarking).

4.2.3 The Decision on Connection Points

As long as information from Directory Service (costs, services, etc.) 
and tested QoS is available, a decision can be made to choose a 
connection point.  At this time, the preference of users (may include 
Internet users and tel/fax users) can be decided according to user 
choice manually or through a given formula automatically. A default 
mechanism (say, shortest end-to-end delay first) can be used to decide 
automatically too.

When the connection points that can be chosen contain more than one 
gateways/routers, and dynamic entrance is possible and needed, a 
formula to decide which gateway/router to choose is required to be 
given by the users or protocols.

4.3 Possible Solutions

Some efforts may need to be carried out in several layers, depending on 
what degrees of services we need to provide on the Internet.  For 
example, in order to obtain the "advanced requirement", some efforts 
may be needed in the IP layer, such as routing information lookup, 
multicast support.  However, if providing "basic requirement", address 
lookup, decision of connection point are relatively simple.  QoS 
routing and QoS reservation (with RSVP [rsvp]) can be optional 
according to application needs.  The solutions can be based on Internet 
Integrated Service Model but can also follow the best-efforts based on 
QoS-test and estimation.

5. Security Considerations

Security is important to ensure the servers that provide information 
for connection points store and deliver the correct information for 
each connection providers.  Security in the data packets is handled by 
other protocols.

6. Author's Address

   Haifeng Zhu
   Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
   The University of Texas at Austin
   Austin, TX 78712-1084
   USA

   Email: zhf@ece.utexas.edu
   Tel: +1-512-475-6875   Fax: +1-512-232-1739

7. References

[utrpt] Haifeng Zhu, "Interconnecting Internet and Public Circuit-
Switching
Networks: Architecture and Technology", Research Report CS97395T, The
University of Texas at Austin, 1997

[dnsurl] Haifeng Zhu, "DNS and URL Naming for Public Circuit-Switching 
Network
Devices", Internet-Draft, draft-zhu-dns-url-level-addr-00.txt, "Work in 
progress", 1997

[urltel1] A. Vaha-Sipila, URLs for Telephony,
draft-antti-telephony-url-01.txt, Sep. 19, 1997

[sip] MMUSIC WG of IETF, Handley, Schulzrinne, Schooler, SIP: Session
Initiation Protocol, draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-04.ps, 2nd Sept, 1997

[confarch] M. Handley, J. Crowcroft, C.Bormann, J.Ott, The Internet 
Multimedia Conferencing Architecture, draft-ietf-mmusic-confarch-
00.txt, July, 1997

[sdp] MMUSIC WG, Mark Handley, Van Jacobson, SDP: Session Description 
Protocol, draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-04.ps, 2nd Sept,1997
 
[rtsp] MMUSICWG, H. Schulzrinne, A. Rao, R. Lanphier, Real Time 
Streaming Protocol (RTSP), Spet.17,1997

[sap-sec] MMUSIC WG, P. Kirstein, G. Montasser-Kohsari, E. Whelan, 
Specification of Security in SAP Using Public Key Algorithms, draft-
ietf-mmusic-sap-sec-01.txt, July 29,1997

[h.323] International Telecommunication Union, Packet Based Multimedia 
Communications Systems, ITU-T H.323 

[sw1] I. Faynberg,, M. Krishnaswamy, H. Lu, A Proposal for Internet and 
Public Swithced Telephone Networks Internetworking,draft-faynberg-
telephone-sw-net-00.txt, March,1997

[sw2] M. Krishnaswamy, H.Lu, Information Exchange to Be Supported by 
the Service Support Transfer Protocol (SSTP), draft-krishna-telephone-
sw-net-00.txt, July, 1997

[in] L. Conroy, M. Lautenbacher, R. Scholl, Analysis of Services and 
Interfaces used when Interworking Between the Internet and the 
Intelligent Network (I.N.),draft-conroy-interfaces-in-net-00.txt, 
expire on Jan 7,1998

[telurl1] A. Vaha-Sipila, URLs for Telephony, draft-antti-telephony-
url-01.txt, Sep.19,1997

[faxemail] C. Allocchio, Fax address format in e-mail services v3.1, 
draft-ietf-fax-addressing-00.txt, Sept,1997 

[inetp] C. Yang, INETPhone: Telephone Services and Servers on Internet, 
RFC 1789

[mimefax] Harald T. Alvestrand, A MIME body part for FAX, draft-ietf-
mixer-fax-01.txt, Aug. 19, 1996

[ipv6] S. Deering, R. Hinden, Internet Protocol, Version 6 
Specification, RFC 1883, December, 1995

[ipv6sec] RFC 1825 - 1829, RFC 1851-1852

[ipv4v6] R. Gilligan and R. Callon, "IP v6 Transition Mechanisms 
Overview", Connexions, Oct. 1995

[qosroute] Eric Crawley, Raj Nair, Bala Rajagopalan, Hal Sandick, "A 
Framework for QoS-based Routing in the Internet", draft-ietf-qosr-
framework-01.txt

[RFC 1633] R. Braden, D. Clark, S. Shenker, Integrated Services in the 
Internet Architecture: an Overview, RFC 1633, July 1994

[RFC 1944] S. Bradner, J. McQuaid, Benchmarking Methodology for Network 
Interconnect Devices, RFC 1944, May 1996

[rfc2052] A. Gulbrandsen, P. Vixie, A DNS RR for specifying the 
location of services (DNS SRV), RFC 2052, Oct. 1996

[rsvp] R. Braden, L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, S. Jamin, Resourse 
ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) - Version 1 Functional Specification, RFC 
2205, Sep.,1997

[RFC 2210] J. Wroclawski, The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated 
Services, RFC 2210, Sep., 1997

[RFC 2215] S. Shenker, J. Wroclawski,General Characterization 
Parameters for Integrated Services, RFC 2215, Spe.,1997

[tpc] RFC 1530-1569, RFC 1703, TPC.INT experiments' RFCs

[LDAP] RFC 1777, RFC 1778, and a draft proposal for LDAP version 3

[rfc2119] S. Bradner, Keywords for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
Levels

some more ...


