

                                                                  J. Kempf, 
                                                                     Editor 
  Internet Draft                                                   K. Leung 
  Document: draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps-00.txt                   P. Roberts 
                                                                 K. Nishida 
                                                                G. Giaretta 
                                                                 M. Liebsch 
                                                                            
                                                                            
  Expires: August, 2006                                      Feburary, 2006 
      
      
                        Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility 
                         (draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps-00.txt) 
      
  Status of this Memo 
   
     By  submitting  this  Internet-Draft,  each  author  represents  that  any 
     applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware have been 
     or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes aware will be 
     disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.  
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force 
     (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also 
     distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and 
     may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is 
     inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them 
     other than as "work in progress."  
      
     The   list   of   current   Internet-Drafts   can   be   accessed   at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
      
     The  list  of  Internet-Draft  Shadow  Directories  can  be  accessed  at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
  Abstract 
   
     In this document, the well-known problem of localized mobility management 
     for IP link handover is given a fresh look. After a short discussion of the 
     problem and a couple of scenarios, the principal shortcomings of existing 
     solutions are discussed. 
   
  Table of Contents 
   
     1.0  Introduction.....................................................2 
     2.0  The Local Mobility Problem.......................................3 
     3.0  Scenarios for Localized Mobility Management......................6 
     4.0  Most Serious Problems with Existing Solutions....................6 
     5.0  Security Considerations..........................................8 
     6.0  Author Information...............................................8 
     7.0  Informative References...........................................9 

      
     Kempf, et. al.               Expires August, 2006               [Page 1] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
     8.0  IPR Statements...................................................9 
     9.0  Disclaimer of Validity..........................................10 
     10.0 Copyright Notice................................................10 
   
   1.0 Introduction 
         
     Localized mobility management has been the topic of much work in the IETF 
     for some time, and it may seem as if little remains to be said on the topic. 
     The experimental protocols developed from previous work, namely FMIPv6 [1] 
     and HMIPv6[2], involve host-based solutions that mimic to a greater or 
     lesser extent the approach taken by Mobile IPv6 [3] for global mobility 
     management.  However,  recent  developments  in  the  IETF  and  the  WLAN 
     infrastructure market suggest that it may be time to take a fresh look at 
     localized mobility management. Firstly, new IETF work on global mobility 
     management protocols that are not Mobile IPv6, such as HIP [4] and Mobike 
     [5], suggests that future wireless IP nodes may support a more diverse set 
     of  global  mobility  protocols.  Secondly,  the  success  in  the  WLAN 
     infrastructure market of WLAN switches, which perform localized mobility 
     management without any host stack involvement, suggests a possible design 
     paradigm that could be used to accommodate other global mobility management 
     options on the mobile node while reducing host stack software complexity and 
     expanding the range of mobile nodes that could be accommodated.  
      
     This document briefly describes the local mobility problem and a few 
     scenarios where localized mobility management would be desirable. Then, it 
     describes the two most serious problems with existing protocols: the 
     requirement for host stack support, and the complex security interactions 
     required between the mobile node and the access network. More detailed 
     requirements and gap analysis for existing protocols can be found in [6].  
      
  1.1 Terminology 
      
     Mobility terminology in this draft follows that in RFC 3753 [7], with the 
     addition of some new and revised terminology given here:  
      
        IP Link 
          A set of routers, mobile nodes, and wireless access points that share 
          link broadcast capability or its functional equivalent. This definition 
          covers one or multiple access points under one or several access 
          routers. In the past, such a set has been called a subnet, but this 
          term is not strictly correct for IPv6, since multiple subnet prefixes 
          can be assigned to an IP link in IPv6. 
           
        Access Network (revised) 
          An Access Network consists of following three components: wireless or 
          other access points, access routers, access network gateways which form 
          the boundary to other networks and may shield other networks from the 
          specialized routing protocols (if any) run in the Access Network; and 
          (optionally) other internal access network routers which may also be 
          needed in some cases to achieve a specialized routing protocol. 
         
        Local Mobility (revised) 

      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 2] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
          Local Mobility is mobility over a restricted area of the network 
          topology. Note that, although the area of network topology over which 
          the mobile node moves may be restricted, the actual geographic area 
          could be quite large, depending on the mapping between the network 
          topology and the wireless coverage area. 
           
        Localized Mobility Management 
          Localized Mobility Management is a generic term for protocols dealing 
          with  IP  mobility  management  confined  within  the  access  network.  
          Localized mobility management signaling is not routed outside the 
          access  network,  although  a  handover  may  trigger  Global  Mobility 
          Management signaling. Localized mobility management protocols exploit 
          the locality of movement by confining movement related changes to the 
          access network. 
           
        Global Mobility Protocol 
          A Global Mobility Protocol is a mobility protocol used by the mobile 
          node to change the global, end-to-end routing of packets when movement 
          causes a topology change and thus invalidates a global unicast address 
          on the local IP link currently in active use by the mobile node. The 
          Global Mobility Protocol allows the mobile node to maintain a mapping 
          between a permanent rendezvous or home address and a temporary care-of 
          address for rendezvous with nodes that want to initiate a connection, 
          and it may also provide direct routing through the rendezvous node 
          and/or optimized routing directly between correspondent nodes and the 
          local address. Typically, this protocol will be Mobile IPv6 [1] but it 
          could also be HIP [4] or Mobike [5] (Note: although Mobike is not 
          considered a mobility management protocol in general, for purposes of 
          this document, it will be so considered because it manages the address 
          map and routing between a fixed VPN endpoint address and a changing 
          local address). 
           
        Global Mobility Anchor Point 
          A node in the network where the mobile node has its fixed home address 
          that maintains the mapping between the home address and care-of address 
          for purposes of rendezvous and possibly traffic forwarding. For Mobile 
          IPv6 [1], this is the home agent. For HIP [4], this is the rendezvous 
          server. For Mobike [5], this is the VPN tunnel gateway in the home 
          network. 
           
        Intra-Link Mobility 
          Intra-Link Mobility is mobility between wireless access points within 
          an IP Link. Typically, this kind of mobility only involves Layer 2 
          mechanisms, so Intra-Link Mobility is often called Layer 2 mobility. No 
          IP link configuration is required upon movement since the link does not 
          change, but some IP signaling may be required for the mobile node to 
          confirm whether or not the change of wireless access point also 
          resulted in a change of IP link. If the IP link consists of a single 
          access  point/router  combination,  then  this  type  of  mobility  is 
          typically absent. See Figure 1.  
             
   2.0 The Local Mobility Problem 
      

      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 3] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
     The local mobility problem is restricted to providing IP mobility management 
     for mobile nodes within an access network. An access network consists of a 
     group of access routers connected to wired or wireless access points on the 
     downlink side and a wired IP core through one or more aggregation routers on 
     the side that is routed toward the border router and the Internet. The 
     aggregation routers function as an access network gateway, although in this 
     case, there is no specialized routing protocol and the routers function as a 
     standard IP routed network. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where the 
     aggregation routers are designated as "AggR". Transitions between service 
     providers in separate autonomous systems or across broader topological 
     "boundaries" within the same service provider are excluded.  
      
     Figure 1 depicts the scope of local mobility in comparison to global 
     mobility. The Aggregation Routers AggR A1 and B1 are gateways to the access 
     network. The Access Routers AR A1 and A2 are in Access Network A, B1 is in 
     Access Network B. Note that it is possible to have additional aggregation 
     routers between AggR A1 and AggR B1 and the access routers if the access 
     network is large. Access Points AP A1 through A3 are in Access Network A, B1 
     and B2 are in Access Network B. Other Aggregation Routers, Access Routers, 
     and Access Points are also possible. The figure implies a star topology for 
     the access network deployment, and the star topology is the primary one of 
     interest since it is quite common, but the problems discussed here are 
     equally relevant to ring or mesh topologies in which access routers are 
     directly connected through some part of the network. 
         
         
                    Access Network A         Access Network B 
         
                        +-------+                +-------+ 
                        |AggR A1| (other AggRs)  |AggR B1| (other AggRs) 
                        +-------+                +-------+     
                         @    @                     @           
                        @      @                    @            
                       @        @                   @            
                      @          @                  @   
                     @            @                 @ 
                    @              @                @         
                 +-----+       +-----+            +-----+       
                 |AR A1|       |AR A2|(other ARs) |AR B1|  (other ARs) 
                 +-----+       +-----+            +-----+ 
                    *             *                  *           
                   * *            *                 * *           
                  *   *           *                *   *           
                 *     *          *               *     *          
                *       *         *              *       * 
               *         *        * (other APs) *         * (other APs) 
              /\         /\       /\           /\         /\ 
             /AP\       /AP\     /AP\         /AP\       /AP\        
            / A1 \     / A2 \   / A3 \       / B1 \     / B2 \      
            ------     ------   ------       ------     ------ 
                    
             +--+      +--+      +--+         +--+ 
             |MN|----->|MN|----->|MN|-------->|MN| 
             +--+      +--+      +--+         +--+ 
      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 4] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
              Intra-link    Local      Global  
               Mobility    Mobility   Mobility 
         
                 Figure 1. Scope of Local and Global Mobility Management 
                                              
      
     As shown in the figure, a global mobility protocol is necessary when a 
     mobile node (MN) moves between two access networks. Exactly what the scope 
     of the access networks is depends on deployment considerations. Mobility 
     between two access points under the same access router constitutes Intra-
     link mobility, and is typically handled by Layer 2 mobility protocols (if 
     there is only one access point/cell per access router, then intra-link 
     mobility may be lacking). Between these two lies local mobility. Local 
     mobility occurs when a mobile node moves between two access points connected 
     to two different access routers. 
      
     Global mobility protocols allow a mobile node to maintain reachability when 
     a change between access routers occurs, by updating the address mapping 
     between the home address and care-of address at the global mobility anchor 
     point, or even end to end by changing the care-of address directly at the 
     correspondent node. A global mobility management protocol can therefore be 
     used between access routers for handling local mobility. However, there are 
     three well-known problems involved in using a global mobility protocols for 
     every transition between access routers. Briefly, they are: 
      
        1) Update  latency.    If  the  global  mobility  anchor  point  and/or 
           correspondent node (for route optimized traffic) is at some distance 
           from the mobile node's access network, the global mobility update may 
           require a considerable amount of time, during which time packets 
           continue to be routed to the old care-of address and are essentially 
           dropped.  
        2) Signaling overhead.  The amount of signaling required when a mobile 
           node moves from one IP link to another can be quite extensive, 
           including all the signaling required to configure an IP address on the 
           new link and global mobility protocol signaling back into the network 
           for changing the home to care-of address mapping. The signaling volume 
           may negatively impact wireless bandwidth usage and real time service 
           performance. 
        3) Location privacy.  The change in care-of address as the mobile node 
           moves exposes the mobile node's topological location to correspondents 
           and potentially to eavesdroppers. An attacker that can assemble a 
           mapping between subnet prefixes in the mobile node's access network 
           and geographical locations can determine exactly where the mobile node 
           is located. This can expose the mobile node's user to threats on their 
           location privacy. 
         
     These problems suggest that a protocol to localize the management of 
     topologically small movements is preferable to using a global mobility 
     management protocol on each IP link move. In addition to these problems, 
     localized mobility management can provide a measure of local control, so 
     mobility management can be tuned for specialized local conditions. Note also 
     that if localized mobility management is provided, it is not strictly 
     required for a mobile node to support a global mobility management protocol 
     since  movement  within  a  restricted  IP  access  network  can  still  be 
      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 5] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
     accommodated. Without such support, however, a mobile node experiences a 
     disruption in its traffic when it moves beyond the border of the localized 
     mobility management domain. 
      
   3.0 Scenarios for Localized Mobility Management 
      
     There are a variety of scenarios in which localized mobility management is 
     attractive.  
      
  3.1 Large Campus with Diverse Physical Interconnectivity 
      
     One scenario where localized mobility management would be attractive is for 
     a campus wireless LAN deployment in which parts of the campus are connected 
     by links that are other than 802.3 or in which it is not possible to cover 
     the campus by one VLAN. In this case, the campus is divided into separate IP 
     links each served by one or more access routers. This kind of deployment is 
     served today by wireless LAN switches that co-ordinate IP mobility between 
     them, effectively providing localized mobility management at the link layer. 
     Since the protocols are proprietary and not interoperable, any deployments 
     that require IP mobility necessarily require switches from the same vendor.   
      
  3.2 Advanced Cellular Network 
      
     Next generation cellular protocols such as 802.16e [8] and Super 3G/3.9G [9] 
     have the potential to run IP deeper into the access network than the current 
     3G cellular protocols, similar to today's WLAN networks. This means that the 
     access network can become a routed IP network. Interoperable localized 
     mobility management can unify local mobility across a diverse set of 
     wireless protocols all served by IP, including advanced cellular, WLAN, and 
     personal area wireless technologies such as UWB and Bluetooth. Localized 
     mobility management at the IP layer does not replace Layer 2 mobility (where 
     available) but rather complements it. A standardized, interoperable 
     localized mobility management protocol for IP can remove the dependence on 
     IP layer localized mobility protocols that are specialized to specific link 
     technologies or proprietary, which is the situation with today's 3G 
     protocols. The expected benefit is a reduction in maintenance cost and 
     deployment complexity. See [6] for a more detailed discussion of the 
     requirements for localized mobility management. 
      
  3.3 Picocellular Network with Small But Node-Dense IP Links 
      
     Future radio link protocols at very high frequencies may be constrained to 
     very short, line of sight operation. Even some existing protocols, such as 
     UWB and Bluetooth, are designed for low power, short range operation. For 
     such protocols, extremely small picocells become more practical. Although 
     picocells do not necessarily imply "pico IP links", wireless sensors and 
     other advanced applications may end up making such picocellular type 
     networks node-dense, requiring subnets that cover small geographical areas, 
     such as a single room. The ability to aggregate many subnets under a 
     localized mobility management scheme can help reduce the amount of IP 
     signaling required on IP link movement.  
      
   4.0 Problems with Existing Solutions 
      
      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 6] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
     Existing solutions for localized mobility management fall into three 
     classes: 
      
     1) Interoperable IP level protocols that require changes to the mobile node's 
        IP stack and handle localized mobility management as a service provided to 
        the host by the access network, 
     2) Link specific or proprietary protocols that handle localized mobility for 
        any mobile node but only for a specific type of link layer, namely 802.11 
        running on an 802.3 wired network backhaul. 
     3) Use of a standard IGP such as OSPF or IS-IS to distribute host routes, and 
        updating the host routes when the mobile node moves. 
      
     For Solution 1, the following are specific problems: 
      
     1) The host stack software requirement limits broad usage even if the 
        modifications are small. The success of WLAN switches indicates that 
        network operators and users prefer no host stack software modifications. 
        This preference is likely to be independent of the lack of widespread 
        Mobile IPv4 deployment, since it is much easier to deploy and use the 
        network. 
     2) Future mobile nodes may choose other global mobility management 
        protocols, such as HIP or Mobike. The existing localized mobility 
        management solutions all depend on Mobile IP or derivatives. 
     3) Existing localized mobility management solutions do not support both IPv4 
        and IPv6.  
     4) Security for the existing localized mobility management solutions 
        requires complex security associations with network elements for no 
        improvement in security over what is available if localized mobility 
        management is not used. In addition to the additional signaling required 
        to set up these security associations, provisioning a mobile node with 
        credentials for roaming to all the access networks where the mobile node 
        might end up may prove difficult, acting as a barrier to deployment.  
      
     Solution 2 has the following problems: 
      
     1) Existing solutions only support WLAN networks with Ethernet backhaul and 
        therefore are not available for advanced cellular networks or 
        picocellular protocols, or other types of wired backhaul. 
     2) Each WLAN switch vendor has its own proprietary protocol that does not 
        interoperate with other vendor's equipment. 
     3) Because the solutions are based on layer 2 routing, they may not scale up 
        to a metropolitan area, or local province. 
      
     Solution 3 has the following problems: 
      
     1) Each router in the localized mobility management domain is required to 
        maintain a host route table and to search the host route table for 
        routing each packet, limiting the memory and processing power 
        scalability. 
     2) After handover, until host routes propagate back along the current path 
        of traffic to the localized mobility management domain border, traffic 
        packets for the mobile node are sent to the old router, causing the 
        packets to drop. Since IGPs typically propagate routing updates through 

      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 7] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
        flooding, the delay in host route propagation also limits the topological 
        span of the localized mobility management domain. 
     3) Rapid movement by the mobile node faster than the rate at which flooding 
        can propagate host routes could lead to a cascading series of host route 
        messages that never stabilize.     
      
     Having an interoperable, standardized localized mobility management protocol 
     that is scalable to topologically large networks, but requires no host stack 
     involvement for localized mobility management is a highly desirable 
     solution. 
           
   5.0 Security Considerations 
      
     Localized mobility management has certain security considerations, one of 
     which - need for access network to mobile node security - was touched on in 
     this document. Existing localized mobility management solutions increase the 
     need for mobile node to access network signaling and provisioning of the 
     mobile node with credentials without increasing the security beyond what is 
     available if no localized mobility management solution is used. A more 
     complete discussion of the security requirements for localized mobility 
     management can be found in [6].   
      
   6.0 Author Information 
         
        James Kempf 
        DoCoMo USA Labs 
        181 Metro Drive, Suite 300 
        San Jose, CA 95110 
        USA 
        Phone: +1 408 451 4711 
        Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com 
         
        Kent Leung 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        170 West Tasman Drive 
        San Jose, CA 95134 
        USA 
        EMail: kleung@cisco.com 
         
        Phil Roberts 
        Motorola Labs 
        Schaumberg, IL 
        USA 
        Email: phil.roberts@motorola.com 
         
        Katsutoshi Nishida 
        NTT DoCoMo Inc. 
        3-5 Hikarino-oka, Yokosuka-shi 
        Kanagawa,  
        Japan 
        Phone: +81 46 840 3545 
        Email: nishidak@nttdocomo.co.jp 
         
        Gerardo Giaretta 
      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 8] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
        Telecom Italia Lab  
        via G. Reiss Romoli, 274   
        10148 Torino  
        Italy  
        Phone: +39 011 2286904  
        Email: gerardo.giaretta@tilab.com 
         
        Marco Liebsch  
        NEC Network Laboratories  
        Kurfuersten-Anlage 36 
        69115 Heidelberg  
        Germany  
        Phone: +49 6221-90511-46  
        Email: marco.liebsch@ccrle.nec.de 
         
         
   7.0 Informative References 
      
      [1] Koodli, R., editor, "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6," RFC 4068, July, 
          2005. 
      [2] Soliman, H., editor, "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management," 
          RFC 4140, August, 2005. 
      [3] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and Arkko, J., "Mobility Support in IPv6," 
          RFC 3775. 
      [4] Moskowitz, R., Nikander, P., Jokela, P., and Henderson, T., "Host 
          Identity Protocol", Internet Draft, work in progress. 
      [5] Kivinen, T., and Tschopfening, H., "Design of the MOBIKE Protocol", 
          Internet Draft, work in progress. 
      [6] Kempf, J., Leung, K., Roberts, P., Giaretta, G., Liebsch, M., and 
          Nishita, K.., "Requirements and Gap Analysis for Localized Mobility 
          Management", Internet Draft, work in progress. 
      [7] Manner, J., and Kojo, M., "Mobility Related Terminology", RFC 3753, 
          June, 2004. 
      [8] IEEE, "Air Interface for Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems", 
          802.16e, 2005. 
      [9] 3GPP, "3GPP System Architecture Evolution: Report on Technical Options 
          and Conclusions", TR 23.882, 2005, http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-
          info/23882.htm. 
        
        
   8.0 IPR Statements 
   
     The  IETF  takes  no  position  regarding  the  validity  or  scope  of  any 
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
     pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in this 
     document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or might 
     not be available; nor does it represent that it has made any independent 
     effort to identify any such rights. Information on the procedures with 
     respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
      

      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 9] 

     Internet Draft      Problem Statement for IP Local Mobility   Feburary, 2006 
      
     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any assurances of 
     licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a 
     general license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by 
     implementers or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF 
     on-line IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
      
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights that 
     may cover technology that may be required to implement this standard.  
     Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
       
   9.0 Disclaimer of Validity 
   
     This document and the information contained herein are provided on an "AS 
     IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS 
     SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
     TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
     LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT 
     INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
     FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
      
   10.0   Copyright Notice 
   

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject to the 
     rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set 
     forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
      
   11.0   Changes in 01 (remove before publication) 
      
      
        - Added "revised" to those definitions in Section 1.1 that are revised 
        from RFC 3753. 
         
        - Changed "mobile host" to "mobile node" where the wireless device was 
        meant, to avoid confusion about whether mobile routers are supported. 
         
        - Added discussion in Section 4 of problems involving using a standard 
        IGP for host route distribution. 















      
     Kempf, et. al.                 Expires August 2006              [Page 10] 







