Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)                        S. Natarajan
Internet Draft                                    Deutsche Telekom Inc.
Category: Informational                                     R. Krishnan
                                                           A. Ghanwani
                                                                   Dell
                                                        D. Krishnaswamy
                                                           IBM Research
                                                              P. Willis
                                                                     BT



Expires: March 2016                                     October 1, 2015


             An Analysis of Container-based Platforms for NFV

                  draft-natarajan-containers-for-nfv-00

Abstract

   With the technology advancements in the field of containers, they
   are considered a potential alternative to virtual machine based
   implementations. In the area of cloud applications, there are
   comprehensive studies and early implementations of container based
   platforms. This draft describes some of the challenges of using
   virtual machines for NFV workloads and how containers can
   potentially address these challenges.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.




Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire in March 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................3
   2. Challenges in Virtual Machine Implementations..................3
      2.1. Performance (SLA).........................................3
         2.1.1. Challenges...........................................3
      2.2. Continuity/ Elasticity/ Portability.......................4
         2.2.1. Challenges:..........................................4
      2.3. Security..................................................5
         2.3.1. Challenges...........................................5
      2.4. Management................................................6
         2.4.1. Challenges...........................................7
   3. Benefits of Containers.........................................7
   4. Challenges with Containers and potential solutions.............8
   5. Conclusion.....................................................9
   6. Future Work....................................................9
   7. IANA Considerations............................................9
   8. Security Considerations........................................9
   9. Contributors..................................................10
   10. Acknowledgements.............................................10
   11. References...................................................10
      11.1. Normative References....................................10
      11.2. Informative References..................................10
   Authors' Addresses...............................................11



Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015


1. Introduction

   This draft describes some of the challenges of using virtual
   machines for NFV workloads and how container-based platforms can
   potentially address these challenges. It also suggests future work
   in the area of containers.

2. Challenges in Virtual Machine Implementations

   In this section, we provide our assessment of using virtual machines
   to host VNFs. We enlist the advantages and limitations of VMs and
   then discuss some open issues that can potentially be addressed by
   containers.


2.1. Performance (SLA)
   Performance requirements vary with each VNF type and configuration.
   The platform should support the specification, realization and
   runtime adaptation of different performance metrics. Achievable
   performance can vary depending on several factors such as the
   workload type, the size of the workload, the set of virtual machines
   sharing the underlying infrastructure, etc. Here we highlight some
   of the challenges based on potential deployment considerations.

     2.1.1. Challenges

   .  VNF provisioning time (including up/down/update) constitutes the
     time it takes to spin-up the VNF process, its application-specific
     dependencies, and additional system dependencies. The resource
     choices such as the hypervisor type, the guest and host OS flavor
     and the need for hardware and software accelerators, etc.,
     constitute a significant portion of this processing time
     (instantiation or down time) when compared to just bringing up the
     actual VNF process. As a result, the provisioning latency is
     heavily dependent on the optimal choice of infrastructure
     resources.

   .  The runtime performance (achievable throughput, line rate speed,
     maximum concurrent sessions that can be maintained, number of new
     sessions that can be added per second) for each VNF is directly
     dependent on the amount of resources (e.g., virtual CPUs, RAM)
     allocated to individual VMs. Choosing the right resource setting
     is a tricky task. If VM resources are over-provisioned, we end up
     under-utilizing the physical resources. On the contrary if we
     under-provision the VM resources, then upgrading the resource to
     an advanced system setting might require scaling out or scaling up
     of the resources and re-directing traffic to the new VM; scaling


Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

     up/down operations consume time and add to the latency. This
     overhead stems from the need to account resources of components
     other than the actual VNF process (e.g., guest OS requirements).


   .  If each network function is hosted in individual VMs, then an
     efficient inter-VM networking solution is required for
     performance.

   .  Deploying VNF's inside a virtual machine can impose several
     challenges in meeting Service Level Agreements (SLA). As an
     example, SLAs demand dynamic fine-tuning (e.g., changing base
     memory, allocating additional vCPUs) and instantiation of additive
     features (e.g., integration with hardware and software
     accelerators) during runtime. In most cases, achieving this task
     with VMs require snapshotting the current VM state, halting the
     VM, upgrading the VM with improved features, and re-spinning the
     VM, all of which have performance implications.


2.2. Continuity/ Elasticity/ Portability


   VNF service continuity can be interrupted due to several factors:
   undesired state of the VNF (e.g. VNF upgrade progress), underlying
   hardware failure, and unavailability of virtualized resources, VNF
   SW failure, etc.  Some of the requirements that need consideration
   are:

     2.2.1. Challenges:

   o  VM-based VNF's are not completely decoupled from the underlying
     infrastructure. As discussed in the previous section, most VNFs
     have a dependency on the guest OS, hypervisor type, accelerator
     used, and the host OS. Therefore porting VNFs to a new platform
     might require identifying equivalent resources (e.g., hypervisor
     support, new hardware model, understanding resource capabilities)
     and repeating the provisioning steps to bring back the VNF to a
     working state.

   o  Service continuity requirements can be classified as follows:
     seamless (with zero impact) or non-seamless continuity (accepts
     measurable impacts to offered services). Achieving seamless
     service continuity requires an efficient high availability
     solution or a quick restoration mechanism that can bring back the
     VNF to an operational state. (Note that the need for an efficient
     high availability solution or quick restoration mechanism is not
     unique to VM based implementations.) For example, an anomaly


Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

     caused by a hardware failure can impact all VNFs hosted on that
     infrastructure resource. To restore the VNF to a working state,
     the user should first provision the VM (process + guest OS +
     hypervisor info), spin-up and configure the VNF process inside the
     VM, setup the interconnects to forward network traffic, manage the
     VNF-related state, and update any dependent runtime agents.

   o  Addressing the service elasticity challenges require holistic
     view of the underlying resources. The challenges for presenting a
     holistic view include the following

        o Performing Scalable Monitoring: Scalable continuous
          monitoring of the individual resource's current state is
          needed to spin-up additional resources (auto-scale or auto-
          heal) when the system encounters performance degradation or
          spin-down idle resources to optimize resource usage.

        o Handling CPU-intensive vs Memory-intensive VNFs: For CPU-
          intensive VNFs the degradation can primarily depend on the
          VNF processing functionality. On the other hand, for I/O
          intense workloads, the overhead is significantly impacted by
          to the hypervisor features, its type, the number of VMs it
          manages, the modules loaded in the guest OS etc.

2.3. Security

   Broadly speaking, security can be classified into:

   o  Security features provided by the VNFs to manage the state, and

   o  Security of the VNFs and its resources.

   Some considerations on the security of the VNF infrastructure are
   listed here.

     2.3.1. Challenges

   o  The adoption of virtualization techniques (e.g., para-
     virtualization, OS-level) for hosting network functions and the
     deployment need to support multi-tenancy requires secure slicing
     of the infrastructure resources. In this regard, it is critical to
     provide a solution that can ensure the following:

        o Provision the network functions by guaranteeing complete
          isolation across resource entities (hardware units,
          hypervisor, virtual networks, etc.). This includes secure
          access between VM and host interface, VM-VM communication,



Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

          etc. For maximizing overall resource utilization and
          improving service agility/elasticity, sharing of resources
          across network functions must be possible.

        o When a resource component is compromised, quarantine the
          compromised entity but ensure service continuity for other
          resources.

        o Securely recover from runtime vulnerabilities or attacks and
          restore the network functions to an operational state.
          Achieving this with minimal or no downtime is important.

   Realizing the above requirements is a complex task in any type of
   virtualization options (virtual machines, containers, etc.)

   o  Resource starvation / Availability: Applications hosted in VMs
     can starve the underlying physical resources such that co-hosted
     entities become unavailable. (Note that the resource starvation
     challenge is not unique to VM based implementations.) Ideally,
     countermeasures are required to monitor the usage patterns of
     individual VMs and ensure fair use of individual VM resources.


2.4. Management


   The management and operational aspects are primarily focused on the
   VNF lifecycle management and its related functionalities. In
   addition, the solution is required to handle the management of
   failures, resource usage, state processing, smooth rollouts, and
   security as discussed in the previous sections.  Some features of
   VM-based management solution include:

     oCentralized control and visibility: Support for web client,
       multi-hypervisor management, single sign-on, inventory search,
       alerts & notifications.

     oProactive Management: Creating host profiles, resource management
       of VMs, dynamic resource allocation, auto-restart in HA model,
       audit trails, patch management.

     oExtensible platform: Define roles, permissions and licenses
       across resources and use of APIs to integrate with other
       solutions.

   Thus, the key requirements for a management solution

     o  Simple to operate and deploy VNFs.


Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

     o  Uses well-defined standard interfaces to integrate seamlessly
        with different vendor implementations.

     o  Creates functional automation to handle VNF lifecycle
        requirements.

     o  Provide APIs that abstracts the complex low-level information
        from external components.

     o  Is secure.

     2.4.1. Challenges

   The key challenge is addressing the aforementioned requirements for
   a management solution while dealing with the multi-dimensional
   complexity introduced by the hypervisor and guest OS.

3. Benefits of Containers

   .   Containers (when compared to VMs) can provide better service
     agility as it allows us to run the VNF process directly in the
     host environment. This eliminates the provisioning and processing
     delay associated with spinning up (or down/update) guest OS,
     kernel driver association, and hypervisor processing time. This
     facilitates meeting the SLA requirements of different VNFs. The
     placement problem for finding a container that is running on
     hardware of a certain type, e.g. hardware with certain offloads,
     remains to be addressed.

   .   Containers share the host OS and only require resource
     allocation for the individual VNF process which usually results in
     better runtime performance when compared to VMs.

   .   With containers, the inter-VNF communication latency depends on
     the inter-process communication option (when hosted in the same
     host) such as bridge mode, sharing the host's network stack,
     sharing network namespace between containers, etc. or the
     networking solution (e.g., network overlays, virtualization, etc.)
     used between clusters of nodes (when VNFs are hosted across
     multiple nodes). This eliminates the overhead introduced by the
     guest OS's network stack.

   .  Auto-scaling VNFs or achieving service elasticity in runtime can
     be simplified by the use of container based VNFs due to the
     lightweight resource usage of containers. Using containers can
     simplify the allocation of additional resources to existing
     containers or quickly spinning up alternate containers, as it only



Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

     requires booting the VNF process and handling the state transition
     associated with it. This can significantly reduce the downtime or
     upgrade time.

   .  Some container management solutions (e.g., Kubernetes
     [KUBERNETES-SELF-HEALING]) provide self-healing features such as
     auto-placement, restart, and replacement by using a service
     discovery mechanism and continuously monitoring the health of
     individual or group of containers. When a container process
     encounters a failure, the platform auto detects the issue and
     seamlessly recovers from failures. This can address some of the
     service continuity requirements needed in VNF deployments.

4. Challenges with Containers and potential solutions

   .  Resource Management/Isolation/Security: Containers create a slice
     of the underlying host using techniques like namespaces, cgroups,
     chroot etc. However, there are several other kernel features that
     are not completely isolated from the processes running inside
     containers. This can allow a vulnerable container to compromise
     the host or containers belonging to other users (e.g., resource
     starvation).

        oPotential Solution: Guaranteeing complete isolation across
          entities requires an efficient access control mechanism and
          resource quota mechanism. Usage of kernel security modules
          like SELinux [SELINUX], AppArmor [APPARMOR] along with
          containers can provide the required features for a secure VNF
          deployment. Usage of resource quota techniques such as those
          in Kubernetes [KUBERNETES-RESOURCE-QUOTA] can provide the
          typical resource guarantees for a VNF deployment.
          Additionally, a hybrid deployment with VMs and containers can
          be envisioned depending on the degree of isolation needed
          between VNFs.

   .  Cross-VNF compatibility and Operating System dependency: As of
     today, containers are supported in selective operating systems
     such as Linux, Windows and Solaris. On the other hand, in the
     current range of VNFs, many don't support Linux OS or other OSes
     such as Windows and Solaris. Depending on the nature of the
     software associated with VNFs, and the libraries installed inside
     a container, and the underlying OS version that a container
     utilizes, some VNFs may not be compatible with other VNFs.

        oPotential Solution: A hybrid deployment with VMs and
          containers can be envisioned to address this problem. The
          VNFs which don't run on container supported OSes can be run



Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

          in VMs. Additionally, one could envision each set of
          compatible VNFs running within a specific VM, with different
          sets of VNFs running on different VMs, where the VMs run on a
          hypervisor. A notable additional challenge in this solution
          is state transfer between containers and virtual machines.

   .  Overall Performance: Unlike VMs, containers can run directly on
     the host OS and thus exhibit significant performance benefits. As
     an example, the whitepaper [VCPE-CONTAINER-PERF] demonstrates ~25%
     throughput improvement for TCP traffic for a Virtual Enterprise
     Customer Premises Equipment (vE-CPE) use case as described in
     [ETSI-NFV-USE-CASES]; the environments which were compared were
     containers using LXC and VM using KVM.

5. Conclusion

   The use of containers for VNFs appears to have significant
   advantages compared to using VMs and hypervisors especially for
   efficiency and performance. With this background, the authors urge
   the industry to address the future work areas, especially solutions
   for the challenges, as described in Section 4 and consider
   container-based VNFs in real deployments beyond proof-of-concepts.

6. Future Work

   Opportunistic areas for future work include but not limited to
   developing solutions to address the challenges in VNF
   containerization described in Section 3, distributed micro-service
   network functions, etc.

7. IANA Considerations

   This draft does not have any IANA considerations.

8. Security Considerations

   VM-based VNFs can offer a greater degree of isolation and security.
   Since container-based VNFs provide abstraction at the OS level, it
   can introduce potential vulnerabilities in the system when deployed
   without proper OS-level security features. This is one of the key
   implementation/deployment challenges that needs to be further
   investigated.








Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

9. Contributors

10. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Vineed Konkoth for the Virtual
   Customer CPE Container Performance white paper, and Ashay Chaudhary
   for the detailed comments and suggestions on this document.

11. References

11.1. Normative References

11.2. Informative References

   [ETSI-NFV-WHITE]  "ETSI NFV White Paper,"
   http://portal.etsi.org/NFV/NFV_White_Paper.pdf

   [ETSI-NFV-USE-CASES] "ETSI NFV Use Cases,"
   http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/001/01.01.01_60/gs_N
   FV001v010101p.pdf

   [ETSI-NFV-REQ]   "ETSI NFV Virtualization Requirements,"
   http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/004/01.01.01_60/gs_N
   FV004v010101p.pdf

   [ETSI-NFV-ARCH]   "ETSI NFV Architectural Framework,"
   http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/002/01.01.01_60/gs_N
   FV002v010101p.pdf

   [ETSI-NFV-TERM] "Terminology for Main Concepts in NFV,"
   http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/003/01.01.01_60/gs_n
   fv003v010101p.pdf

   [KUBERNETES-RESOURCE-QUOTA] "Kubernetes Resource Quota,"
   http://kubernetes.io/v1.0/docs/admin/resource-quota.html

   [KUBERNETES-SELF-HEALING] "Kubernetes Design Overview,"
   http://kubernetes.io/v1.0/docs/design/README.html

   [SELINUX] "Security Enhanced Linux (SELinux) project,"
   http://selinuxproject.org/

   [APPARMOR] "Mandatory Access Control Framework,"
   https://wiki.debian.org/AppArmor






Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Container-based Platforms for NFV     September 2015

   [VCPE-CONTAINER-PERF] "Virtual Customer CPE Container Performance
   White Paper," http://info.ixiacom.com/rs/098-FRB-840/images/Calsoft-
   Labs-CaseStudy2015.pdf



Authors' Addresses

   Sriram Natarajan
   Deutsche Telekom Inc.
   sriram.natarajan@telekom.com


   Ram (Ramki) Krishnan
   Dell
   ramki_krishnan@dell.com

   Anoop Ghanwani
   Dell
   anoop@alumni.duke.edu

   Dilip Krishnaswamy
   IBM Research
   dilikris@in.ibm.com

   Peter Willis
   BT
   peter.j.willis@bt.com






















Natarajan et al.          Expires March 2016                  [Page 11]

