

Network Working Group                                      A. Mihailovic
Internet-Draft                                      Kings College London
Expires: March 16, 2002                                          M. West
                                                              R. Hancock
                                                      Siemens/Roke Manor
                                                              P. Eardley
                                                    BTexact Technologies
                                                               T. Suihko
                                              VTT Information Technology
                                                      Septembar 16, 2002


  Experience of the BRAIN and MIND Projects  in the Development of IP
                           Mobility Solutions
                <draft-mihailovic-brain-mind-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 24, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This draft gives an overview of the design of IP mobility protocols
   conducted in BRAIN and MIND IST projects.





Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Initial Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Design principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Proposed IP Mobility Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Further Discussion on the IP Mobility Solution . . . . . . . .  8
   5.1 Architecture Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.2 Modularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.3 Scaling and Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.4 Current BCMP work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Project Details  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

































Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


1. Introduction

   The BRAIN [1] project dealt with the development of an IP-based
   architecture for IP access networks.  Extensive research into IP
   mobility protocols was one of the main activities of the project.
   The BRAIN Access Network (AN) is defined as a static IP access
   network with wired internal infrastructure and heterogeneous wireless
   access for mobile nodes (MNs).  IP functionality is contained in the
   entire system from gateways to Access Routers (ARs) where MNs are
   assumed to run IP protocols with additional capabilities required to
   take advantage of the connectivity offered by the AN.

   The MIND [2] project is the follow-up project to BRAIN continuing the
   development of the AN architecture by including some new network
   scenarios (MANET / NEMO extensions).  However, MIND also deals with
   improvements to and testing of the results of BRAIN (including the IP
   mobility protocol developed).

   In the following we present a summary of our design processes for
   development of IP micro-mobility [8] solutions by discussing our
   initial research strategy, some particular design decisions made
   along the way, current results of our work and reasoning behind our
   decisions embodied in the results.

2. Initial Strategy

   The ultimate result of our effort was intended to be a recommendation
   for the IP mobility solution for deployment in the AN.  Initially,
   this development was not restricted in any sense, our options were:
   selection of an existing IP mobility protocol that would satisfy the
   set of requirements; enhancement or simplification of an existing IP
   mobility protocol; or development of a new solution.

   Due to the overwhelming number and variety of available IP mobility
   protocols, we initially decided to perform a detailed analysis of
   existing IP mobility mechanisms.  This was expected to provide
   extraction of the key issues that need to be solved by any IP
   mobility protocol and to allow comparison of the different concepts
   applied in solving those issues [3].  Those issues were named
   Protocol Design Issues and included all aspects of IP mobility:
   packet forwarding mechanisms, path updates, handover management,
   address management, support for idle MNs/paging, security,
   requirement for MNs, requirements for Core Network Interface and
   Routing Topology.

   To assist the analysis we proposed a classification of IP mobility
   protocols where the most relevant axis for separation of protocols
   was the difference in concepts applied for mechanisms of packet



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   forwarding.  The classification was generally applicable to any
   micro-mobility protocols.  (Macro-mobility was considered as a
   separate issue as discussed in the following sections.)

   The classification produced two main categories of micro-mobility
   Protocols:

   1) Protocols deploying Proxy Agents and typically using IP tunnels
      for packet forwarding between the Agents.  This effort has now
      converged in HMIP-based proposals (Regional Registrations for IPv4
      and HMIPv6) for IPv4 and IPv6.

   2) Protocols deploying enhanced routing methods in scoped domains.
      These are all types of protocols that use a form of per-node
      routing techniques (we called these "Localised Enhanced Routing
      Schemes").  This category can be further divided as follows:

      2a) pure per-node forwarding techniques: mobility protocols
         deploying new routing features by typically installing per-node
         states in routers in the localised domains (e.g.  HAWAII,
         Cellular IP,...).

      2b) mobility protocols using multicast as the routing solution in
         localised domains.

      2c) mobility protocols deploying (modified) ad-hoc routing
         protocols as the routing solution in localised domains (e.g.
         MER-TORA).

   We picked an exemplar protocol from each of the protocol categories
   above, and assessed them against the Protocol Design Issues for
   several Evaluation Criteria (efficiency; scalability and robustness;
   applicability / ease of deployment).  The conclusions from this
   exercise were that no existing micro-mobility protocol - or category
   of protocol - is clearly preferable (each has pros and cons).  Our
   next step was to argue about what "design principles" a micro-
   mobility protocol should have - the high-level, mostly architectural,
   features that a good solution should have.

3. Design principles

   Defining a set of design principles and solution requirements is a
   vital step in the evaluation and development of IP mobility
   protocols.  It assists in creating a constructive perspective to the
   problem, which may sometimes appear too abstract to solve.  While
   this method of working around the problem is not a novelty, our
   particular design principles and solution requirements are further
   shaped by the particular architecture of the IP AN in consideration.



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   We believe that this approach demonstrates a useful experience and
   could help the development of all IP mobility protocols, not only the
   ones to be deployed in the above explained IP ANs.

   Some of the design principles we found helpful are listed:

   1.  IP's 'usual' design principles: the architectural principles of
       the Internet, (e.g.  the end-to-end principle which is sometimes
       reduced to the concept of the dumb network); layered design ('IP
       over everything, everything over IP'); and modular design (to
       help flexible deployment and evolution)

   2.  A well-defined problem scope: Our problem scope was an IP AN
       where MNs move around from one AR to another.  From a pure IP
       perspective this AN, which is controlled by a single operator is
       a single administrative domain and it is of arbitrary size.

   3.  Transparency principle: This was the term we used to capture our
       assertion that the basic goal of the AN is to make mobile
       wireless Internet access look like 'normal' access through wired
       infrastructure.  For example, this means that the access network
       completely hides, from other fixed networks and correspondent
       nodes (CNs), the mobility and wireless aspects; these are only
       visible as performance impacts such as transient QoS variations -
       just as occur with other access systems.  Additionally, the AN is
       expected to perform appropriate uplink and downlink forwarding of
       packets without changing or discriminating their contents,
       provided MNs are authorised to use the network.

   4.  Impact of transparency principle on addressing: The AN must allow
       a MN to get an IP address to use in communicating with CNs (again
       no assumption on macro-mobility mechanisms because the AN may be
       the 'home network' of MN), and to keep this address whilst it
       moves(because if mobility caused its address to change that would
       be visible outside the AN, violating the 'transparency
       principle').  Therefore the AN must:

       *  assign addresses to MNs - which are globally reachable

       *  route packets to the MNs based purely on these locally
          assigned IP addresses.

   5.  Micro and macro mobility should be solved with separate
       protocols: This follows as another corollary of the transparency
       principle.  If macro mobility (i.e.  MN moving between ANs) were
       to impact micro mobility, then the latter would be unable to work
       with alternative macro mobility protocols - which would violate
       the transparency principle.  Further, since routing within the AN



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


       is based on the locally assigned IP address, when the MN moves
       into another AN it must get a new IP address.  This conclusion is
       different from much of the existing IP mobility work which try
       and solve all mobility problems with a set of extensions closely
       coupled to some version of Mobile IP.

   6.  Modularity: Starting from the initially identified Protocol
       Design Issues it was considered beneficial to re-group the
       functions they represent into (semi) independent modules of the
       complete mobility solution.  Naturally, not all of the identified
       Protocol Design Issues are functionally separable from the rest
       of mobility.  Some initial conclusions were: separated air
       interface protocols from internal protocols, paging, address
       management, AAA, interaction with lower layers...  The AN must
       allow a MN to obtains an IP address for all of its
       correspondences, to retain that address and must be capable of
       routing packets to the MN based on the acquired IP address.
       While obeying these requirements there should be a fair amount of
       freedom offered to MNs to actually change the obtained IP address
       or obtain more than one address.  The separation of handover
       management, path updating and paging is not new and is already
       seen for MIP-based and HMIP-based solutions [5], the Edge
       Mobility Architecture (EMA) [6] and Seamoby paging [7].  An
       outline of the benefits of such separation is (the references
       contain more detailed discussion):

       *  easier design (eg handover management doesn't have to worry
          about scalability, as it only ever involves three entities
          (old and new ARs and MN))

       *  easier evolution - breaking up the problem along clear
          functional boundaries between the modules allows for separate
          evolution of the components.

       *  easier deployment - (potentially) allow standardisation of the
          air interface signalling - a universal standard would allow a
          mobile to work on any network (providing of course that it had
          the appropriate wireless link technology), whilst also
          allowing an operator to choose a path update protocol
          appropriate to their particular circumstances (eg different
          protocols for large and small networks).

       *  Easier 'fallback' - eg in a "planned" handover, when the MN
          ends up not moving as expected onto the new AR.

   7.  Scaling and Resilience: It is important to consider these two
       requirements from the very start of the design process.  In
       particular we identified the following specific requirements on



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


       the micro-mobility solution: support multiple AN gateways,
       encourage route aggregation and provide fast recovery in case of
       link or router failures.


4. Proposed IP Mobility Solution

   The main modules consist of routing, handover, path updates,
   addressing, and paging where the additional mechanisms such as AAA
   and link layer interaction should be treated independently or as
   functions associated with the mechanisms of a particular module.  We
   now discuss each of these modules further; we leave open the question
   of which 'modules' could/should be separate protocols.

   1.  Address Management: address allocation is independent of the 
       other 'modules'. Address change does not occur as an automatic 
       consequence of mobility inside the AN. However, it can be 
       triggered by a MN or the AN, according to their particular 
       preferences. This approach to address management contrasts with 
       many other IP mobility solutions; one of its advantages is that 
       the network operator can manage addresses in the manner that suits 
       them. In case the allocated address is prefix routable inside the 
       AN (apart from being globally routable) its origin should be any 
       possible entity in the network: AR, any  internal router or any
       network gateway.

   2.  Handover Management: Separated Handover Management gives
       flexibility and freedom for development of appropriate solutions
       considering the relevant criteria.  Depending on the suitability
       to a particular deployment scenario handovers can be mobile or
       network controlled/assisted, independent/dependent on particular
       wireless scenarios...  As mentioned there should be no direct
       relation and interdependence between the addressing and any stage
       of the execution of the handover sub-protocol.

   3.  Path updates: This relates to the mechanism for facilitating re-
       routing of packet flows in the AN (executed after handover
       completion).  Assuming that handover management protocol takes
       care of the temporary redirection of packets during the handover,
       the importance of path updates with respect to handover latencies
       is reduced.  The path updates should be triggered when the AR
       transfer facilitated by the handover management is certain.  The
       initiator of the path updates can be AR or MN.  MN is inevitably
       involved in stages of the handover protocol and since handover is
       decoupled from the rest of mobility, it is beneficial to "hide"
       the process of path updates from MNs and trigger them from ARs
       (this option may also be preferred for security reasons).



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   4.  Routing: Routing (or packet forwarding) considering the above
       setup mostly relates to the way in which packets are forwarded
       from the address origin (router entity allocating the addresses
       in case they are prefix-routable inside the AN or the local
       domain ingress entity in case they are not).  Our conclusion was
       that both per host or tunnel based protocols can meet these
       requirements for this particular protocol step.  In addition,
       regular prefix-based routing inside AN should be encouraged for
       resilience as discussed below.

   5.  Note: routing as a separate module is not separable from the rest
       of mobility as clearly as other presented modules but involves an
       important design decision (i.e.  per node vs.  tunnel based...)
       which, according to the presented discussed platform, can be
       considered independently.

   6.  Paging: Paging should run on its own when required, with minimal
       interactions with other mobility modules but with close
       interaction with link layer solutions.

   7.  IP-to-Wireless (IP2W): We developed a standardised API between IP
       and a generic wireless link layer.  Further discussion of this
       "IP2W" interface is in [1].

   As regards the path updating / routing modules, we were not able to
   reach consensus about whether per-node or tunnel based protocols are
   better; views depended on what other implementation factors are
   considered important. 

   MER-TORA [6] is a per-node (per host) protocol that comes close to 
   fulfilling our requirements. It meets the requirements of the 
   transparency principle as it impacts addressing (Section 3d) and the 
   separation from macro-mobility (Section 3e). It applies a modular 
   approach (Section 3f) by separating handover management from path 
   updating - the former is dealt with by, what it terms, the Edge 
   Mobility Architecture (EMA) and the latter by a modification / 
   extension of the TORA routing protocol. It does not deal with paging.
   
   BCMP is a tunnel based protocol that was designed within the BRAIN/
   MIND projects to fulfil our design principles. The protocol and how 
   it meets our requirements is described in more detailed below. 

5. Further Discussion on the IP Mobility Solution

   The explained elements of the platform form the required template for
   creation and/or adoption of complementary mobility protocols.  One
   such protocol is BRAIN Candidate Mobility Protocol (BCMP) initially



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   developed in the BRAIN project and is  currently being tested and
   refined in MIND.  BCMP operations can be summarised into two main
   protocol parts: protocol features inside the AN and the protocol run
   by MNs for connecting to the AN.  The latter is called MN-AR
   (sub)protocol and resembles the "fast handover proposals" for MIP and
   HMIP proposal.  The MN-AR handover (sub-)protocol consists of two
   parts: planned and unplanned, where the unplanned part is designed as
   an incomplete planned handover to allow the whole handover process to
   successfully recover in case the planned handover fails.
   The central entity in the AN is the Anchor Point (ANP).  The MNs are
   allocated addresses prefix routable to the appropriate ANP, which
   stands as the address origin.  Note that the allocation is not
   performed by the ANP itself but by an independent agent in the
   network.  There are no restrictions on the number and location of
   ANPs in AN: ANP can be an internal router, gateway or AR.  During the
   downlink packet forwarding ANP tunnels received packets to the
   current AR where MN is attached.  Although address change is possible
   in BCMP, by default, MNs retain the serving ANP and the allocated
   address during mobility within the AN.

   BCMP also deploys a paging mechanisms and contains additional
   features for AAA support, post-login address change, optimisation of
   the serving ANP.  More details can be found in [4][1].

   The candidate solution protocol BCMP is recognised to contain some
   similarities with some already proposed solutions mostly regarding
   the tunnel-based packet forwarding setup (in particular HMIP and
   HMIP-based solutions such as the latest variances of MIP integration
   with Regional Tunnelling).  Also, the handover management protocol
   (MN-AR protocols) resembles the "fast handover" proposal for MIP and
   HMIP considering the mechanics of control message transfer.

   A summary of some main differences of BCMP and HMIP are:

   o  BCMP makes no assumption about the global mobility protocol or
      tunnelling solutions

   o  BCMP only has a single level of mobility agents (the ANPs),
      whereas HMIP allows multiple levels of hierarchy (ie multiple
      levels of MAPs - although the current recommendation is for a
      single level only)

   o  Packets are tunnelled to the AR, rather than to the MN

   o  MN is not acquiring a new "on-link" CoA every time it moves

   o  address allocation is controlled by the network: the AN operator
      chooses which ANP the MN should use, in HMIP the choice is



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


      effectively made by the MN

   o  reverse tunnelling is used from AR to ANP.


5.1 Architecture Considerations

   Adherence to the "transparency principle" can be explained
   considering the following points:

   o  As a natural consequence of the preservation of allocated
      addresses, mobility of MNs is hidden from the external networks
      and hosts.

   o  The handover protocol is the interface protocol for MNs connecting
      to the AN.  The rest of the mobility mechanism inside the AN
      should be hidden from MNs.  In BCMP, the setup of message
      transfers (in particular the MN-AR protocol) is such that the
      location of the serving ANP or any additional information about it
      is kept hidden from MNs.  In simple terms, this means that the MN
      acquires an IP address during the login phase and it is only
      required to run the MN-AR protocol without any further mobility-
      related intelligence thus keeping the inside of the AN invisible
      to the attaching MNs.

   o  Encouraging the prefix-routing inside the AN limits the exposure
      of mobility in the network.

   BCMP executes AAA-based control at the initial login.  In practical
   terms, upon the initial message exchange between AR and MN, the AR
   consults a local AAA-entity and the address allocation agent in the
   network before the appropriate ANP is selected.  Furthermore, BCMP
   deploys a reverse tunnel from the AR to ANP for uplink transmission
   by MN.  This feature enhances the "transparency" of the protocol and
   offers a useful functionality for other mechanisms of the AN.  In
   abstract terms, this causes all traffic flowing to and from the MN to
   appear as if it terminates and originates at the serving ANP
   respectively.

   Effectively, the template platform for mobility and BCMP as its
   realised example is a stand-alone micro mobility solution.  It does
   not inhibit the use of any macro mobility protocols such a Mobile IP
   and can also support other global mobility mechanisms such as SIP.
   The stand-alone property of such a mobility solution is considered
   important for connectivity scenarios in IP ANs where the connecting
   hosts may use the actual AN as their home network.

   MNs are allocated globally routable IP addresses.  Considering BCMP,
   MNs are allowed to change the obtained address not as a mobility-



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   imposed necessity but as the controlled option for achieving
   optimisation of packet flows or for provisioning some other
   architectural aspects (QoS, ingress filtering, multi-homing).

   Also, MNs are allowed to request more than one IP address, even
   subnets, provided they satisfy the necessary requirements for such
   actions (again these requirements often depend on other aspects of
   the architecture).

   BCMP was primarily designed for IPv6 systems but its features are
   free of IPv6 or IPv4 dependency.  As an example BCMP's operations are
   intentionally independent of any subnet structuring or
   autoconfiguration options.

5.2 Modularity

   BCMP overall setup can be decomposed to reveal the individual
   protocol elements of the adopted template platform for mobility.
   Separating the air interface protocols from the network internal
   protocols directly maps into the distinction between the handover
   management protocol (MN-AR) and the path updating process inside the
   access network.  The addressing setup of the protocol does not impose
   great requirements on the handover and path updating processes.
   Location of ANPs is not restricted, they can be AN gateways or any
   routers in the network as well as ARs.  Due to the MN-AR handover
   protocol, location of ANP is not expected to influence packet losses.

   Modularity allows for easy enhancement and evolution of the deployed
   mobility support through modification or complete change of some
   protocol parts of the template platform.  This particular property
   has been the driver for the refinement work on BCMP currently being
   conducted in the MIND project.

   BCMP interoperates with other architectural components such as QoS,
   Radio Resource Management (RRM) and security by primarily not
   conflicting with their requirements and functionalities and
   additionally providing a platform for integration of them.

5.3 Scaling and Resilience

   The initial consideration for resilience of mobility solutions is
   that the specific mobility-imposed resilience mechanisms should be
   minimised and mostly assisted by the embedded support in the AN.  Our
   conclusion was that the resilience of BCMP comes from the property of
   routing in the protocol, which does not rely on the specific
   installation of routing entries and thus overcomes any failures in
   the network using the default mechanisms for the internal routing
   setup in the AN (routing 'module').  This point should be interpreted 
   as the explanation of the mechanism for achieving resilience, rather 
   that mitigation of the resilience requirement. ANPs are the weakest 
   points of the protocol, hence ANP changes are needed  should the 
   serving one fail. The utilisation of the network internal routing 



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   methods (because the MN's address is prefix routable to the ANP from 
   where the tunnel is again prefix routable to the serving AR) provides 
   a natural support for multiple AN gateways.  Some micro-mobility 
   protocols rely on a specific gateway-entity in the network, BCMP does 
   not inflict any routing requirements for the ingress and egress points 
   of the network.

   This again allows for better scaling of the mobility protocols as the
   process of assigning a particular ANP to MNs through the allocation
   of IP addresses and can be further controlled by the network in a
   traffic-engineering manner.  Additionally, utilisation of the
   internal routing as the only packet forwarding mechanism of the
   protocol mitigates risks of bottlenecks (specifically imposed by the
   mobility support) and provides a sufficient level of confidence for
   scenarios of dense population of MNs.  BCMP setup is applicable to
   any network size.

5.4 Current BCMP work

   As mentioned BCMP's details are currently being refined in the MIND
   project.  The particular features of BCMP provide a good level of
   freedom for routing configuration of the AN, which can be required
   for some scenarios of multi-homing support and particular ingress and
   egress filtering requirements for AN connection with Internet Service
   Providers.

   It is considered that the performance of the proposed mobility
   platform is not particularly dependent on the topological layout of
   the network.  Testing of BCMP reveals that there is no negative
   relation of the protocol's performance with the network topology (eg.
   tree vs.  mesh) [4].

   Two independent implementations of BCMP are currently being developed
   and will be demonstrated soon.

6. Conclusions

   This document presents the research steps behind the development of
   mobility management for BRAIN/MIND ANs.  The foremost intention was
   to present the stages of the design and some of the consequent
   decisions in order to assist the further efforts in development of
   micro-mobility solutions.

   The proposed template platform for development of mobility protocols



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   is believed to be a beneficial concept which can be endorsed either
   as a development skeleton (which we used) or as an evaluation metric
   for other design strategies.  Also the mentioned design processes and
   devised requirements can be further extended and enhanced.

7. Project Details

   The candidate solution protocol BCMP has been briefly presented and
   discussed.
   The BRAIN (Broadband Radio Access for IP Networks) [1] project ran
   for 18 months to March 2001.  MIND (Mobile IP-based Network
   Development) [2] is in progress and it is a follow-up of BRAIN
   continuing some of the work initiated in BRAIN and further studying
   MANET/MONET scenarios in IP Access Networks.  Most of the work in
   mobility management was initiated in Work Package 2 of the BRAIN
   project and can be found in Deliverable 2.2 in the referenced public
   web site.

   Both projects have been conducted as collaborative projects within
   the EU 5th RTD Framework Programme.

8. Security Considerations

   Any protocol arising from discussions such as those detailed in this
   document will be subject to a number of security issues.  However,
   this draft primarily describes the process of protocol evaluation and
   selection that was performed within the BRAIN and MIND projects.
   Some thought was given to the security issues within these projects.

   However, this draft does not address specific security considerations
   in and of itself.

9. Acknowledgements

   This work has been (partially) performed in the framework of the IST
   project IST-2000-28584 MIND, which is partly funded by the European 
   Union. The authors would like to acknowledge the help of their 
   colleagues in preparing this document, in particular Markku Kojo and 
   Dave Wisely.

References

   [1]  "Project BRAIN (Broadband Radio Access for IP Networks)-
        Deliverable 2.2", IST 1999-10054, March 2001, <http://www.ist-
        brain.org>.

   [2]  "Project MIND (Mobile IP-based Network Developments)", IST 2000-
        28584, May 2002, <http://www.ist-mind.org>.



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   [3]  Eardley, P., Mihailovic, A. and T. Suihko, "A Framework for
        Evaluation of IP Mobility Protocols", The eleventh IEEE
        Internation Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio
        Communications (PIMRC 2000) London, UK, September 2000.

   [4]  Keszei, C., Georganopoulos, N., Turanyi, Z. and A. Valko,
        "Evaluation of the BRAIN Candidate Mobility Management
        Protocol", IST Summit Barcelona, September 2001.

   [5]  Dommety, G., Yegin, A., Perkins, C., Tsirtsis, G., El-Malki, K.
        and M. Khalil, "Fast Handover for Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-
        mobileip-fast-mipv6-04.txt (work in progress), March 2002.

   [6]  O'Neill, A., Tsirtsis, G. and S. Corson, "Edge Mobility
        Architecture", draft-oneill-ema-02.txt (work in progress), July
        2000.

   [7]  Kempf, J., Chitrapu, P., Pagtzis, T., Sreemanthula, S. and H.
        Wei, "Dormant Mobile Host Alerting (DMHA) Protocol Assessment",
        draft-ietf-seamoby-paging-protocol-assessment-01.txt (work in
        progress), February 2002.

   [8]  Malinen, J. and C. Williams, "Micromobility Taxonomy", draft-
        irtf-mm-taxonomy-01.txt (work in progress), November 2001.

Authors' Addresses

   Andrej Mihailovic
   Kings College London
   Centre for Telecommuncations Research
   Kings College London
   Strand
   London  WC2R 2LS
   UK
   Phone: +44 (0)20 7848 2889
   EMail: andrej.mihailovic@kcl.ac.uk
   URI:   http://www.ctr.kcl.ac.uk

   Mark A. West
   Siemens/Roke Manor
   Roke Manor Research Ltd.
   Romsey, Hants  SO51 0ZN
   UK
   Phone: +44 (0)1794 833311
   EMail: mark.a.west@roke.co.uk
   URI:   http://www.roke.co.uk



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   Robert Hancock
   Siemens/Roke Manor
   Roke Manor Research Ltd.
   Romsey, Hants  SO51 0ZN
   UK
   Phone: +44 (0)1794 833601
   EMail: robert.hancock@roke.co.uk
   URI:   http://www.roke.co.uk


   Philip Eardley
   BTexact Technologies
   pp B28/2B, Adastral Park,
   Martlesham
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK
   Phone: +44 (0)1473 645938
   EMail: philip.eardley@bt.com
   URI:   http://www.bt.com


   Tapio Suihko
   VTT Information Technology
   P.O. Box 1203
   FIN-02044 VTT
   Finland
   Phone: +358 9 456 6078
   Fax:   +358 9 456 7028
   EMail: tapio.suihko@vtt.fi

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an



Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Experience of BRAIN and MIND             June 2002


   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mihailovic, et al.      Expires December 24, 2002              [Page 16]

