    
 
 
 
 
 
Internet Engineering Task Force                             Mike Pierce
INTERNET DRAFT                                                    Artel
Expires May, 2002
                                                               Don Choi
                                                                   DISA

                                                          November 2001



   Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice over IP


             draft-pierce-sipping-assured-aervice-00.txt


Status of This Memo 
   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet Drafts. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed a
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.text 
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
   
Copyright Notice
   
   Copyright (c) Internet Society 2001.  All rights reserved. 
   Reproduction or translation of the complete documents, but not of
   extracts, including this notice, is freely permitted. 
   

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 1]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001

Abstract
   
   Assured Service refers to the set of capabilities used to ensure that
   mission critical communications are setup and remain connected. This
   memo describes the need for such capabilities in support of the US
   military and government communications requirements. It discusses
   possible approaches to the provision of these capabilities within the
   framework of SIP.
   

Table of Contents
      
   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.   High Level Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.   Functional Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.1  Precedence Level Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.2  Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.3  Preferential Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.4  Diversion if Not Answered  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.5  Notifications to Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.7  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure  . . . . 7
   5.   Current Situation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.1  IPv4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.2  DiffServ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.3  IntServ/RSVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.4  MPLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.5  SIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.   Possible Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.1  Precedence Level Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.2  Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.3  Preferential Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.4  Diversion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.5  Notification to Preempted Party  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.7  Protection of Signaling Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.1  Authentication of User Access  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.2  Security of Signaling Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.3  Security of Routing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10.  Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   ANNEX A Example Mapping of Call Precedence Levels . . . . . . . . 15

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                [Page 2]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   A.1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   A.2 Packet Forwarding Treatment Using DiffServ  . . . . . . . . . 16
   A.3 Packet Forwarding Treatment Without DiffServ  . . . . . . . . 16
   A.4 Call Setup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Full Copyright Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 
   
   
1.   Introduction
   
   Throughout many decades of evolution of the telephony network and its
   supporting protocols, there has been a need to provide special
   services to a limited subset of the calls within a network or domain
   in order to ensure completion of important calls. Examples of this
   need have been in support of emergency traffic for natural disasters,
   network restoration traffic, and high priority traffic in a military
   network. Provision of the required capabilities with the signaling
   protocols and within the switching systems has been defined in a
   number of national and international standards, most notably a
   service referred to as Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption as
   defined in an American National Standard [T1.619] in the US and in
   corresponding ITU-T Recommendations [I.255.3, Q.735.3, and Q.955.3].
   In addition, a service called High Probability of Completion (HPC)
   was defined in [T1.631] and, most recently, an ITU-T Recommendation
   defines the requirements for the International Emergency Preference
   Scheme (IEPS) [E.106].
   
   Other drafts submitted to the IETF have addressed aspects of MLPP and
   IEPS. Some of these are [Polk], which identified some of the
   requirements for MLPP within IP, [Folts2] which presents the
   functional requirements, features, and objectives for the Emergency
   Telecommunications Service (ETS), and [Carlberg] which provides a
   framework for IEPS for telephony over IP.
   
   MLPP was the solution to providing Assured Service capabilities
   within the circuit switched environment. It is essential that
   equivalent Assured Service capabilities are defined and implemented
   for the packet-based, connectionless environment of the Internet, and
   specifically SIP. Without these capabilities, SIP can not be used for
   US military applications, and is less than optimal for many other
   government uses.
   
   This memo builds on these references and identifies the specific
   requirements for Assured Service capabilities in support of the US
   military/government environment. Because of many efforts in the past
   to jointly develop requirements and signaling protocols, these
   requirements are very similar to the requirements of the military/
   government networks of other countries. The term "Assured Service" is

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 3]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   used to refer to the required capabilities rather than the previous
   terms of MLPP or IEPS, since the envisioned set of capabilities and
   protocols to achieve them are not expected to be the same as those
   previously defined services.
   
   Although not addressed explicitly by this memo, many of the same
   requirements and capabilities may be applied for non-military or
   government networks, for example, in support of commercial network
   restoration efforts. A presentation in the TEWG at London [Ash]
   demonstrated real-life situations from the past in which total
   network failures required extensive efforts, presumably including
   communication via other unaffected networks, to bring the affected
   network back on line. If one considered a situation in which the very
   network which had failed was needed to carry the network management
   traffic required to get it back on line, it would be hard to imagine
   how it could ever be brought back up in the face of overwhelming
   customer attempts. Capabilities would be required to give priority to
   the network management traffic, even to the extent of blocking all
   non-emergency traffic for a period of time.
   
   
2.   Background
   
   In the circuit switched environment, specific circuits or channels
   were used for each call. These were typically 64 kbit/s channels
   which were a part of a TDM transmission structure. Later developments
   used packet/cell based transport instead of dedicated 64 kbit/s
   channels, however, the effect was the same. There was still a
   dedicated transport capacity assigned for each call.
   
   Assured Service in the circuit switched environment may be provided
   by one or more of the following techniques. Note that the
   capabilities included within IEPS [E.106], are included here for
   reference but not dealt with further in this memo. They are further
   dealt with in [Folts2]:
   
      - Giving priority to return of dial tone (IEPS).
   
      - Marking of signaling messages for better handling, for example,
        being last to be dropped in case of congestion in the signaling
        network (HPC).
   
      - Extra routing possibilities for higher priority calls. (IEPS)
   
      - Exemption from restrictive management controls (IEPS) such as
        hard-to-read codes and code gapping.
   
      - Reservation of specific facilities (trunks) for higher priority

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 4]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


        traffic (IEPS).
   
      - Higher priority calls may preempt existing lower priority calls,
        causing the network to release the lower priority call to free
        up resources for immediate reuse by the higher priority call
       (MLPP).
   
   Identification of traffic authorized to use one or more of these
   techniques may be via the following methods:
   
      - Calls placed from physical lines authorized for its use
   
      - Calls placed to specific telephone numbers or blocks of numbers
   
      - Entry of a special ID code and PIN from any telephone line
   
   
3.   High Level Requirements
   
   While the existing requirements and capabilities have been developed
   with the circuit switched environment in mind, many are directly
   applicable to the packet environment and specifically the Voice over
   IP application being defined using SIP. Some of the capabilities need
   to be adapted or modified for application in the packet mode
   environment. In addition, there will likely be new techniques which
   can be defined specifically for the SIP case.
   
   At a high level, the Assured Service requirements can be stated as
   the need to ensure that mission critical voice-mode calls get set up
   and remain connected.
   
   
4.   Functional Requirements
   
   As noted above, the functional requirements for Assured Service being
   detailed here are specifically those needed to support the US
   government requirements, primarily for the military environment. This
   memo concentrates on those portions mentioned in Section 2 which are
   derived from the requirements for MLPP as defined in [T1.619].
   
   The basic requirements can be defined as follows;
   
4.1  Precedence Level Marking
   
   It must be possible for the originator to select and signal one of
   five precedence levels for a call, with the call defaulting to the
   lowest if none is specified. It must be possible to carry this call
   associated precedence level though the IP network. It must be

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 5]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   possible to deliver the originally signaled precedence level to the
   called party.
   
   
4.2  Authentication
   
   It must be possible to verify that the calling party is authorized to
   use the Assured Service and the requested value and to take the
   appropriate action if the calling party attempts to use a higher
   level. The preferred action is to reject the call, and send an
   indication of the reason to the caller.
   
4.3  Preferential Treatment
   
   It must be possible to provide preferential treatment to higher
   precedence calls in relation to lower precedence calls. Examples of
   preferential treatments are:
   
      - reservation of network resources for precedence calls
   
      - usage of higher Call Acceptance limits for higher precedence
        calls
   
      - preferential queuing of signaling messages based on precedence
        level
   
      - preferential queuing of user data packets based on precedence
        level
   
      - discarding of packets of lower precedence call
   
      - preemption of one or more existing calls of lower precedence
        level
   
4.4  Diversion if Not Answered
   
   If a precedence call (one higher that "Routine") does not answer
   within a designated time or the called party is busy with a call of
   equal or higher precedence such that an indication of the new call
   can not be given, the call must be diverted to a predetermined
   alternate party. In general, this must operate similar to a normal
   "Call Forwarding on No Answer" service.
   
4.5  Notifications to Preempted Party
   
   All preempted parties must be provided with a distinct notification
   informing them that their call has been preempted.
   

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 6]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


4.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party
   
   When a call is preempted for delivery of a higher precedence call to
   the same party, after the party is notified that a new call is being
   presented, the party must acknowledge the preemption before the new
   call is connected. That is, there must be a positive acknowledgement
   before any audio information is transferred in either direction.
   
4.7  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure
   
   It is required that sensitive information not be made available to
   non-secure portions of the network or to any non-secure network
   through which the traffic passes. It is also important that it not be
   accessible by users connected to the network. This non-disclosure
   requirement especially applies to information which is used to
   control link state routing protocols based on knowledge of the
   current traffic load at each precedence level on each route.
   
   Further, it is desirable that the precedence information regarding
   each call (as well as the other information such as calling/called
   party identity) be protected from disclosure to the greatest extent
   possible.
   
   
5.   Current Situation
   
   Current support for Assured Service within various IETF defined
   protocols and ongoing initiatives is not considered to be sufficient.
   
5.1  IPv4
   
   Although support for the traditional five precedence levels was
   included in the TOS field of IPv4 from the earliest days, support for
   this field is not universal, and it only provides packet level
   priority. It does not provide call setup priority or control of call
   retention.
   
5.2  DiffServ
   
   Although it is possible to map the required five precedence levels to
   the Assured Forwarding classes defined in RFC 2597, this also
   provides only per packet priority treatment. While this may provide a
   fundamental subcomponent of the Assured Service requirements detailed
   in this memo, it does not support the basic call setup priority that
   is required.
   
   While a mapping could be defined between the required five precedence
   levels and the four Assured Forwarding classes, there is no explicit

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 7]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   order defined for those AF classes. This would need to be done.
   
   Additionally, the Expedited Forwarding PHB may provide a needed
   capability for the transfer of signaling messages for high priority
   traffic. On the other hand, it is likely that it will be necessary to
   use this PHB for all call control signaling in order to meet any
   acceptable delay limit on the transfer of messages for even the
   lowest priority calls.
   
5.3  IntServ/RSVP
   
   Although RSVP includes mention of preemption of existing reservations
   in favor of other higher priority ones, it does not provide detailed
   procedures for doing so. In principle, it should be straightforward
   to do so. However, it is not believed that the procedures required
   for establishment of a path using RSVP, and the additional procedures
   that would be necessary for preemption of an existing path, would
   allow this to be useful for the provision of Assured Service
   capabilities to individual calls.
   
   RSVP may be applicable for the establishment of trunk groups between
   switching points, with each trunk group serving a different
   precedence level of calls. No preemption of these trunk groups is
   required.
   
5.4  MPLS
   
   Since MPLS is fundamentally a means to emulate circuit-mode operation
   by establishment of a "path" which then functions like a
   "connection", the principles of priority and preemption could be
   applied to this path the same as they are in the circuit-mode
   environment. RFC 2702 describes the requirements for such
   capabilities as applied to "traffic trunks". However, it uses the
   term "traffic trunk" to refer to a facility which is established to
   carry an aggregate of traffic, i.e., many telephone calls. This is
   the equivalent of a "trunk group" in standard telephony terminology
   [T1.523]. Because of the extensive procedures that are required to
   establish and remove such a Label Switched Path, it is believed that
   this prevents MPLS from being used to setup paths for individual
   calls.
   
   MPLS may be applicable for the establishment of the equivalent of
   dedicated trunk groups between switching entities (if such entities
   were to exist in the SIP network architecture). Each of these "trunk
   groups" or "traffic trunks" could exist to support a specific
   precedence level of traffic between two points and could be setup
   using the procedures defined in [MPLS-CR-LDP] or those in [MPLS-RSVP-
   LSP]. These drafts allow the signaling of the required five levels of

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 8]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   precedence as well as separate setup and holding priorities.
   
5.5  SIP
   
   The initial plans for SIP [RFC2543] defined four tokens for priority
   levels to be used to control call setup, however, they do not equate
   to the levels required for Assured Service. It should also be noted
   that no explicit ordering of these four defined values (emergency,
   urgent, normal, non-urgent) can be found. The current draft revision
   [SIP-2543bis] adds the notion of a fifth value or "token" for
   "other-priority", but it does not define how this would be used.
   While the intention of this addition might be to allow the definition
   of whatever tokens are desired in various applications, this does not
   provide a standard to ensure interoperability without the additional
   burden of a coordination function such as that provided by IANA.
   
   Security is discussed in the draft revision to RFC 2543 [SIP-
   2543bis], but it has been recognized in various Working Group
   discussions that security for all aspects of call control needs to be
   considered in a unified manner. Security for each individual
   component of call setup and release can not be designed separately.
   
   The procedure being proposed for authorization of call set-up and
   media allocation [SIP-CALL-AUTH] appears to be too time consuming to
   expect it to occur each time a user attempts to place a telephone
   call, especially a high-priority one. The probable delay in
   establishing this authorization would be contrary to the goals and
   requirements for Assured Service. Overloads of the proxies
   responsible for the Call Authorization would prevent or unacceptably
   delay setup of the high precedence call.
   
   
6.   Possible Approaches
   
   The following identify possible approaches to meeting the
   requirements stated above.
   
6.1  Precedence Level Marking
   
   The approaches to be used for precedence level marking may need to be
   different for each of the following cases:
   
   A. Individual call setup:
   
   There needs to be a definition of a field to be carried in SIP which
   identifies the precedence levels of 0-4. These five values have
   specific meanings within the US military networks (as currently
   defined in MLPP) and the standard may reflect these meanings of the

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 9]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   values 0-4. However, it is preferable to not use the actual English
   language words within the protocol itself, as is currently defined in
   the Priority Header in SIP, since other countries will use different
   words and interoperability may be difficult.
   
   The specification may allow more than 5 levels. There is no need for
   the 65k levels defined in [RFC2751] nor is there currently a
   requirement to carry the separate preemption and defending priorities
   of [RFC2751] or the separate setup and holding priorities proposed in
   [MPLS-CR-LDP] and [MPLS-RSVP-LSP].
   
   B. Packet forwarding:
   
   To support preferential treatment on the packet transfer level, the
   currently defined priority levels in IPV4 and the Assured Forwarding
   and Expedited Forwarding PHBs of DiffServ will provide the required
   functionality. Appropriate mappings from the call level precedence
   levels to these PHBs should be defined in BCPs for various networks.
   An example of such mapping is provided in Annex A.
   
   C. Trunk group establishment:
   
   For MPLS, RFC 2702 defines the idea of a "traffic trunk" for which a
   priority may be signaled by the label distribution protocol in order
   to establish telephony "trunk groups". If LDP is used for label
   distribution, the priority defined in [MPLS-CR-LDP] should be used.
   If RSVP is used for label distribution, the priority defined in
   [MPLS-RSVP-LSP] should be used.
   
6.2  Authentication
   
   There needs to be a simple security mechanism (in the sense that it
   requires a few number of messages exchanged between a few number of
   network elements) to be used for each call setup. It is essential
   that a framework for security for SIP be established that allows a
   security association to be established between a user's terminal and
   their dedicated SIP proxy at the time of an initial registration.
   This initial registration would likely require an extensive number of
   messages and interaction with numerous network elements including a
   Policy Server. This registration would normally be done when a
   terminal is turned on, activated, or places the first call.
   Thereafter, the authentication for each call establishment must
   consist of a simple exchange of a minimum number of messages between
   that user and the dedicated proxy. This should preferably consist of
   one message, the same as the one requesting service (INVITE). In many
   other cases besides call setup, it is also necessary to perform
   authentication. Appropriate security mechanisms have already been
   defined to perform an initial registration.

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 10]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   
   This requires that each user have a dedicated proxy to support
   originating and terminating calls. It appears that discussions of
   other capabilities within SIP are coming to the same conclusion for
   provision of other services and capabilities. For examples, [SIP-
   PRIVACY] states that, in order for an originating device to achieve
   privacy concerning its IP address related information, "UACs ... must
   initiate calls through their trusted proxy". In addition, the
   terminating UAS also has to operate through a specific trusted proxy.
   This association between a user and a proxy would be established at
   the time of registration.
   
6.3  Preferential Treatment
   
   The preferential treatments would not be standardized unless they
   require signaling between network elements. Currently, most
   treatments envisioned are local matters within a proxy or router.
   Consideration of preferential treatments depends on the case:
   
   A. Per call:
   
   Preemption of existing calls will require coordination between
   network elements, and therefore protocol standards, especially if
   distinct actions are expected to reserve the preempted resources for
   setup of the higher precedence call,
   
   B. Packet level:
   
   Current capabilities of DiffServ will provide the necessary
   preferential treatments regarding packet transfer, including
   indications of priority queuing and discard priority. It is not
   envisioned that additional functionality is needed.
   
   C. MPLS/RSVP Paths:
   
   There should be no need for preemption of MPLS/RSVP established
   traffic trunks (trunk groups) as described in [RFC2702] and
   [RFC2205]. The required capability should be provided by mechanisms
   to reduce the traffic engineering limits placed on lower priority
   trunk groups (even by reducing to zero) to make space for the
   establishment of a new higher priority trunk group or the increasing
   of the limits on already existing higher priority trunk groups.
   
6.4  Diversion
   
   Diversion should be based on procedures that are developed for a Call
   Forwarding on No Answer type service. However, it should not be
   dependent on a timing performed by the original called party. Again,

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 11]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   this must be a function of either the originating or terminating
   proxy.
   
6.5  Notification to Preempted Party
   
   Notification to the preempted party should follow whatever is done
   for notifications for any network-initiated release.
   
6.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party
   
   Acknowledge by the preempted party (before connection of a new call)
   should follow whatever is done for normal call presentation, that is,
   it must be acknowledged before any audio is transferred in either
   direction. The terminating proxy should probably control the flow of
   audio packets.
   
6.7  Protection of Signaling Information
   
   See Section 7.
   
   
7.   Security Considerations
   
7.1  Authentication of User Access
   
   Discussions within SIP are beginning to identify the need to
   authenticate all access to capabilities, since virtually any could be
   misused, resulting in harm to the network or other users. Because
   Assured Service is intended to provide an authorized user with better
   service than other users, including the potential of actually
   preempting other calls, it is even more important to authenticate the
   user's access to the Assured Service capabilities.
   
7.2  Security of Signaling Information
   
   The need to protect signaling information from disclosure is
   independent from the provision of Assured Service. Military/
   government networks have long been built on the premise that such
   information needed to be protected. Bulk encryption of signaling
   links (as well as the user data channels) between secure switches
   provided much of this protection. In addition, the Signal Transfer
   Points of the SS#7 network could be secured against unauthorized
   access. It should be noted that commercial networks are now beginning
   to recognize the need for the same protection.
   
   In the IP environment, the signaling packets as well as the user data
   traverse many routers and could be accessed by unauthorized persons
   at any one of them. While the contents of the individual signaling

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 12]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   messages could be hidden by encryption of the request and response
   for end-to-end protection of information, the header must be visible
   to intermediate routers. It is preferable to not require decryption/
   encryption at each router. The approach has been to encrypt the
   contents of the signaling message but not the headers which are
   needed by the routers. However, the headers themselves may contain
   sensitive information such as precedence level and called party
   identification.
   
7.3  Security of Routing Data
   
   Of more concern than the information about an individual call is the
   information normally needed by Link State routing logic used by an
   originating device to select a route though an entire network. Such a
   routing function requires knowledge of the state (busy or not) of
   various portions of the network. When Assured Service based on
   precedence levels is added, this requires that the routing point also
   know the current loading of various precedence levels for each
   portion of the network. Especially in a large network, this is highly
   sensitive information and must not be revealed to unauthorized
   network elements.
   
   It should be noted that the constraint-based LSP setup proposed in
   [MPLS-CR-LDP] depends on the routing point knowing this information.
   
   
8.   IANA Considerations
   
   It is not expected that there will be any IANA involvement in support
   of Assured Service. The definition of precedence levels in the
   protocol should be of generic, non-application specific values
   forming an ordered set, for example 0-15. The meaning of each value,
   that is, the words in the local language which represent the level,
   is a local matter and need not be a part of the protocol definition.
   
   
9.   References
   
   [T1.523] ANSI T1.523-2001 Telecommunications Glossary.
   
   [T1.619] ANSI T1.619-1992 (R1999) Multi-Level Precedence and
   Preemption (MLPP) Service, ISDN Supplementary Service Description.
   
   [T1.619a] ANSI T1.619a-1994 (R1999) Addendum to MLPP.
   
   [T1.631] ANSI T1.631-1993 (R1999) Telecommunications - Signalling
   System No. 7 (SS7) - High Probability of Completion (HPC) Network
   Capability.

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 13]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   
   [E.106] ITU-T Recommendation E.106 (2000) International Emergency
   Preference Scheme (IEPS).
   
   [I.255.3] ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3 (1990), Multilevel precedence
   and preemption service (MLPP).
   
   [Q.735.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.735.3 (1993), Description for
   community of interest supplementary services using SS No. 7 -
   Multilevel precedence and preemption (MLPP).
   
   [Q.955.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.955.3 (1993), Description for
   community of interest supplementary services using DSS1 - Multilevel
   precedence and preemption (MLPP).
   
   [RFC2205] "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)", R. Braden, et al,
   Sept 1997
   
   [RFC2597] "Assured Forwarding PHB Group", J. Heinanen, et al, June
   1999.
   
   [RFC2598] "An Expedited Forwarding PHB", V. Jacobson, et al, June
   1999.
   
   [RFC2702] "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS", D.
   Awduche, et al, Sept 1999.
   
   [RFC2751] "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element", S. Herzog,
   January 2000.
   
   [MPLS-CR-LDP] draft-ietf-mpls-cr-ldp-05, "CR-LDP: Constraint-based
   LSP Setup using LDP", February 2001. ????
   
   [MPLS-RSVP-LSP] draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-tunnel-08, "RSVP-TE: Extensions
   to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", February 2001.
   
   [SIP-CALL-AUTH] draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-02, "SIP Extension for Media
   Authorization", August 2001.
   
   [SIP-PRIVACY] draft-ietf-sip-privacy-02, "SIP extensions for Caller
   Identity and Privacy", May 2001.
   
   [SIP-2543bis] draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-05, "SIP: Session Initiation
   Protocol" (revision), October 2001.
   
   [Ash] draft-ash-mpls-diffserv-te-alternative-02, "Alternative
   Technical Solution for MPLS DiffServ TE", Jerry Ash, Aug 2001.
   

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 14]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   [Carlberg] draft-carlberg-ieps-framework-01, "Framework for
   Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony", Ken Carlberg, July 2001.
   
   [Folts1] draft-folts-ohno-ieps-considerations-00, "Functional
   Requirements for Priority Services to Support Critical
   Communications", Hal Folts, June 2000.
   
   [Folts2] draft-folts-ieps-white-paper-00, "Emergency
   Telecommunications Service in Next-Generation Networks", Hal Folts,
   Oct 2001.
   
   [Polk] draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00, "Multi-Level Precedence and
   Preemption over IP", James Polk, February 2001.
   

   
10.  Authors' Addresses
   
   Michael Pierce
   Artel
   1893 Preston White Drive
   Reston, VA 20191
   Phone: +1 410.817.4795
   Email: pierce1m@ncr.disa.mil
   
   Don Choi
   DISA
   5600 Columbia Pike
   Falls Church, VA 22041-2717
   Phone: +1 703.681.2312
   Email: choid@ncr.disa.mil
   



   
ANNEX A Example Mapping of Call Precedence Levels 
   
A.1 General
   
   For each of the five precedence levels which may be signaled by the
   originator, a mapping should take place for each of the components
   involved in the call. This includes the call setup/disconnect
   signaling and transfer of the packets carrying the user's data
   (voice). This example is based on the presumption of the use of an
   audio coding algorithm which includes marking individual packets
   which may be considered for discard in case of overload.
   

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 15]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


A.2 Packet Forwarding Treatment Using DiffServ
   
   This example is for the case of the use of DiffServ to provide the
   packet forwarding preferential treatment.
   
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
   |  Precedence  |Indication| Indication in user | Indication in user |
   |     Level    |in set-up | data transfer for  | data transfer for  |
   |              |messages  | packets not marked | packets marked for |
   |              |          | for discard by     | discard by codec   |
   |              |          | codec              |                    |
   |              |          |-----------------------------------------|
   |              |          | Class |    Drop    | Class |    Drop    |
   |              |          |       | precedence |       | precedence |
   |-------------------------------------------------------------------|
   |Routine       |   None   |  AF1  |   Medium   |  AF1  |    High    |
   |Priority      |    EF    |  AF1  |    Low     |  AF1  |   Medium   |
   |Immediate     |    EF    |  AF2  |    Low     |  AF2  |   Medium   |
   |Flash         |    EF    |  AF3  |    Low     |  AF3  |   Medium   |
   |Flash Override|    EF    |  AF4  |    Low     |  AF4  |   Medium   |
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
   
A.3 Packet Forwarding Treatment without DiffServ
   
   When the network is not DiffServ capable, the only mapping available
   for packet level preferential treatment is the defined priority
   values within IPv4 (and their carry-over into IPv6). The same five
   call setup precedence levels addressed in this memo are supported by
   RFC 791 and the mapping is direct.
   
A.4 Call Setup
   
   Proper identification of the required five precedence levels for call
   setup within SIP will require standardization of the appropriate
   values/field within SIP signaling and possibly a BCP for the mapping
   that would apply within a specific network.
   
   As an example, presuming a new Header is defined to carry the
   Priority Level needed to support Assured Service Call Setup control
   and if the tokens representing the levels were defined as:
   
      "Level00" | "Level01" | "Level02" | "Level03" | ... | Level15"
   
   with an explicit statement concerning the order, then the following
   mapping could be defined (for a specific network that uses five
   levels):
   


Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 16]
 

Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001


   Mapping at originating point:
    ---------------------------------------------- 
   | From: User's desired | To: SIP Header        |
   |  Precedence Level    |                       |
   |----------------------------------------------|
   |  Routine             |  Level04              |
   |  Priority            |  Level03              |
   |  Immediate           |  Level02              |
   |  Flash               |  Level01              |
   |  Flash Override      |  Level00              |
    ---------------------------------------------- 
   
   Mapping at terminating point:
    ---------------------------------------------- 
   | From: SIP Header     | To: User's application|
   |                      |                       |
   |----------------------------------------------|
   |  Level15 - Level04   |  Routine              |
   |  Level03             |  Priority             |
   |  Level02             |  Immediate            |
   |  Level01             |  Flash                |
   |  Level00             |  Flash Override       |
    ---------------------------------------------- 
   
   (Other networks may choose to use fewer levels and could use
   different words to represent those levels.)
   
   
Full Copyright Statement
   
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.
   
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published,
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 17]
 
Internet Draft   Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    14 Nov 2001

   
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY and THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE disclaim all warranties, express or implied, including but
   not limited to any warranty that the use of the information herein
   will not infringe any rights or any implied warranties of
   merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
   









































Pierce                        Expires May 2002                 [Page 18]

