


Internet Engineering Task Force                                D. Saucez
Internet-Draft                          Universite catholique de Louvain
Intended status: Informational                          D. Papadimitriou
Expires: January 8, 2009                                    Alcatel Bell
                                                            July 7, 2008


      Why should the Traffic Optimization not be restricted to the
                           Application-Layer?
                 draft-saucez-alto-generalized-alto-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) problem is being
   discussed within the IETF and more globally by the research community
   and some enterprises.  In this memo, we argue that it is important to
   conceive general-purpose mechanisms to solve this problem.  By
   general-purpose we say not only application independent but also
   layer independent mechanism.  The generality can be obtained because



Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


   the underlying problem is the same regardless the application or the
   layer.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Generalize ALTO to a generic traffic optimization problem . . . 3
   3.  Application-Network Cooperation for Generic Path Selection  . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8





































Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


1.  Introduction

   The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) topic is being
   discussed within the IETF and more globally by the research community
   and some enterprises.  As described in [1], traditional techniques to
   solve the problem are network coordinate systems, path selection
   algorithms or cross layer cooperation.  We could also add the use of
   looking glasses or host active probing like traceroutes.

   In this memo, we argue that it is important to conceive general-
   purpose mechanisms for traffic optimization as discussed on the P2Pi
   mailing list <mailto: p2pi@ietf.org> By general-purpose we say not
   only application independent but also layer independent mechanism.
   The generality can be obtained because the underlying problem is the
   same regardless the application or the layer.

   This mechanism can be conceived as a generic service that works in
   any context requiring a path selection so as to better suits both
   applicative needs and service provider needs.  Such distributed path
   selection service would be queried by hosts and would allow ranking
   paths based on policies and performance metrics defined by the
   network operator to meet its objectives, e.g. in terms of traffic
   engineering.  The introduction of such service requires minimal
   changes into the service providers network architecture.

   Thus, we also argue that making both applications and service
   providers cooperating for the path selection process can lead to a
   win-win situation as both will meet their requirements.


2.  Generalize ALTO to a generic traffic optimization problem

   Instead of solving the ALTO problem for P2P as proposed by [1], we
   suggest to open the discussion to the traffic optimization problem in
   general (i.e., ALTO become TO).  Indeed, we believe that the traffic
   optimization is not restricted to P2P and that the community should
   focus on a way to optimize traffic regardless of the traffic purpose.

   Furthermore, traffic optimization in P2P mostly comes from the
   multiplicity of peers providing a given content.  Multiply the peers
   often mean multiply the network paths to get a content and different
   paths give different performances (for any definition of performance
   like bw or cost).  This problem also exists for FTP replicas, HTTP
   replicas or any CDN.  In addition, the same issue appears in lower-
   layers.  For instance, for dual-stack hosts, the choice of IPv6
   instead IPv4 can dramatically influence the traffic performances [2].
   Moreover, the Locator Identifiers Separation Protocol (LISP) [3]
   allows to associate several locators to an identifier leading to the



Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


   possibility to optimize traffic by selecting the best locator.  A
   more precise description of the generalization problem can be found
   in [4].

   The key point in IP flow traffic optimization is the path selection
   algorithm.  Basically, for a high level definition of a source S and
   a destination D, at a time T, a good traffic optimizer should be able
   to influence the path (whatever definition of path) to follow.  For
   peer-to-peer it means selecting a (set of) peer(s) in the swarm.  For
   LISP, it means the selection of a source and a destination locator
   and for the IPv4 vs IPv6 choice, it means selecting IPv4 instead of
   IPv6 or vice versa.


3.  Application-Network Cooperation for Generic Path Selection

   A generic information path selection aims at simplifying the path
   selection process while allowing both service providers and
   applications to meet their requirements (that are initially of
   different nature e.g. self-fish vs common resource sharing).  It is
   an instantiation of application-network cooperation so as address the
   traffic optimization objective in scope of ALTO.

   Such system works as distributed request/response service in which a
   client sends a request to the service.  The service is used to rank
   path(s) among a set of candidate paths by relying on information that
   is usually available in ISP network:

   o  Routing information (e.g., BGP, OSPF/ISIS) to compare different
      paths based on routing metrics but also based on path costs.

   o  Traffic information via e.g. active or passive measurements to
      compare different paths based on quantitative performance metrics.

   o  Network policies allows for selecting paths based on resource
      performance metrics.

   A request will contain one or more source addresses (or prefixes),
   one or more destination addresses (or prefixes), and a set of
   criteria.  Upon reception of a request, the Path Selection Service
   builds a list of all the possible paths between the source(s) and the
   destination(s).  It then ranks the remaining paths (using the metrics
   and policy information).  Ranked paths are listed as part of the
   response to the client.  Figure 1 illustrates this request/response
   path selection service.






Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


                   Routing  Traffic
                      |        |
                      v        v
                      |        |
              Req.   ------------
             --->---|   Path     |
      Client        | Selection  |--<-- Policy (Network Resource Perf.)
             ---<---|  Service   |
              Resp. | (ranking)  |
                     ------------

                      Path Selection Service Overview

                                 Figure 1

   The noticeable properties of such system are the following:

   o  the service and the protocols it involves are application
      independent

   o  the resulting path information/ranking keeps the ultimate
      selection decision at the end-user (the PS system does not
      arbitrarily constrain but only combines end-users objectives with
      the network objectives).

   o  the service does not rely on closed loop that would increase
      global system convergence, as long as it is able to direct the
      traffic over the selected path and predict the future paths
      behavior in order to divert traffic to the most appropriated
      paths.

   o  the information on which the system relies is also application
      independent.  But more importantly neither its obtention or its
      usage incur any change in the network topology and network
      properties (scaling, efficiency, security, etc.) and operations
      Also, it does not impede the organic network deployment nor
      imposes any centralization of network operations (hence meeting
      the deployability requirement)

   Thus, to address a general purpose mechanisms for traffic
   optimization we believe that the community should make an effort to
   propose a generic protocol able to give information about paths.
   First, the protocol should be application independent.  This does not
   mean that the information cannot be related to a particular
   application but it means that the infrastructure required to provide
   the information must be able to support any kind of application.
   Only the way to inject information into the infrastructure can be
   application related.  Second, the protocol should be layer



Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


   independent.  In today's Internet, if an application needs to know
   the performance of a path, it has to reverse engineer the network.
   This technique is painful and does often not lead to the optimal
   solution.  The issues comes from the opacity of the lowest layers to
   the higher layers.  Being layer independent should allow layer
   cooperation and thus fill the gap between the "clients" and the
   "operators".  However, the cooperation must not rely on the
   dissemination of the exact lower layers to the higher layers but must
   rely on an abstraction of the different layers information in order
   to be understandable by any layer without having to know from where
   comes the information.

   By construction, the protocol should be able to run at any level and
   should be operable by the clients themselves, the network providers
   or any third party.  The difference would only be on the accuracy and
   the granularity of the information provided. [5] and [6] introduce
   the problem and suggest a first iteration of such a protocol.


4.  Security Considerations

   As we propose to influence the paths followed by the traffic, we
   induce many security concerns (e.g., eavesdropping, DoS, etc).  An
   important effort must therefore be devoted to security when designing
   such a mechanism.


5.  Conclusion

   In this memo, we have seen that the Application-Layer Traffic
   Optimization can be generalized in a path selection problem.  This
   generalization shows that the problem is not limited to P2P and
   application-layer but can be extended to any application and any
   layer.  We thus suggest, to design a generic application/layer
   independent path selection protocol able to tackle the ALTO problem
   and able to support future traffic and application requirements.


6.  Informative References

   [1]  Marocco, E. and V. Gurbani, "Application-Layer Traffic
        Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement",
        draft-marocco-alto-problem-statement-01 (work in progress),
        June 2008.

   [2]  Zhou, X., Jacobsson, M., Uijterwaal, H., and P. Van Mieghem,
        "IPv6 delay and loss performance evolution", International
        Journal of Communication Systems  DOI: 10.1002/dac.916, 2007.



Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


   [3]  Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Oran, D., and D. Meyer, "Locator/ID
        Separation Protocol (LISP)", draft-farinacci-lisp-07 (work in
        progress), April 2008.

   [4]  Saucez, D., Donnet, B., Bonaventure, O., and D. Papadimitriou,
        "Towards an Open Path Selection Architecture", Position
        paper available on http://inl.info.ucl.ac.be/idips, 2008.

   [5]  Bonaventure, O., Saucez, D., and B. Donnet, "The case for an
        informed path selection service", Internet-Draft
        draft-bonaventure-informed-path-selection-00, February 2008.

   [6]  Saucez, D., Donnet, B., and O. Bonaventure, "IDIPS : ISP-Driven
        Informed Path Selection", Internet-Draft  draft-saucez-idips-00,
        February 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Damien Saucez
   Universite catholique de Louvain
   Place Sainte Barbe 2
   Louvain-la-Neuve,   1348
   Belgium

   Email: damien.saucez@uclouvain.be
   URI:   http://inl.info.ucl.ac.be


   Dimitri Papadimitriou
   Alcatel Bell
   Francis Wellesplein 1
   Antwerpen,   2018
   Belgium

   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be















Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Generalize ALTO problem statement          July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Saucez & Papadimitriou   Expires January 8, 2009                [Page 8]

