


Networking Working Group                                        P. Levis
Internet-Draft                                       Stanford University
Intended status: Informational                               A. Tavakoli
Expires: January 14, 2009                             S. Dawson-Haggerty
                                                             UC Berkeley
                                                           July 13, 2008


Overview of Existing Routing Protocols for Low Power and Lossy Networks
                  draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2009.

Abstract

   Networks of low power wireless devices introduce novel IP routing
   issues.  Low-power wireless devices, such as sensors, actuators and
   smart objects, have difficult constraints: very limited memory,
   little processing power, and long sleep periods.  As most of these
   devices are battery-powered, energy efficiency is critically
   important.  Wireless link qualities can vary significantly over time,
   requiring protocols to make agile decisions yet minimize topology
   change energy costs.  Routing over such low power and lossy networks
   has requirements that existing mesh protocols only partially address.
   This document provides a brief survey of the strengths and weaknesses



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   of existing protocols with respect to this class of networks.  It
   provides guidance on how lessons from existing and prior efforts can
   be leveraged in future protocol design.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Suitability Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Formal Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Table Scalability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Loss Response  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Control Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.5.  Link and Node Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Routing Protocol Taxonomy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Link State Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  OSPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  OLSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  TBRPF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Distance Vector protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  RIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  DSDV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.3.  Ad-hoc On Demand Vector Routing (AODV) . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.4.  DYMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.5.  DSR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Neighbor Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  IPv6 Neighbor Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.2.  MANET-NHDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Security Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Manageability Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   13. Annex A - Routing protocol scalability analysis  . . . . . . . 14
   14. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     14.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     14.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21





Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


1.  Terminology

   AODV: Ad-hoc On Demand Vector Routing

   DSDV: Destination Sequenced Distance Vector

   DSR: Dynamic Source Routing

   DYMO: Dynamic Mobile On-Demand

   MANET: Mobile Ad-hoc Networks

   MAC: Medium Access Control

   MPLS: Multiprotocol Label Switching

   MPR: Multipoint Relays

   MTU: Maximum Transmission Unit

   LSA: Link State Advertisement

   LSDB: Link State Database

   OLSR: Optimized Link State Routing

   ROLL: Routing in Low power and Lossy Networks

   TDMA: Time Division Multiple Access


2.  Introduction

   Wireless is increasingly important to computer networking.  As
   Moore's Law has reduced computer prices and form factors, networking
   includes not only servers and desktops, but laptops, palmtops, and
   cellphones.  As computing device costs and sizes have shrunk, small
   wireless sensors, actuators, and smart objects have emerged as an
   important next step in inter-networking.  The sheer number of the
   low-power networked devices means that they cannot depend on human
   intervention (e.g., adjusting position) for good networking: they
   must have routing protocols that enable them to self-organize into
   multihop networks.

   Energy is a fundamental challenge in these devices.  Convenience and
   ease of use requires they be wireless and therefore battery powered.
   Correspondingly, low power operation is a key concern for this class
   of networked device.  Cost points and energy limitations cause these



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   devices to have very limited resources: a few kB of RAM and a few MHz
   of CPU is typical.  As energy efficiency does not improve with
   Moore's Law, these limitations are not temporary.  This trend towards
   smaller, lower power, and more numerous devices has led to new low-
   power wireless link layers to support them.  In practice, wireless
   networks observe much higher loss rates than wired ones do, and low-
   power wireless is no exception.  Furthermore, many of these networks
   will include powered as well as energy constrained nodes.
   Nevertheless, for cost and scaling reasons, many of these powered
   devices will still have limited resources.

   These low power and lossy networks introduce constraints and
   requirements that other networks typically do not possess
   ([I-D.brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs] and
   [I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]).  This document examines existing
   routing protocols and how well they can be applied to low power and
   lossy networks.  It provides a basic framework with which to compare
   the costs and benefits of different protocol designs and examines
   existing protocols within this framework.  From these observations it
   provides guidance on how existing solutions can be leveraged in
   future protocol design.


3.  Suitability Summary

   In this section, we present five important requirements for routing
   in low power and lossy networks, and evaluate protocols against them.
   Our evaluation attempts to take a complicated and interrelated set of
   design decisions and trade-offs and condense them to a simple "pass",
   "fail", or "?".  As with any simplification, there is a risk of
   removing some necessary nuance.  However, we believe that being
   forced to take a position on whether or not these protocols are
   acceptable according to binary criterion will be constructive.

   We derive these metrics from existing documents that describe ROLL
   network application requirements.  These metrics do not encompass all
   application requirements.  Instead, they are a common set of routing
   protocol requirements that most applications domains share.
   Considering this very general and common set of requirements sets a
   minimal bar for a protocol to be generally applicable.  If a protocol
   cannot meet even these minimalist criteria, then it cannot be used in
   several major ROLL application domains and so is unlikely to be a
   good candidate for further analysis and examination.  Satisfying
   these minimal criteria is necessary but not sufficient: they do not
   represent the complete intersection of application requirements and
   applications introduce additional, more stringent requirements.  But
   this simplified view provides a first cut of the applicability of
   existing protocols, and those that do satisfy them might be



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   reasonable candidates for further study.

   The five metrics are "table scalability", "loss response", "control
   cost", "link cost", and "node cost".  For each of these, the value
   "pass" indicates that a given protocol has satisfactory performance
   according to the metric.  The value "fail" indicates that the
   protocol does not have acceptable performance according to the
   metric, and that the RFC defining the protocol does not appear to
   contain sufficient flexibility to alter the protocol to do so.
   Finally, "?" indicates that an implementation could exhibit
   satisfactory performance while following the RFC, but that design
   considerations necessary to do so are not specified.

3.1.  Formal Definitions

   To provide precise definitions of these metrics, we use formal big-O
   notation, where N refers to the number of nodes in the network, D
   refers to the number of unique destinations, and L refers to the size
   of a node's single-hop local neighborhood (the network density).  We
   explain the derivation of each metric from application requirements
   in its corresponding section.

3.2.  Table Scalability

   Scalability support for large networks of sensors is highlighted as a
   key requirement by the application requirements documents mentioned
   above, with size ranging from a minimum of 250 nodes
   ([I-D.brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs]) to very large networks
   ([I-D.dohler-roll-urban-routing-reqs]), and network depths of up to
   20 hops ([I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]).  Given that network
   information maintained at each node is stored in routing and neighbor
   tables, along with the constrained memory of nodes, necessitates
   bounds on the size of these tables.

   This metric examines whether routing tables scale within reasonable
   memory resources of low-power nodes.  According to this metric,
   routing protocols that scale linearly with the size of the network or
   a node's neighborhood fail.  Scaling with the size of the network
   prevents networks from growing to reasonable size, while scaling with
   the network density precludes dense deployments.  However, as many
   low-power and lossy networks behave principally as data collection
   networks and principally communicate through routers to data
   collection points in the larger Internet, scaling with the number of
   such collection points is reasonable.  Protocols whose state scales
   with the number of destinations pass.

   More precisely, routing table size scaling with O(N) or O(L) fails.
   A table that scales O(D) (assuming no N or L) passes.



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


3.3.  Loss Response

   In low power and lossy networks, links routinely come and go due to
   being close to the SINR threshold.  It is important that link churn
   not trigger unnecessary responses by the routing protocol.  This
   point is stressed in all the application requirement documents,
   pointing to the need to localize response to link failures with no
   triggering of global network re-optimization, whether for reducing
   traffic or for maintaining low route convergence times
   ([I-D.brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs],
   [I-D.dohler-roll-urban-routing-reqs], and
   [I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]).

   A protocol which requires many link changes to propagate across the
   entire network fails.  Protocols which constrain the scope of
   information propagation to only when they affect routes to active
   destinations, or to local neighborhoods, pass.

   More precisely, loss responses that require O(N) transmissions fail,
   while responses that can rely on O(1) local broadcasts or O(D) route
   updates pass.

3.4.  Control Cost

   Battery-operated devices are a critical component of all three
   application spectrums, and as such special emphasis is placed on
   minimizing power consumption to achieve long battery lifetime,
   ([I-D.brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs]), with multi-year deployments
   being a common case ([I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]).  In terms
   of routing structure, any proposed L2N routing protocol ought to
   support the autonomous organization and configuration of the network
   at the lowest possible energy cost
   ([I-D.dohler-roll-urban-routing-reqs]).

   All routing protocols must transmit additional data to detect
   neighbors, build routes, transmit routing tables, or otherwise
   conduct routing.  As low-power wireless networks can have very low
   data rates, protocols which require a minimum control packet rate can
   have unbounded control overhead.  This is particularly true for
   event-driven networks, which only report data when certain conditions
   are met.  Regions of a network which never meet the condition can be
   forced to send control traffic even when there is no data to send.
   For these use cases, hard-coded timing constants are unacceptable,
   because they imply a prior knowledge of the expected data rate.

   If control traffic is uncorrelated with data traffic, a protocol
   fails according to Control Cost metric.  Protocols which pass bound
   their control traffic rate to their data traffic.  Protocols which



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   pass do not use resources to maintain unused state.  More
   specifically, any protocol which requires fixed-rate periodic control
   packets in the absence of data traffic fails.

3.5.  Link and Node Cost

   These two metrics specify how a protocol chooses routes for data
   packets to take through the network.  Classical routing algorithms
   typically acknowledge the differing costs of paths and may use a
   shortest path algorithm to find paths.  This is a requirement for low
   power networks, as links must be evaluated as part of an objective
   function across various metric types, such as minimizing latency and
   maximizing reliability ([I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]).

   However, in low power networks it is also desirable to account for
   the cost of routing through particular routers.  Applications require
   node or parameter constrained routing, which takes into account node
   properties abd attributes such as power, memory, and battery life
   that dictate a router's willingness or ability to route other
   packets([I-D.brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs],
   [I-D.dohler-roll-urban-routing-reqs]).  Node cost refers to the
   ability for a protocol to incorporate router properties into routing
   metrics and use node attributes for constraint-based routing.

   A "pass" indicates that the protocol contains a mechanism allowing
   these considerations to be considered when choosing routes.


4.  Routing Protocol Taxonomy

   Routing protocols broadly fall into two classes: link-state and
   distance-vector.

   A router running a link-state protocol first establishes adjacency
   with its neighbors and then reliably floods the local topology
   information in the form of a Link State Advertisement packet.  The
   collection of LSAs constitutes the Link State Database (LSDB) that
   represents the network topology, and routers synchronize their LSDBs.
   Thus each node in the network has a complete view of the network
   topology.  Each router uses the LSDB to compute a routing table where
   each entry (reachable IP destination address) points to the next hop
   along the shortest path according to some metric.  Link state
   protocols (such as OSPF and IS-IS) support the concept of area
   (called "level" for IS-IS) whereby all the routers in the same area
   share the same view (they have the same LSDB) and areas are
   interconnected by border routers according to specific rules that
   advertise IP prefix reachability between areas.




Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   A distance vector protocol exchanges routing information rather than
   topological information.  A router running a distance vector protocol
   exchanges information with its "neighbors" with which it has link
   layer connectivity.  Tunneling and similar mechanisms can virtualize
   link layer connectivity to allow neighbors that are multiple layer 2
   hops away.  Rather than a map of the network topology from which each
   router can calculate routes, a distance vector protocol node has
   information on what routes its neighbors have.  Each node's set of
   available routes is the union of its neighbors routes plus a route to
   itself.  In a distance vector protocol, nodes may only advertise
   routes which are in use, enabling on-demand discovery.  In comparison
   to link state protocols, distance vector protocols have the advantage
   of only requiring neighbor routing information, but also have
   corresponding limitations which protocols must address, such as
   routing loops, count to infinity, split horizon, and slow convergence
   times.  Furthermore, routing constraints are difficult to enforce
   with distance vector protocols.

   Neighbor discovery is a critical component of any routing protocol.
   It enables a protocol to learn about which other nodes are nearby and
   which it can use as the next hop for routes.  As neighbor discovery
   is a key component of many protocols, several general protocols and
   protocol mechanisms have been designed to support it.  A protocol's
   neighbor set is defined by how many "hops" away the set reaches.  For
   example, the 1-hop neighbor set of a node is all nodes it can
   directly communicate with at the link layer, while the 2-hop neighbor
   set is its own 1-hop neighbor set and the 1-hop neighbor sets of all
   of its 1-hop neighbors.

   Because nodes often have very limited resources for storing routing
   state, protocols cannot assume that they can store complete neighbor
   information.  For example, a node with 4kB of RAM cannot store full
   neighbor state when it has 1000 other nodes nearby.  This means that
   ROLL protocols must have mechanisms to decide which of many possible
   neighbors they monitor as routable next hops.  For elements such as
   2-hop neighborhoods, these decisions can have a significant impact on
   the topology that other nodes observe, and therefore may require
   intelligent logic to prevent effects such as network partitions.

   Protocols Today

   Wired networks draw from both approaches.  OSPF or IS-IS, for
   example, are link-state protocols, while RIP is a distance-vector
   protocol.

   MANETs similarly draw from both approaches.  OLSR is a link-state
   protocol, while AODV, DSDV, and DYMO are distance vector protocols.
   The general consensus in core networks is to use link state routing



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   protocols as IGPs for a number of reasons: in many cases having a
   complete network topology view is required to adequately compute the
   shortest path according to some metrics.  For some applications such
   as MPLS Traffic Engineering it is even required to have the knowledge
   of the Traffic Engineering Database for constraint based routing.

   Furthermore link state protocols typically have superior convergence
   speeds (ability to find an alternate path in case of network element
   failure), are easier to debug and troubleshoot, and introduce less
   control packet overhead than distance vector protocols.  In contrast,
   distance vector protocols are simpler, require less computation, and
   have smaller storage requirements.  Most of these tradeoffs are
   similar in wireless networks, with one exception.  Because wireless
   links can suffer from significant temporal variation, link state
   protocols can have higher traffic loads as topology changes must
   propagate globally, while in a distance vector protocol a node can
   make local routing decisions with no effect on the global routing
   topology.  One major protocol, DSR, does not easily fit into one of
   these two classes.  Although it is a distance vector protocol, DSR
   has several properties that make it differ from most other protocols
   in this class.  We examine these differences in our discussion of
   DSR.

   The next two sections summarize several well established routing
   protocols.  Later sections consider the properties of these protocol
   with respect to ROLL requirements.  This table shows, based on the
   criteria described above, whether these protocols meet ROLL criteria.


     Protocol      Table   Loss  Control   Link Cost  Node Cost
     OSPF          fail    fail    fail      pass       fail
     OLSRv2        fail    fail    fail      pass       pass
     TBRPF         fail    pass    fail      pass        ?
     RIP           fail    fail    fail       ?         fail
     AODV          pass     ?      pass      fail       fail
     DSDV          fail    fail    fail       ?         fail
     DYMO[-low]    pass    fail    pass      fail       fail
     DSR           fail     ?      pass      fail        ?



5.  Link State Protocols

5.1.  OSPF

   OSPF (specified in [RFC2328] for IPv4 and in [RFC2740] for IPv6)) is
   a link state protocol designed for routing within an Internet
   Autonomous System (AS).  OSPF provides the ability to divide a



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   network into areas, which can establish a routing hierarchy.  The
   topology within an area is hidden from other areas and IP prefix
   reachability across areas (inter-area routing) is provided using
   summary LSAs.  The hierarchy implies that there is a top-level
   routing area (the backbone area) which connects other areas.  Areas
   may be connected to the back-bone area through a virtual link.  OSPF
   maintains routing adjacencies by sending hello messages.  OSPF
   calculates the shortest path to a node using link metrics (that may
   reflect the link bandwidth, propagation delay, ...).  OSPF Traffic
   Engineering (OSPF-TE, [RFC3630]) extends OSPF to include information
   on reservable, unreserved, and available bandwidth.

5.2.  OLSR

   Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) (see [RFC3626] and
   [I-D.ietf-manet-olsrv2]) is a link state routing protocol for
   wireless mesh networks.  OLSR nodes flood route discovery packets
   throughout the entire network, such that each node has a map of the
   mesh topology.  Because link variations can lead to heavy flooding
   traffic when using a link state approach, OLSR establishes a topology
   for minimizing this communication.  Each node maintains a set of
   nodes called its Multipoint Relays (MPR), which is a subset of the
   one-hop neighbors whose connectivity covers the two-hop neighborhood.
   Each node that is an MPR maintains a set called its MPR selectors,
   which are nodes that have chosen it to be an MPR.

   OLSR uses these two sets to apply three optimizations.  First, only
   MPRs generate link state information.  Second, nodes can use MPRs to
   limit the set of nodes that forward link state packets.  Third, an
   MPR, rather than advertise all of its links, can advertise only links
   to its MPR selectors.  Together, these three optimizations can
   greatly reduce the control traffic in dense networks, as the number
   of MPRs should not increase significantly as a network becomes
   denser.

   OLSR selects routes based on hop counts, and assumes an underlying
   protocol that determines whether a link exists between two nodes.
   OLSR's constrained flooding allows it to quickly adapt to and
   propagate topology changes.

   OLSR is closely related to clustering algorithms in the wireless
   sensor networking literature, in which cluster heads are elected such
   that routing occurs over links between cluster heads and all other
   nodes are leafs that communicate to a cluster head.







Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


5.3.  TBRPF

   Topology Dissemination Based on Reverse Path Forwarding (see
   [RFC3684]) is another proactive link state protocol.  TBRPF computes
   a source tree, which provides routes to all reachable nodes.  It
   reduces control packet overhead by having nodes only transmit a
   subset of their source tree as well as by using differential updates.

   The major difference between TBRPF and OLSR is the routing data that
   nodes advertise and who chooses to aggregate information.  In OLSR,
   nodes select neighbors to be MPRs and advertise their link state for
   them; in TBRPF, nodes elect themselves to advertise relevant link
   state based on whether it acts as a next hop.


6.  Distance Vector protocols

6.1.  RIP

   The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) (defined in [RFC2453])
   predates OSPF.  As it is a distance vector protocol, routing loops
   can occur and considerable work has been done to accelerate
   convergence since the initial RIP protocols were introduced.  RIP
   measures route cost in terms of hops, and detects routing loops by
   observing a route cost approach infinity where "infinity" is referred
   to as a maximum number of hops.  RIP is typically not appropriate for
   situations where routes need to be chosen based on real-time
   parameters such as measured delay, reliability, or load or when the
   network topology needs to be known for route computation.

   "Triggered RIP" (defined in [RFC2091]) was originally designed to
   support "on-demand" circuits.  The aim of triggered RIP is to avoid
   systematically sending the routing database on regular intervals.
   Instead, triggered RIP sends the database when there is a routing
   update or a next hop adjacency change: once neighbors have exchanged
   their routing database, only incremental updates need to be sent.
   Because incremental updates cannot depend on periodic traffic to
   overcome loses, triggered RIP uses acknowledgment based mechanisms
   for reliable delivery.

6.2.  DSDV

   Destination Sequenced Distance Vector Routing uses distance vectors
   to continuously maintain routes throughout a network.  Unlike RIP,
   DSDV uses per-node sequence numbers to provide a total ordering on
   route information age in order to prevent loops.  In DSDV, each node
   maintains a route to each other node.




Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


6.3.  Ad-hoc On Demand Vector Routing (AODV)

   AODV (specified in [RFC3561]) is a distance vector protocol intended
   for mobile ad-hoc networks.  When one AODV node requires a route to
   another, it floods a request in the network to discover a route.  A
   depth-scoped flooding process avoids discovery from expanding to the
   most distant regions of the network that are in the opposite
   direction of the destination.  AODV chooses routes that have the
   minimum hop count.

   If an AODV route request reaches a node that has a route to the
   destination (this includes the destination itself), that node sends a
   reply along the reverse route.  All nodes along the reverse route can
   cache the route.  When routes break due to topology changes, AODV
   floods error messages and issues a new request.  Because AODV is on-
   demand, it does not maintain routes to all nodes as DSDV does;
   instead, it only maintains routes for active nodes.  When a link
   breaks, AODV issues a new route request message (RREQ), with a higher
   sequence number so nodes do not respond from their route caches.
   Correspondingly, a route request can flood the entire network.

6.4.  DYMO

   Dynamic Mobile On-Demand routing (DYMO) (([I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]) is
   an evolution of AODV.  The basic functionality is the same, but it
   has different packet formats, handling rules, and supports path
   accumulation.  Path accumulation allows a single DYMO route request
   to generate routes to all nodes along the route to that destination.
   Like AODV, DYMO uses hop counts as its routing metric.  Like AODV, on
   link breaks DYMO issues a new route request message (RREQ), with a
   higher sequence number so nodes do not respond from their route
   caches.  Correspondingly, a route request can flood the entire
   network.

6.5.  DSR

   Dynamic Source Routing ([RFC4728]) is a distance vector protocol, but
   a DSR packet source explicitly specifies the route for each packet.
   Because the route is determined at a single place -- the source --
   DSR does not require sequence numbers or other mechanisms to prevent
   routing loops, as there is no problem of inconsistent routing tables.
   Unlike DSDV, AODV, and DYMO, by pushing state into packet headers,
   DSR does not require per-destination routing state.  Instead, a node
   originating packets only needs to store a spanning tree of the part
   of the network it is communicating with.






Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


7.  Neighbor Discovery

   A limit on maintained routing state (light footprint) prevents ROLL
   protocols from assuming they know all 1-hop, 2-hop, or N-hop
   neighbors.  For this reason, while protocols such as MANET-NHDP
   ([I-D.ietf-manet-nhdp]) and IPv6's neighbor discovery ([RFC4861])
   provide basic mechanisms for discovering link-layer neighbors, not
   all of their features are relevant.  This section describes these two
   protocols, their capabilities, and how ROLL protocols could leverage
   them.

7.1.  IPv6 Neighbor Discovery

   IPv6 neighbor discovery provides mechanisms for nodes to discover
   single-hop neighbors as well as routers that can forward packets past
   the local neighborhood.  There is an implicit assumption that the
   delegation of whether a node is a router or not is static (e.g.,
   based on a wired topology).  The fact that all routers must respond
   to a Router Solicitation requires that the number of routers with a
   1-hop neighborhood is small, or there will be a reply implosion.
   Furthermore, IPv6 neighbor discovery's support of address
   autoconfiguration assumes address provisioning, in that addresses
   reflect the underlying communication topology.  IPv6 neighbor
   discovery does not consider asymmetric links.  Nevertheless, it may
   be possible to extend and adapt IPv6's mechanisms to wireless in
   order to avoid response storms and implosions.

7.2.  MANET-NHDP

   The MANET Neighborhood Discovery Protocol (MANET-NHDP) provides
   mechanisms for discovering a node's symmetric 2-hop neighborhood.  It
   maintains information on discovered links, their interfaces, status,
   and neighbor sets.  MANET-NHDP advertises a node's local link state;
   by listening to all of its 1-hop neighbor's advertisements, a node
   can compute its 2-hop neighborhood.  MANET-NHDP link state
   advertisements can include a link quality metric.  MANET-NHDP's node
   information base includes all interface addresses of each 1-hop
   neighbor: for low-power nodes, this state requirement can be
   difficult to support.


8.  Security Issues

   TBD







Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


9.  Manageability Issues

   TBD


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.


11.  Security Considerations

   TBD


12.  Acknowledgements


13.  Annex A - Routing protocol scalability analysis

   This aim of this Annex is to provide the details for the analysis
   routing scalability analysis.

   "OSPF"

   OSPF floods link state through a network.  Each router must receive
   this complete link set.  OSPF fails the table size criterion because
   it requires each router to discover each link in the network, for a
   total routing table size which is O(N * L).  This also causes it to
   fail the control cost criterion, since this information must be
   propagated.  Furthermore, changes in the link set require re-flooding
   the network link state even if the changed links were not being used.
   Since link state changes in wireless networks are often uncorrelated
   with data traffic and are instead caused by external (environmental)
   factors, this causes OSPF to fail both the control cost and loss
   response criteria.  OSPF routers will utilize multiple routes to a
   destination if they exist, and so receives a pass for the link cost
   requirement.  However, there is no way to associate metrics with
   routers when computing paths, and so fails the node cost criteria.

   "OLSRv2"

   OLSRv2 is a proactive link state protocol, flooding this information
   through a set of multipoint relays (MPRs).  Routing state includes
   1-hop neighbor information for each node in the network, 1-hop and
   2-hop information for neighbors, and a routing table, resulting in
   state proportional to network size and density (O(N*L + L^2)), and
   failing the table scalability criteria.



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   Unacceptable control traffic overhead arises from flooding and
   maintenance.  HELLO messages are periodically broadcast local beacon
   messages, but TC messages spread topology information throughout the
   network (using MPRs).  As such, control traffic is proportional to
   O(N^2).  As L is bounded by N, this means control traffic is
   proportional to O(N).  MPRs reduce this load to O(N^2 / L).  As the
   number of MPRs is inversely proportional to the density of the
   network and L is bounded by N, this means control traffic is at best
   proportional to O(N), and fails the control cost metric.

   Furthermore, changes in the link set require re-flooding the network
   link state even if those links were not being used by routing, which
   fails the loss response metric.

   OLSR allows for specification of link quality, and also provides a
   'Willingness' metric to symbolize node cost, giving it a pass for
   both those metrics.

   "TBRPF"

   As a link state protocol, TBRPF routing table size scales with
   network size, leading to table sizes which are O(N * L) when a node
   receives disjoint link sets from its neighbors.  However, this causes
   the protocol to fail the table size criteria.  The protocol's use of
   differential updates should allow both fast response time and
   incremental changes once the distributed database of links has been
   established.  Differential updates are only used to reduce response
   time to changing network conditions, not to reduce the amount of
   topology information sent, since each node will periodically send
   their piece of the topology.  As a result, TBRPF fails the control
   overhead criteria.  However, its differential updates are triggered
   by a link failure do not immediately cause a global re-flooding of
   state, leading to a pass for loss response.

   TBRPF has a flexible neighbor management layer which enables it to
   incorporate various link metrics into its routing decision.  As a
   result, it receives a pass for link cost.  It also provides a
   mechanism whereby routers are able to advertise their "willingness to
   route."  Although the RFC does not specify a policy for using these
   values, developing one could allow TBRPF to satisfy this requirement,
   leading to a ? for the node cost requirement.

   "RIP"

   RIP is a distance vector protocol, with all routers maintaining a
   route to all other routers, and as such table size being O(N).
   However, if destinations are known apriori, table size can be reduced
   to O(D), resulting in a pass for table scalability.  Each node



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   broadcasts a beacon per period, and updates must be propagated by
   affected nodes, irrespective of data rate, failing the control cost
   metric.  Loss triggers updates, only propagating if part of a best
   route, even if the route is not actively being used, resulting in a
   fail for loss response.

   RIP receives a ? for link cost, because while current implementations
   focus on hop count, any number can theoretically be used to advertise
   link quality.  There is no concept of router quality, and so it
   receives a fail for the node cost criteria.

   "AODV"

   AODV table size is a function of the number of communicating pairs in
   the network, scaling with O(D).  This is acceptable and so AODV
   passes the table size criteria.  As an on-demand protocol, AODV does
   not generate any traffic until data is sent, and so control traffic
   is correlated with the data and so it receives a pass for control
   traffic.  When a broken link is detected, AODV will use a precursor
   list maintained for each destination to inform downstream routers
   (with a RERR) of the topology change.  This information is not sent
   as a flood, leading to an acceptable of traffic for a loss.
   Furthermore, the router encountering a broken link may initiate local
   repair via a scoped flood.  However, link churn may also result in
   RREQ and RREP messages being flooded to the entire network.
   Depending on these and other implementation decisions like the use of
   scoped RREQs, AODV may provide satisfactory loss response; however,
   many of these settings are not specified in the RFC.  Therefore, AODV
   receives a ? for loss response.

   AODV allows the source router to wait and collect a number of RREP
   messages before choosing which route is to be used.  This allows that
   router to evaluate the link cost of the different alternatives,
   although it is not clear how this should be done.  AODV fails the
   link cost requirement because it does not appear that that a design
   goal was to choose paths which are minimal under some metric.  It
   fails the node cost requirement because there is no way for a router
   to indicate its [lack of] willingness to route while still adhering
   to the RFC.

   "DSDV"

   DSDV is another distance vector protocol, similar to RIP, with the
   only main difference being in the usage of destination-based sequence
   numbers to prevent routing loops.  As such the following analysis
   applies, which is the same as RIP's.

   DSDV receives a pass for scalability because table size can be



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   limited to O(D) if all destinations are known apriori.  Control cost
   is a fail, because periodic beaconing, irrespective of data rate, is
   required, with updates propagating throughout the network.  Loss
   response is also a fail since although loss only results in
   propagation to routers that utilize that link in their routing
   tables, there is no mechanism for restricting this propagation to
   active routes, rather than all routes.  Link cost is a ? since
   theoretically distance metrics other than hops could be used, but are
   not covered in the protocol description, and node cost is a fail as
   there is no provision for router quality.

   "DYMO/DYMO-low"

   The design of DYMO shares much with AODV, with some changes to remove
   precursor lists and compact various messages.  Table size is somewhat
   smaller, including entries for neighboring DYMO routers and routes
   passing through the router.  Control overhead has been reduced
   somewhat, and DYMO does not generate spurious RERRs; these messages
   are only generated when a forwarding failure occurs.  DYMO includes
   mechanisms to add additional routing information (potentially
   including router willingness), but does not define explicit policy
   mechanisms for choosing links and routers along a path.

   "DSR"

   DSR performs source routing of packets, discovering packets through a
   route discovery mechanism.  Only table entries needed by the data are
   maintained, which is equivalent to the number of unique next hops
   needed to access all desired destinations.  Control traffic is only
   initiated when a new route is being discovered, or when an existing
   route fails, and as such is proportional to the data rate.  Loss does
   not trigger updates, unless the path is used.  Routes are selected
   based on hop count, with no mechanism for differentiating between
   "routers".

   DSR fails the table criterion because it maintains a blacklist of
   neighbors with whom connectivity is not bidirectional: this scales
   with O(L).  DSR receives a ? on the loss criterion because some of
   its mechanisms, such as automatic route shortening and route cache
   suggest that it may be able to meet the loss criterion, but exactly
   how these are implemented will affect its efficiency.  DSR passes the
   control criterion because all control traffic is on-demand, and so is
   bound to data traffic rates.  DSR fails the link cost criterion
   because its source routes are advertised only in terms of hops, such
   that all advertised links are considered equivalent.  DSR has a ? on
   the node cost criterion because sources decide on whom to send
   packets through, and nodes cannot announce their capabilities in this
   regard.  However, a new route reply option could possibly achieve



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   this goal.


14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

14.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs]
              Brandt, A., "Home Automation Routing Requirement in Low
              Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-brandt-roll-home-routing-reqs-01 (work in progress),
              May 2008.

   [I-D.dohler-roll-urban-routing-reqs]
              Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Jacquenet, C., Madhusudan, G.,
              and G. Chegaray, "Urban WSNs Routing Requirements in Low
              Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-dohler-roll-urban-routing-reqs-01 (work in
              progress), April 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]
              Chakeres, I. and C. Perkins, "Dynamic MANET On-demand
              (DYMO) Routing", draft-ietf-manet-dymo-13 (work in
              progress), April 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-manet-nhdp]
              Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., and J. Dean, "MANET
              Neighborhood Discovery Protocol (NHDP)",
              draft-ietf-manet-nhdp-06 (work in progress), March 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-manet-olsrv2]
              Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., and P. Jacquet, "The Optimized
              Link State Routing Protocol version 2",
              draft-ietf-manet-olsrv2-06 (work in progress), June 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]
              Networks, D. and P. Thubert, "Industrial Routing
              Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs-00 (work in progress),
              April 2008.

   [RFC2091]  Meyer, G. and S. Sherry, "Triggered Extensions to RIP to
              Support Demand Circuits", RFC 2091, January 1997.



Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC2453]  Malkin, G., "RIP Version 2", STD 56, RFC 2453,
              November 1998.

   [RFC2740]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., and J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6",
              RFC 2740, December 1999.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3626]  Clausen, T. and P. Jacquet, "Optimized Link State Routing
              Protocol (OLSR)", RFC 3626, October 2003.

   [RFC3630]  Katz, D., Kompella, K., and D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering
              (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630,
              September 2003.

   [RFC3684]  Ogier, R., Templin, F., and M. Lewis, "Topology
              Dissemination Based on Reverse-Path Forwarding (TBRPF)",
              RFC 3684, February 2004.

   [RFC4728]  Johnson, D., Hu, Y., and D. Maltz, "The Dynamic Source
              Routing Protocol (DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for
              IPv4", RFC 4728, February 2007.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Philip Levis
   Stanford University
   358 Gates Hall, Stanford University
   Stanford, CA  94305-9030
   USA

   Email: pal@cs.stanford.edu










Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


   Arsalan Tavakoli
   UC Berkeley
   Soda Hall, UC Berkeley
   Berkeley, CA  94707
   USA

   Email: arsalan@eecs.berkeley.edu


   Stephen Dawson-Haggerty
   UC Berkeley
   Soda Hall, UC Berkeley
   Berkeley, CA  94707
   USA

   Email: stevedh@cs.berkeley.edu



































Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    draft-levis-roll-protocols-survey-01         July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Levis, et al.           Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 21]

