


Network Working Group                                          D. Plonka
Internet-Draft                                   University of Wisconsin
Expires: April 18, 2004                                 October 19, 2003


   Embedding Globally Routable Internet Addresses Considered Harmful
                       draft-plonka-embed-addr-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Vendors of consumer electronics and network gear have produced and
   sold hundreds of thousands of Internet hosts with globally routable
   Internet Protocol addresses embedded within their products' firmware.
   These products are now in operation world-wide and primarily include,
   but are not necessarily limited to, low-cost routers and middleboxes
   for personal or residential use.

   This "hard-coding" of globally routable IP addresses within the
   host's firmware presents significant problems to the operation of the
   Internet and to the management of its address space.

   This document means to clarify best current practices in the Internet
   community.  It denouces the practice of embedding references to



Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


   unique, globally routable IP addresses in Internet hosts, describes
   some of the resulting problems, and considers selected alternatives.
   It is also intended to remind the Internet community of the ephemeral
   nature of unique, globally routable IP addresses and that the
   assignment and use of such addresses is temporary and therefore
   should not be used in fixed configurations.













































Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


1. Introduction

   Internet hosts should not contain globally routable Internet Protocol
   addresses embedded within firmware or elsewhere as part of their
   default configuration influencing their run-time behavior.

   Ostensibly, this practice arose as an attempt to implement of "zero
   configuration" with neither peer review nor the use of a proposed or
   standard Internet protocol to do so.  Unfortunately, products which
   rely on such embedded IP addresses initially may appear convenient to
   both the product's designer and its operator or user, but this
   dubious benefit comes at the expense of others in the Internet
   community.






































Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


2. Problems

   In a number cases, the embedding of IP addresses has caused Internet
   products to rely on a single central Internet service, which can
   result in a collapse when the aggregate workload overwhelms that
   service.  When fixed addresses are embedded in an ever-increasing
   number of client IP hosts, this practice runs directly counter to the
   design intent of hierarchically deployed services that would
   otherwise be robust solutions.

   The reliability, scalability, and performance of many Internet
   services require that the pool of users not directly access a service
   by IP address.  Instead they rely on a level of indirection provided
   by the DNS, RFC 2219 [2].  DNS permits the service operator to
   reconfigure the resources for maintenance and load-balancing without
   the participation of the users. For instance, a load-balancing
   technique in common use today employs multiple DNS records with the
   same name which are then doled out in a round-robin fashion by the
   Berkeley Internet Name Daemon (BIND) and other DNS server
   implementations.  This enables the operator to distribute the user
   request load across a set of servers with discrete IP addresses,
   which generally remain unknown to the user.

   Furthermore, embedding globally unique IP addresses taints the IP
   address blocks in which they reside, lessening the usefulness and
   portability of those IP address blocks and increasing the cost of
   operation.  Unsolicited traffic may continue to be delivered to the
   embedded addresses for historical reasons, even after the IP address
   or block has been reassigned.  IP address blocks containing addresses
   that have been embedded into the configuration of many Internet hosts
   become encumbered by their historical use. This may interfere with
   the ability of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) and the
   Internet Registry (IR) hierarchy to usefully reallocate IP address
   blocks. This is of particular concern as the IPv4 address space nears
   exhaustion. Note that, to facilitate IP address reuse, RFC 2050 [3],
   encourages Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to treat address
   assignments as "loans".

   Because consumers are not necessarily capable, experienced operators
   of Internet hosts, they are not able to be relied upon to implement a
   fix if and when problems arise.  As such, a significant
   responsibility lies with the manufacturer or vendor of the Internet
   host to avoid embedding IP addresses.








Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


3. Recommendations

   Network product manufacturers should not assume that their products
   will only be deployed on a single (mythical) global Internet, that
   they happen to observe today.  A myriad of private internets in which
   these products will be used will often not allow these hosts to
   establish end-to-end communications with arbitrary hosts on the
   global Internet.

   Vendors should, by default, disable unnecessary features in their
   products. This is especially true of features that generate
   unsolicited traffic. In this way these hosts will be conservative
   regarding the unsolicited Internet traffic they produce. For
   instance, one of the most common uses of embedded IP addresses has
   been the hard-coding of addresses of well know public Simple Network
   Time Protocol (SNTP RFC 2030 [4]) servers, even though only a small
   fraction of the users benefits from these products even having some
   notion of the current date and time.

   Vendors should provide an operator interface for every feature that
   generates unsolicited IP traffic.  Non-default configuration should
   be required to enable these features so that, as a consequence, the
   operator becomes aware that the feature exists.  This will mean that
   it is more likely that the product's owner or operator can
   participate in problem determination and mitigation if and when
   problems arise.

   Internet hosts should use the Domain Name System to determine the
   routable IP addresses associated with the Internet services they
   require. However, note that simply hard-coding DNS names rather than
   IP addresses is not a panacea.  Entries in the domain name space are
   also ephemeral and can change owners for various reasons including
   such as acquisitions and litigation.  A given vendor ought not assume
   that it will retain control of a given zone indefinitely.

   Whenever possible, default configurations, documentation, and example
   configurations for Internet hosts should use Private Internet
   Addresses, as defined by RFC 1918 [1], rather than unique, globally
   routable IP addresses.

   Service providers and enterprise network operators should advertise
   the identities of suitable local services.  For instance, the DHCP
   protocol, as defined by RFC 2132 [5], enables one to configure a
   server to answer queries regarding available servers to clients that
   ask for them.  Unless the advertisement of local services is
   ubiquitous, designers may resort to ad hoc mechanisms which rely on
   central services.




Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


   Operators that provide public services on the global Internet, such
   as the the NTP community, should deprecate the advertisement of the
   explicit IP addresses of public services. These addresses are
   ephemeral, and their widespread citations in indexes of public
   services interferes with these services to be reconfigured to scale
   with unexpected, increased load.













































Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


4. Security Considerations

   Embedding or "hard-coding" IP addresses within a host's configuration
   almost always means that some sort of host-based trust model is being
   employed, and that the Internet host with the given address is
   trusted in some way. Due to the ephemeral roles of routable IP
   addresses, the practice of embedding them within products' firmware
   or default configurations presents a security risk.

   An Internet host designer may be tempted to implement some sort of
   remote control mechanism within a product, by which its Internet host
   configuration can be changed without reliance on, interaction with,
   or even the knowledge of its operator or user.  This raises security
   issues of its own.  If such a scheme is implemented, this should be
   fully disclosed to the customer, operator, and user so that an
   informed decision can be made, in accordance with local security or
   privacy policy.  Furthermore, the significant possibility of
   malicious parties exploiting such a remote control mechanism may
   completely negate any potential benefit of the remote control scheme.
































Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


5. Conclusion

   As larger number of homogenous hosts continue to be deployed, it is
   particularly important that both designers and other members of the
   Internet community are diligent in assessing host implementation
   quality and reconfigurability.  Unique, globally routable IP
   addresses should not be embedded within a host's fixed configuration
   because doing so excludes the ability to remotely influence hosts
   when the unsolicited traffic they generate causes problems for the
   for those operating the IP addresses to which the traffic is
   destined.








































Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


References

   [1]  Rekhter, Y., "Address Allocation for Private Internets", RFC
        1918, BCP 5, February 1996.

   [2]  Hamilton, M., "Use of DNS Aliases for Network Services", RFC
        2219, BCP 17, October 1997.

   [3]  Hubbard, K., "INTERNET REGISTRY IP ALLOCATION GUIDELINES", RFC
        2050, BCP 12, November 1996.

   [4]  Mills, D., "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP) Version 4 for
        IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 2030, October 1996.

   [5]  Alexander, S., "DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor Extensions", RFC
        2132, March 1997.


Author's Address

   David J. Plonka
   University of Wisconsin - Madison
   DoIT, room b263
   1210 W. Dayton Street
   Madison, WI  53705
   US

   Phone: +1 608 265 5184
   EMail: plonka@doit.wisc.edu
   URI:   http://net.doit.wisc.edu/~plonka/





















Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Embedding IP Addresses Considered Harmful October 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Plonka                   Expires April 18, 2004                [Page 11]


