

MEGACO                                                     Wayne Cutler
Internet Draft                                                  Marconi
                                                         Communications
Document: <draft-cutler-megaco-recvpkg-01.txt>            November 2000
Category: Informational


                  MGC Recovery Package for Megaco/H248


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



1. Abstract

   This documents provides a proposed definition for a supplemental
   package to Megaco/H.248. The proposed package addresses support of
   functionality to enable a MGC to store information on a MG which can
   subsequently be retrieved thereby facilitating the appropriate (MGC)
   recovery action in the event of a MGC restart.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].












Cutler                     Expires May 2001                          1
 
                 MGC Recovery Package for Megaco/H248    November 2000




3. MGC Recovery Package

   Package ID: mgcrecv (0x????)
   Version : 1
   Extends: None

   This package defines a property to enable the MGC to store
   information on a MG. The information is stored in relation to an
   active MG connection. In the event of an MGC restart, the MGC will
   retrieve the stored information in order to facilitate  its recovery
   action. The stored information is treated by the MG as an opaque
   digit string.

3.1 Properties

   MGC Recovery Information

   Property ID : recvinfo (0x0001)
   Type : 1*64 (HEXDIG)
   Possible Values : Any, as defined by the MGC
   Defined in : Local Control Descriptor
   Characteristics : Read/Write

3.2 Events

   None.

3.3 Signals

   None.

3.4 Statistics

   None.

3.5 Procedures

   Whenever the MGC requests a connection at a MG, the MGC should
   stored away its recovery information. The stored information may be
   subsequently updated at will by the MGC during the lifetime of a
   given MG connection. Subsequent to a MGC failure, the audit
   mechanism would be used to obtain the stored information to
   facilitate MGC recovery action.


4. Formal Syntax

   As in [4], the package described in this draft may be encoded as
   ASN.1 or augmented Backus-Naur Form (BNF) [2].




Cutler                     Expires May 2001                          2
 
                 MGC Recovery Package for Megaco/H248    November 2000


5. Security Considerations

   Not applicable for this draft. Refer to [3].




9. References


   1  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   2  Crocker.D & Overell.P (editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax
      Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   3  Cuervo et al, "Megaco Protocol", RFC 2885, August 2000.





10.  Acknowledgments



11. Author's Addresses

   Wayne Cutler
   Marconi Communications
   New Century Park
   Coventry CV3 1HJ
   England
   Phone: +44 24 76562417
   Email: wayne.cutler@marconi.com



















Cutler                     Expires May 2001                          3
 
                 MGC Recovery Package for Megaco/H248    November 2000



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into







































Cutler                     Expires May 2001                          4
 