                                                       
Internet Draft                                             Carl Williams                            
Expires:  December 2002                                      Alper Yegin
Informational:  June 2002                                DoCoMo USA Labs
                                                         Jari T. Malinen
                                                           John Loughney                                          
                                                   Nokia Research Center
                                                       Andrej Mihailovic
                                                    King's Collge London



                   Micromobility Problem Statement 
                     draft-irtf-mm-prob-stmt-00.txt


Status of This Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and
its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

This document is a submission by the Micro-mobility Working Group of the
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). Comments should be submitted to
the irtf-rr@nether.net mailing list.

Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Abstract

Mobile IP [1] has been developed in the IETF for a number of years already.
It's simplicity and scalability give it a growing success within the 
IETF as several Internet drafts are proposed to extend various 
improvements for Mobile IP and its counterpart designed 
for IPv6, Mobile IPv6 [2].  Mobile IP suffers from several well-known 
weaknesses that have led to the definition of the macro/micro-mobility  
architecture.  Such an architecture implies the division of the mobility 
architecture into two different parts: mobility management at a 
large scale, between the different domains (macro-mobility), and, on the other 
hand, at a local scale, inside these domains (micro-mobility).  Each type of 
mobility is then managed by specific mechanisms and protocols.  
The macro-micro approach results in many advantages that all 

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 1]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002




micro-mobility protocols will have; thereby effectively addressing weaknesses 
that plague Mobile IP.

This document discusses the micro-mobility problem, and is an attempt to
enumerate some of the concepts and approaches defining the micromobility
problem space.  This draft will serve to document the problem
space and definition of micro-mobility for discussion in the IRTF
micro-mobility working group.



                                Contents


Status of This Memo                                                    1

Abstract                                                               1

 1. Introduction...................................................... 2
 2. Terminology....................................................... 3
 3. The Mobility Landscape: A macro-micro mobility Model.............. 4
 4. Micro-mobility Problem Space Issues............................... 7
 5. Micro-mobility advantages.........................................11
 6. Conclusions.......................................................11
 7. Acknowledgements................................................. 13
 8, Authors' Addresses............................................... 13
 9. Full Copyright Statement......................................... 14


1. Introduction

   Application of location dependent Internet Protocol (IP) unicast
   addresses for identifying hosts in the Internet, despite various
   benefits, creates problems when used for locating mobile hosts 
   since their home address always points to their home subnets thus
   restricting their movement.  Regardless of the mobility limitations,
   the current state of research into future generation of telecom
   systems indicates a high probability of having IP-based protocols
   as the dominant mechanisms for network and related layers.  

   IP-mobility protocols MUST enable maintenance of established sessions
   without significant service disruption while not restricting
   the movements of mobile users to single points of attachment or 
   subnets.

   Mobile IP has been standardized by IETF enabling mobile hosts
   to maintain established sessions while being able to move between
   different subnets.  However, the general concept of Mobile IP,
   although providing a robust and simple solution, does not support
   seamless or near-seamless mobility, which is demanded for the new
   emerging generation of Internet networks and relevant applications
   and services (e.g., real time applications). 
 
Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 2]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002

   This weakness of Mobile IP is due mainly to the inefficient location
   updating during handovers where mobile hosts are updating during
   handovers where mobile hosts are required to send new location
   updates to their Home Agents each time they change subnets.  In
   situations with fast moving hosts that change their locations
   frequently, the frequency of updates is high and, depending on
   the position of the Home Agent, packet flows can experience
   significant delays.

   However, Mobile IP still provides a solid basis for enabling
   elementary mobility in the Internet and it seems a natural
   solution for global mobility with its domain for a more efficient
   alternative local or micro mobility of mobility hosts. 
   Having said that this document makes no assumptions in its
   discussion of micro-mobility problem space what the protocol
   or mechanisms is for providing macro or global mobility.

   This local mobility can be solved by more efficient procedures
   called local or micro mobility protocols, which should be deployed
   in scoped networks, called micro-mobility domains in this document,
   to reduce the delays and the extent of route updating.  We will
   not define the exact physical architecture of a micro-mobility
   domain since it is dependent on the implementation strategy
   of different operators. It is worth noting some essential
   architectural requirements of the micro-mobility domain so
   that one can understand how the micro-mobility methods 
   work within this physical region.  These are explained in 
   Section 2 "The Mobility Landscape: A macro-micro mobility Model".

   

2. Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

In addition, this document uses the following terms:


     Macro-mobility
               Node mobility that does not rely on preserving the the
               same network-layer access address.  Can be deployed with
               any size of networks, even Internet-wide.

     Micro-mobility
               Node mobility when preserving the same network-layer
               access address possibly using varying transports and
               providing support for quality of service.  Usually
               deployed within limited topology.  The concept is
               attempted to be refined in this document.




Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 3]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



      Fixed Node
               An IP node not capable of changing its point of attachment
               to the network. A fixed node is capable of sending and 
               receiving packets, that is, being a source or destination of
               traffic, but not a forwarder of it.

      Fixed Router
               A router not capable of moving from its home link to
               other links.  A fixed router is capable of forwarding
               packets between two or more interfaces, and possibly
               running a dynamic routing protocol modifying the state by
               which to do packet forwarding.

      Mobile Node
               An IP node capable of changing its point of attachment 
               to the network.  The Mobile Node may have routing
               functionality.

      Mobile Router
               A router moving from its home link to other links.  A
               mobile router is capable of forwarding packets between
               two or more interfaces, and possibly running a dynamic
               routing protocol modifying the state by which to do
               packet forwarding.

This terminology is intended to conform to those that have been used in
IPv6, Mobile IPv6, and other Internet protocols [2, 3].


3. The Mobility Landscape: A macro-micro mobility Model


3.1 Mobility landscape

  A general mobility model is depicted in figure 1 as to serve
  the purpose of defining the micro-mobility problem space. It
  is not intended to provide a framework for the specification
  of a protocol.  With such a model discussion can proceed in
  terms of defining the macro-micro mobility architecture and
  thereby defining the micro-mobility problem statement. [8]

  The mobility model in figure 1 describes different micro-mobility
  domains connected with the global Internet via some edge (gateway)
  router.  The different domains are connected with the global 
  wired Internet and with each other through an inter-domain backbone.
  The micro-mobility protocol will reside in each domain while
  some global mobility protocol will allow seamless movement
  between domains.  Hosts use all network services and have seamless
  connectivity with its correspondents anywhere while roaming 
  within a domain but also from a domain to another.


Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 4]





Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002

                             ~~~~~~~~~~~                      
                            {           }                     
   X  denotes              {             }                    
   =   BS                 {    Internet   }       
                +--------  {             }  ---------+      
                |           {           }            |      
                |            ~~~~~~~~~~~             |      
           
             +---+                                 +---+
   Domain 1  |   | gateway router                  |   | Domain 2
             +---+                                 +---+
            /     \                                /  \
           /       \                              /    \
      +-+           \         +---+ +---+        /    +-+
 X    | | Access              |   |-|   |             | |     X
 =    +-+ Router              +---+ +---+             +-+     =
                               \    \
   +-+   +-+                  +---+ +---+         +-+    +-+
   | |   | |                  |   |-|   |         | |    | |
   +-+   +-+                  +---+ +---+         +-+    +-+
X    X        X
=    =        =               Inter-domain        X     X    X
                                Backbone          =     =    =


                  Figure.1 Landscape of Mobility model
                           

3.2 Architectural characteristics of micro-mobility domains

  For the purpose of understanding how a micro-mobility protocol
  functions within a domain some essential architectural
  requirements should be noted. [9]

  (a)  micro-mobility domain:  Is an IP based network, which
       is seen by the rest of the Internet as a single stub
       domain, meaning: that the traffic that reaches it is
       only intended for hosts inside the network.

  (b)  micro-mobility domain:  Is a collection of subnets.
       Since the network is to support mobility, access points
       are wireless base stations, which are IP capable and functioning
       as mobility-capable IP routers where wireless cells define
       different subnets inside the domain.

  (c)  micro-mobility domain:  has a logical tree-shaped topology
       routed at the Gateway router and branches toward the access
       routers.

   With (c) the micro-mobility method doesn't have to assume
   a particular physical configuration.  Each micro-mobility domain 
   is assumed to be administered under the same administration domain. 
 
Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 5]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002

3.3. Macro-mobility and Micro-mobility

  Mobility in the Internet has traditionally meant movement of hosts
  or routers away from their topologically correct places.  As known,
  topologically correct place is the one into which network-layer address
  -based aggregated routing æænaturally'' will forward packets.  By
  natural we here mean forwarding table -driven aggregated routing where
  packet forwarding takes place only as a result of examining aggregated,
  or non-host-route -based, forwarding state in intermediate nodes.

  Since the hierarchical addressing scheme in the Internet was designed
  for fixed routing, routing to a topological place in the network that
  would not change for a destination node, mobility support resulted
  in support of separating the encoding of identity and location in
  the IP address.  The macro mobility solution, Mobile IP [5, 4], or
  Mobile IPv6 [3] separate the access and identity addresses of a mobile
  node.  Hence, the mobile node has a separate unchangeable address for
  identity and another one for access, the latter changing every time a
  mobile node moves to a new link.  This means that such a macro mobility
  solution supports the change of the access address, also known as the
  care-of-address.

  Hence, one definition for micromobility is the opposite of macromobility
  in the above sense.  By this definition, micromobility is mobility where
  the access address does not change.  This can be viewed as mobility
  within a subnet.

  A characterization of micromobility as compared to macro mobility is
  the ability to restrict registration signaling locally to a domain as
  compared to global registration in the macro mobility case.

  One characteristic of micromobility schemes is the scope of their
  functionality.  For example, Fast handoff [6, 7] can be view as
  micromobility and acts local to a set of access routers where as
  HMIPv6 [11] acts local to some æævisited'' domain, a set of nodes under
  one administration not necessarily all access routers.


3.4. Other types of mobility

  Characteristic to mobility is that a node moves with respect to other
  nodes, on the network layer between subnets, or on the link-layer
  between attachment points of a link.  In a network following a clean
  layered strucuture the latter would mean that if with link-layer
  mobility the network layer does not change, a node stays within a
  subnet.

  Related terms for mobility are host and router mobility where the
  former considers movement of hosts, the latter movement of routers.
  Other related concepts involve network mobility where one considers
  the movement of networks.  Router mobility with network mobility would
  consider mobility of whole subnets or islands of the fixed network.  If
  no fixed aggregation is preserved in router mobility, the result is mesh

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 6]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



  mobility.  A method of managing mesh mobility is host routing in mobile
  meshs, also called mobile ad hoc routing.



4. Micro-mobility Problem Space Issues

  A set of issues to solve have been considered for a routing or mobility
  protocol that considers micro-mobility. [10]


4.1. Identity

  Selecting the identity used in micromobility protocol needs to consider
  the following issues.  A conventional thinking of micromobility is
  that it like macromobility considers host or router mobility, not user
  mobility.

  Another aspect affecting selection of identity is the layer on which
  a micromobility protocol operates.  As the mobility would be host or
  router mobility, the identity tends to be the routing identity.

  Every identity can always have an encoding, e.g., to make management
  of identities lighter.  An example would be flow labels used for
  abbreviating and speeding up forwarding lookups in network-layer
  routing.  Encoding methods can also be used for setting up different
  transports, e.g., to forward protocols over incompatible other
  protocols.

4.2. Transport

  There are several methods of transport one could consider when
  forwarding data with a micromobility protocol.  First, a protocol moving
  packets from a topologically correct into a topologically incorrect
  place often uses some kind of an encapsulation or forwarding to make the
  packets to go where a node has moved.  There can be several types of
  transports in use for such forwarding.

      Encapsulation
               Many different kinds of encapsulations of protocols
               within other protocols can be considered as a possible
               transport for the purpose of forwarding data packets
               along elements of the protocol architecture.  Example
               encapsulation protocols could include IP in IP, or GRE.

      Host Routes
               Providing micromobility protocol transport by means
               of IP forwarding state mostly considers host routing.
               Other routing state considers aggregation as a means
               of forwarding and this may not be feasible to be used
               as a means of managing individual nodes moving while
               preserving the same access address.

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 7]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



      Mobility Bindings
               A common way of forwarding data when using mobility
               protocols is by mobility bindings.  For example, the home
               agent uses a proxy ARP or proxy Neighbor Cache entry to
               forward captured packets to a dislocated destination.
               Analogically, a micromobility protocol could use mobility
               binding-driven forwarding as its transport.

      Overlay Routing
               Instead of a solution resorting to IP routing on the
               same level as any neighboring router, the transport
               architecture may be composed of a set of elements
               maintaining their connectivity by means of a separate
               ææoverlay'' routing protocol.  E.g., the overlay routing
               can be embedded to some other protocl, such as the
               mobility signaling.  The resulting forwarding may use
               this information for encapsulation or for a forwarding
               mechanism directly applying the overlay routing state.
               An example of this is Mobile IPv6 Regional Forwarding.

      Flows
               Abbreviations of forwarding state can be generated by
               several tokens.  An interesting example is the use
               of flow labels, e.g., in IPv6 there is a placeholder
               in every packet's IP header for such a field and any
               forwarding engine should forward packets based on flows.
               This gives a fairly unused method for a rather efficient
               and stateless forwarding.

      Other Forwarding State
               Other types of forwarding include e.g.  link-address
               network-address association state maintenance, which can
               be used for switching-like forwarding.  That is, there is
               a special type of state leading into setting of circuits
               or paths within the forwarding fabric.  These are usually
               non-robust solutions but can be available as particularly
               light-weight variants of forwarding.  An example of this
               could be the MPLS protocol.

4.3. Scalability

  One aspect to consider for further work of micromobility is the types
  and requirements of scalability for mobility, e.g.  should these
  indicate that a new kind of a mobility protocol would be needed to
  increase some type of scalability.

      Route Aggregation
               A micromobility soluion could be assumed not to adversely
               affect routing state maintenance.  This is a criterium
               easily leading to deprecating the use of host-based
               routes even for micromobility.  However, one explanation

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 8]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



               for micromobility is that it uses host routes in its
               transport.


      Service of multiple nodes
               A scalability issue for micromobility is that it may be
               assumed to easily serve large numbers of nodes.  This
               can lead to selection of transport methods such as host
               routes or flows whose setup and use is considered lighter
               than those of encapsulations.

      Distribution
               A possible scalability issue is distribution of
               functionality to share the processing load and state
               maintenance resource drain caused by serving of a huge
               number of nodes.

      Localization
               Another scalability issue is the possible localization of
               mobility and other signaling, e.g., QoS and AAA signaling
               that otherwise would propagate further, possibly up to
               the far-end nodes of communication.  This also tells
               that a micromobility protocol has some common aspects
               to localized mobility protocols in that localization
               although not the key identifier of a micromobility
               protocol, unlike localized mobility management (LMM)
               protocols, still is another important motivator.


4.4. Other Architecture Issues

By solution architecture one considers issues such as the following

      Layer of operation
               A micromobility solution could operate on application,
               network, or link layer, or on a combination thereof.  A
               clean solution typically is assumed to work on one layer
               only, and in case of IP networks, on the network layer
               Since micromobility typically considers node mobility,
               the next possible layer to consider is typically the link
               layer.

      IP Layer Extension Constraints
               In case a micromobility protocol is designed defining
               an extension to the IP layer, is the extensions such
               that it does not violate IP design principles.  Also of
               interest is whether such an extension would be feasible.
               What are the signaling implications or network element
               implications, does this introduce, e.g., a gateway
               element.

      Observation of the end-to-end principle
               The Mobile IP -like macromobility protocols made the
               endpoints do forwarding decision which is a deviation

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 9]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



               from using the middle nodes to do forwarding decision


               as in æænatural'' routing.  However, even though middle
               nodes would do the routing, if they do not violate
               mutability rules of packets by changing packets on the
               fly from wrong places, such routing does not violate the
               end-to-end principle.  Typically a clean solution would
               not violate this principle.

      Layer Independence
               A micromobility protocol would make sense as a common
               name if commonalities can be found and used to generate
               a link-layer independent solution or part of a solution.
               Since layer-dependency affects design of a protocol
               message and its state behavior, layer independence can
               be considered a basic design principle.  Possibly,
               optimizations e.g.  for Quality of Service (see below)
               can be considered important enough to motivate layer
               violations, violations against the princible of layer
               independence.

      Mobility Protocol Independence and Interworking
               A key design principle is to have non-micromobility
               aware network elements to interoperate with the new
               elements and to have backward compatibility to existing
               protocols.  This is important in particular to the macro
               mobility protocols.  MN registration is independent of mm
               protocol operating within a specific domain.  The nature
               of mobility support is therefore very mch dependent on
               which micro-mobility protocols are deployed.

      Robustness
               This principle would call for the use of distributed
               state maintenance methods such as recovery from failure
               in network layer routing, and to avoid using static path
               setup methods which less easily recover from failures.

      Quality of Service
               One motivation for micromobility protocols has been that
               it would be an optimization to provide a more managed
               transport for a QoS support than a routing protocol on
               an arbitrary link-layer.  For example, QoS support in
               handoffs could be considered optimization for real-time
               content support.

      Handoffs with Micromobility Protocols
               A micromobility protocol should ideally be
               self-containing but it also operates with other
               protocols.  A question then would be how handoffs are
               done with micromobility protocols.  How is information
               exchanged - e.g., between access routers Do we have
               layer two functions or do we hide the details of lower

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 10]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



               layer from upper layers.  Or for something that is more
               proactive - we may take adv of link layer and radio
               specific information, or have connectivity between the
               mobile nodes and a Foreign Agent at the link layer.  Do
               we do any host redirect with the protocol when handoff is
               completed.

      Security
               Micromobility protocol needs to address security to
               prevent unauthorized nodes changing routing state.
               Without proper security mechanisms, neither the network
               nor the nodes can truct each other.


5. Micro-mobility advantages

  The partition of mobility management among micro and macro-mobility
  provides a good solution to the major problems of Mobile IP.  The 
  basic assumption is that wireless networks are grouped in domains
  under a single administrative authority.  All domains are connected
  to a global network such as the Internet.  On this basis, the mobility
  among the different domains is mangaged by the macro-mobility protocol
  while a specific protocol deals with mobile hosts movement inside
  each domain (micro-mobility).

  The main advantage of this architecture is that the users movements 
  inside a domain is totally opaque to the mobile nodes corresponding
  peers outside the domain.  Specific advantges resident themselves
  with respect to the areas listed in section 4.  For example, providing
  Quality of Service using RSVP may be more efficient because the path
  only changes when the Mobile Host moves to a new micro-mobility domain.
  Such system seems to be the only way to enable the use of RSVP like
  protocols to provide QoS to roaming users.

  Another main advantage is that handoff can be optimized considerablely
  in that the time needed to complete the handoff inside a micro-mobility
  domain will be significantly reduced as we are no longer forced to
  deal with global mobility agents everytime the mobile node changes
  its point of attachment.  This will reduce the amount of
  packet loss due to the handoff process.  Any updates to be processed by
  the network routing entities can be reduced or elimiated if handoff
  is assumed local to a micro-mobility domain.


6. Conclusions
  
  It is expected in the IRTF micro-mobility research design team that
  robustness and scalability are to be investigated carefully since we 
  can expect that future IP based wireless networks will be very wide
  and support many users.

  What is clear is that there exist a lack of numerical data and
  realistic simulations.  This is a major weakness of the current

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 11]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002



  micro-mobility approaches. It is important to evaluate these
  protocols in a standard and realistic network model with intensive
  simulations.  Today, such data is not available.


  To motivate further work in the examination of micromobility protocol
  problem space, a set of well accepted common elements of micromobility
  should be further identified, e.g.  by generating future versions of
  this document.

  Another important result should be to add clarity on the definition of
  micromobility protocol.  For example, do we call IEEE 802.11 roaming
  support a link-specific micromobility protocol, or do we call it
  something else.  This should be used for an analysis of potential design
  types calling a survey document as a continuation of this text.


  If the analysis starts to indicate a link-generic micromobility protocol
  is feasible and useful, a design round could be recommended for the
  IETF, possible in a new working group.  If not, a result would be to
  explain why there seems not to be possibility or need to develop new
  micromobility protocol designs.

References

   [1] S. Bradner.  Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels.  Request for Comments (Best Current Practice) 2119,
       Internet Engineering Task Force, March 1997.

   [2] S. Deering and R. Hinden.  Internet Protocol, Version 6 (ipv6)
       Specification.  Request for Comments (Draft Standard) 2460,
       Internet Engineering Task Force, December 1998.

   [3] D. Johnson and C. Perkins.  Mobility support in IPv6 (work in
       progress).  Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force,
       November 1998.

   [4] G. Montenegro.  Reverse Tunneling for Mobile IP.  Request for
       Comments (Proposed Standard) 2344, Internet Engineering Task
       Force, May 1998.

   [5] C. Perkins.  IP Mobility Support.  Request for Comments (Proposed
       Standard) 2002, Internet Engineering Task Force, October 1996.
    
   [6] K. El-Malki, et. al., Low Latency Handoff in Mobile IPv4  
       draft-ietf-mobileip-lowlatencyhandoffs-v4-01.txt.  
    
   [7] G. Dommety, et. al. Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6  
      (work in progress). draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-04.txt,  
       March 2002. 

   [8] P. Reinbold et. Olivier Bonaventure, ôA comparison of IP Mobility
       Protocolsö.  IEEE SCVT 2002 Proceedings, 2001.

Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 12]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002

    [9] P. Eardley, Andrej Mihailovic, Tapio Suihko, ôA Framework for the
        Evaluation of IP Mobility Protocolsö, Proceedings of the eleventh IEEE
        Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC 
        2002), September 2000, London UK.

    [10] J. Malinen, C. Williams, and A. Yegin,  ôMicro-mobility Taxonomyö,
         draft-irtf-mm-taxonomy-00.txt, Novemeber 2001.

    [11] H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. El-Malki, and L. Bellier, ôHierarchical
         Mobile IPv6ö, draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-04.txt.
7. Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank other members of the informal irtf-mm
group for initial exchange of opinions.

8. Authors' Addresses

     Carl Williams
     DoCoMo Communication Laboratories
     USA, Inc.
     181 Metro Drive, Suite 300
     San Jose, California 95110
     USA
     Phone:  +1 408-451-4741
     EMail:  carlw@docomolabs-usa.com
     Fax:  +1 408-573-1090

     Alper E. Yegin
     DoCoMo Communication Laboratories
     USA, Inc.
     181 Metro Drive, Suite 300
     San Jose, California 95110
     USA
     Phone:  +1 408-451-4743
     EMail:  alper@docomolabs-usa.com
     Fax:  +1 408-573-1090

     Jari T. Malinen
     Communications Systems Lab
     Nokia Research Center
     313 Fairchild Drive
     Mountain View, California 94043
     USA
     Phone:  +1-650 625-2355
     EMail:  jmalinen@iprg.nokia.com
     Fax:  +1 650 625-2502

     John Loughney
     Nokia Research Center
     Itamerenkatu 11-13
     00180 Helsinki
     Finland

     Phone:  +350 50 483 6242
     EMail:  john.loughney@nokia.com
Carl E. Williams et.al.       Expires December 2002             [Page 13]


Internet Draft           Micro-mobility Problem Space          June 2002


9. Full Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations,
except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards
in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL
NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
Internet Society.











Carl Williams et.al.            Expires December 2002             [Page 14]
