

Network Working Group                                        M. Nakhjiri
Internet-Draft                                                Huawei USA
Intended status: Informational                                   Y. Ohba
Expires: March 19, 2007                                          Toshiba
                                                      September 15, 2006


                   Pre-Authentication AAA requirements
                   draft-nakhjiri-preauth-aaa-req-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 19, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).














Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006


Abstract

   Pre-authentication as a solution for providing expedited
   authenticataion service as part of handover is being considered
   within a potentially new working group.  This draft intends to
   describe the requirements set forth by Pre-authentication procedure
   on AAA protocols and attributes.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  IANA consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.2.  Informative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9





























Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006


1.  Introduction

   When the mobile changes attaches to the network, it is often required
   that the mobile authenticates to the network and receives
   authorization for the services it is requesting.  During handover,
   i.e. when the mobile changes its point of attachment to the network,
   it is typically required of the mobile to perform the authentication
   and authorization process through the new point of attachment.  It is
   becoming more and more common that the authentication and
   authorization process includes an EAP authentication process
   [RFC3748], which is typically both delay and message intensive.  Pre-
   authentication is defined as a handover optimization technique that
   is based on executing EAP between a mobile node and a target
   authenticator via the serving authenticator before the mobile node
   handovers to the target authenticator, so that the delay involved in
   performing EAP signaling is eliminated from the handover critical
   path to the extent possible.  The motivation and problem statement
   for pre-authentication is described in details in
   [I-D.ohba-hokeyp-preauth-ps].  However, both the authentication and
   the authorization process is typically performed between a mobile
   entity (peer) and a central AAA server, it is important to describe
   the functionality required from the AAA protocols and servers to
   support the pre-authentication process.  This document intends to
   tackle the latter problem beyond what is described in the
   documentations describing encapsulation of EAP messaging inside AAA
   protocol messages (RADIUS [RFC3579] or Diameter [RFC4072]).


2.  Terminology and Assumptions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Most of the terminology found in this document uses the EAP keying
   document [I-D.ietf-eap-keying].

   AAA server:  The entity that is the main point of trust and
      authorization (AAA) in the administrative domain, and maintains
      peer information and possibly keying information.  The AAA server
      relies on EAP server for execution of EAP-method authentications.

   EAP server:  The EAP server in pre-authentication has the same
      functionality of a backend EAP server in [RFC3748] and
      [I-D.ietf-eap-keying], i.e, the EAP server terminates the EAP
      authentication method with peer through a pass-through
      authenticator and can perform keying functions.




Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006



   EAP pass-through authenticator:  The pass-through authenticator is
      the entity between a peer and a backend EAP server that is passing
      through EAP Request and Response messages ([RFC3748]) without
      understanding their data content.  It can understand EAP success
      and failure messages.  The role of pass-through authenticator
      during EAP authentication is defined in [RFC3748].



3.  Problem Description

   Most of the AAA documentations today do not distinguish between a
   full authentication and a pre-authentication and this creates a set
   of open issues:
   Pre-authentication authorization:  Many users may not be allowed to
      have more than one logon session at the time.  This means, when
      such users actively engage in an active session (as a result of a
      previously valid authentication), they will not be able to perform
      pre-authentication.  The AAA server currently has no way of
      distinguishing between a full authentication request and a pre-
      authentication request.

   Pre-authentication life time :  Currently AAA protocols define
      attributes (AVPs) carrying life time information for a full
      authentication session.  Even when a user profile and the AAA
      server support pre-authentication function, after the pre-
      authentication of a peer is complete, since the pre-authentication
      may be accompanied with a pre-authorization, the pre-
      authentication is typically valid only for a short amount of time.
      It is currently not possible for a AAA server to indicate to the
      AAA client/ NAS or a peer what the life time of the pre-
      authenticated session is.  In other words, it is not clear to the
      peer or the NAS, when the pre-authentication will expire.

   Pre-authentication retries:  It is typically expected that shortly
      following the pre-authentication process, the mobile entity moves
      to the new point of attachment and converts the pre-authentication
      state to a full authentication state (the procedure for which is
      not the topic of this particular subsection).  However, if the
      peer has yet not moved to the new location and realizes that the
      pre-authentication is expiring, it may perform another pre-
      authentication.  In order to avoid unlimited number of pre-
      authentication tries, it is quite possible that the network policy
      sets a limit on the maximum number of pre-authentication attempts.






Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006



   Completion of network attachment:  Once the peer has successfully
      attached to the new point of attachment, it needs to convert its
      authentication state from pre-authenticated to fully attached and
      authenticated.  There may need to be a mechanism within the AAA
      protocol to provide this indication to the AAA server.

   Session Resumption  In case the peer ping pongs between a network N1
      with which it has a full authentication state to another network
      N2 and then back to N1, it should possible to simply convert the
      full authentication state to a pre-authenticated state.  The
      problems around handling session life time and keying material
      caching needs to be dealt with.

   multiple candidate authenticators:  There may be situations where the
      mobile node may need to make a selection between a number of
      candidate attachment points.  In such cases it is desirable for
      the mobile to perform pre-authentication with multiple
      authenticators.  In such cases the AAA server may need to be aware
      of the situation.

   roaming support  In case the pre-authentication is being performed
      through a serving network that is foreign to the MN's home AAA
      server, the AAA server needs to obtain information about the
      serving network, so that the AAA server can make authorization
      decisions accordingly (Madjid: I am not sure I understand what
      this is all about?? need more details).

   Inter-technology support  Current specifications on pre-
      authentication mostly deal with homogeneous 802.11 networks.  The
      AAA attributes such as Calling-Station-ID [I-D.aboba-radext-wlan]
      may need to be expanded to cover other access technologies.
      Furthermore, heterogeneous handovers may require change of the MN
      identifier as part of the handover.  Investigation on the best
      type of identifiers for multi-access technology MNs is required.

   Network controlled handovers  It is becoming quite common for the
      network operators to maintain the control over the handovers for
      among other thing load balancing and performance reasons.  Hence
      the network may need to direct the MN to perform pre-
      authentication to one a set of candidate authenticators in an
      anticipation for a handover.  The AAA protocol extensions for
      carrying out such procedures needs to be provided.








Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006


4.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses the requirements of the pre-authentication
   solution for a AAA protocol.  Signaling of pre-authentication
   specific data carried over AAA messages through AAA attributes will
   have security implications and will place specific requirements on
   the AAA entities and the AAA protocol, which may or may not be
   natively met by the AAA protocol, depending on what protocol is
   chosen.  Therefore, the choice of the AAA protocol will effect the
   security considerations.  Some examples are as follows

    Key Management:  Guidance on parameters required, caching, storage
      and deletion procedures for the keying material to ensure adequate
      security and authorization provisioning may need to be defined in
      a solution document or in this document.

   AAA proxies:  One important issue arises from the way the
      authorization decisions might be handled at the AAA server during
      network access authentication.  For example, if AAA proxies are
      involved, they may also influence in the authorization decision.

   Channel Binding  TBD

   More details are TBD.


5.  IANA consideration

   This document may later on require allocation of specific RADIUS
   attributes or Diameter AVPs, which require IANA assignments.  The
   specifics are currently TBD.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Alper Yegin for initiation of this
   work.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3748]  Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
              Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",



Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006


              RFC 3748, June 2004.

   [RFC3579]  Aboba, B. and P. Calhoun, "RADIUS (Remote Authentication
              Dial In User Service) Support For Extensible
              Authentication Protocol (EAP)", RFC 3579, September 2003.

   [RFC4072]  Eronen, P., Hiller, T., and G. Zorn, "Diameter Extensible
              Authentication Protocol (EAP) Application", RFC 4072,
              August 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-eap-keying]
              Aboba, B., "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Key
              Management Framework", draft-ietf-eap-keying-14 (work in
              progress), June 2006.

   [I-D.ohba-hokeyp-preauth-ps]
              Ohba, Y., "Pre-authentication Problem Statement",
              draft-ohba-hokeyp-preauth-ps-00 (work in progress),
              April 2006.

   [I-D.aboba-radext-wlan]
              Aboba, B., "RADIUS Attributes for WLAN",
              draft-aboba-radext-wlan-03 (work in progress), June 2006.

7.2.  Informative references

   [802.11r]  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer, "Draft
              Amendment to STANDARD FOR Information Technology -
              Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between
              Systems - LAN/MAN Specific Requirements. Part 11:Wireless
              LAN Medium Access Control   (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
              Specifications: Amendment 8: Fast BSS Transition", IEEE
              std. 802.11r/D2.0.

   [I-D.housley-aaa-key-mgmt]
              Housley, R. and B. Aboba, "Guidance for AAA Key
              Management", draft-housley-aaa-key-mgmt-03 (work in
              progress), July 2006.

   [RFC4017]  Stanley, D., Walker, J., and B. Aboba, "Extensible
              Authentication Protocol (EAP) Method Requirements for
              Wireless LANs", RFC 4017, March 2005.









Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Madjid Nakhjiri
   Huawei USA
   12040 98th AVE NE, Suite 200B
   Kirkland, WA  98034
   USA

   Email: mnakhjiri@Huawei.com


   Yoshihiro Ohba
   Toshiba America Research,Inc
   1 Telcordia Dr.
   Piscataway, NJ  08854
   USA

   Email: yohba@tari.toshiba.com

































Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Preauth-AAA requirements          September 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Nakhjiri & Ohba          Expires March 19, 2007                 [Page 9]


