


PCN Working Group                                               (Editor)
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Standards Track                          April 29, 2008
Expires: October 31, 2008


                     Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes
                 draft-eardley-pcn-marking-behaviour-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 31, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document standardises the two marking behaviours of PCN-nodes:
   threshold marking and excess traffic marking.  Threshold marking
   marks all PCN-packets if the PCN traffic rate is greater than a first
   configured rate.  Excess traffic marking marks a proportion of PCN-
   packets, such that the amount marked equals the traffic rate in
   excess of a second configured rate.





(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Specified PCN-marking behaviour  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Classify and condition function  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Threshold meter function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Excess traffic meter function  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.5.  Marking function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Authors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Appendix A.  Example algorithms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     A.1.  Threshold metering and marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     A.2.  Excess traffic metering and marking  . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix B.  Implementation notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     B.1.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     B.2.  Classify and condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     B.3.  Threshold metering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     B.4.  Excess traffic metering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     B.5.  Marking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15

















(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


1.  Introduction

   [draft-pcn-architecture] describes a general architecture for flow
   admission and termination based on pre-congestion information in
   order to protect the quality of service of established inelastic
   flows within a single DiffServ domain.  The pre-congestion
   information consists of specific markings of PCN-packets.  The edge
   nodes of the DiffServ domain read these markings and convert them
   into flow admission and termination decisions.  Overall the aim is to
   enable PCN-nodes to give an "early warning" of potential congestion
   before there is any significant build-up of PCN-packets in their
   queues.

   This document standardises the two marking behaviours of PCN-nodes.
   In summary, their objectives are:

   o  threshold marking: its objective is to mark all PCN-packets (with
      a "threshold-mark") whenever the rate of PCN-packets is greater
      than some configured rate ("PCN-threshold-rate");

   o  excess traffic marking: whenever the rate of PCN-packets is
      greater than some configured rate ("PCN-excess-rate"), its
      objective is to mark PCN-packets (with an "excess-traffic-mark")
      at a rate equal to the difference between the bit rate of PCN-
      packets and the PCN-excess-rate.

   [draft-pcn-architecture] describes how the admission control
   mechanism limits the PCN-traffic on each link to *roughly* its PCN-
   threshold-rate and how the flow termination mechanism limits the PCN-
   traffic on each link to *roughly* its PCN-excess-rate.

   Section 2 specifies the functions involved, which in outline are:

   o  Packet classify and condition - decide whether an incoming packet
      belongs to a PCN-flow or not; drop (or downgrade) packets if the
      link is overloaded;

   o  Threshold meter - determine whether the rate of PCN-packets is
      greater than the configured PCN-threshold-rate;

   o  Excess traffic meter - measure by how much the rate of PCN-packets
      is greater than the configured PCN-excess-rate;

   o  Mark - actually mark the PCN-packets, if the meter functions
      indicate to do so;

   [pcn-encoding] specifies the actual encoding, which uses the DSCP and
   ECN fields.  In a particular deployment the operator may have three



(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


   encoding states available (so allowing both threshold marking and
   excess traffic marking) or may have only two encoding state, which it
   may use for either threshold marking or excess traffic marking.  This
   leads to the following four use cases:

   1.  an operator requires both admission control and flow termination,
       and has three encoding states available.  Then admission control
       is triggered from PCN-packets that are threshold-marked, and flow
       termination from PCN-packets that are excess-traffic-marked
       [ref].

   2.  an operator requires both admission control and flow termination,
       and has only two encoding states available.  Then both admission
       control and flow termination are triggered from PCN-packets that
       are excess-traffic-marked [ref].

   3.  an operator requires only admission control.  Then admission
       control is triggered from PCN-packets that are threshold-marked
       and only two encoding states are needed.

   4.  an operator requires only flow termination.  Then flow
       termination is triggered from PCN-packets that are excess-
       traffic-marked and only one encoding states are needed.


                                 +---------+   Result
                              +->|Threshold|-------+
                              |  |  Meter  |       |
                              |  +---------+       V
                 +---------+  |                 +--------+
                 |Classify |  |                 |        |     Marked
     Packet  ===>|    &    |==?================>| Marker |===> Packet
     Stream      |Condition|  |                 |        |     Stream
                 +---------+  |                 +--------+
                              |  +---------+       ^
                              |  | Excess  |       |
                              +->| Traffic |-------+
                                 |  Meter  |   Result
                                 +---------+

   Figure 1: Schematic of functions for PCN-marking


2.  Specified PCN-marking behaviour







(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


2.1.  Scope

   The functions defined in the following sub-sections SHOULD be
   implemented on all links in the PCN-domain.

   There are three possibilities regarding encoding states:

   o  three encoding states are available,

      *  one for threshold marks,

      *  one for excess rate marks

      *  one for "not PCN-marked";

   o  two encoding states are available,

      *  one for threshold marks

      *  one for "not PCN-marked";

   o  two encoding states are available,

      *  one for excess rate marks

      *  one for "not PCN-marked".

   The same choice MUST be used throughout a PCN-domain.

   The descriptions in the following sub-sections are functional and are
   not intended to restrict the implementation.

2.2.  Classify and condition function

   A packet MUST be classified as a PCN-packet if the value of its DSCP
   and ECN fields are as described in [draft-pcn-encoding].

   There may be traffic that is more important than PCN that shares the
   same capacity as PCN and is priority scheduled over PCN (perhaps an
   operator's control messages).  Such traffic MUST be metered as though
   it were PCN-traffic, but MUST NOT be PCN-marked.  Such packets,
   together with PCN-packets, are called "metered packets".

   Otherwise the packet MUST NOT be classified as a PCN-packet.

   If the level of traffic is sufficiently high to overload the PCN
   behaviour aggregate(s), then traffic MUST be conditioned.  The three
   possibilities are:



(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


   o  drop PCN-packets;

   o  downgrade PCN-packets to a lower priority behaviour aggregate,
      such as best effort or assured forwarding, and perhaps drop lower
      priority packets;

   o  drop or downgrade other "metered packets".

   If PCN-packets are dropped (or downgraded) then:

   o  excess-traffic-marked PCN-packets SHOULD be preferentially dropped
      (downgraded);

   o  PCN-packets that are dropped (downgraded) SHOULD NOT be metered by
      the Excess traffic Meter.

2.3.  Threshold meter function

   The Threshold Meter MUST have behaviour that is functionally
   equivalent to the following.

   The meter is a token bucket, which is sized in bits and has a
   configured bit rate, termed PCN-threshold-rate.  The amount of tokens
   in the token bucket is termed TB1.fill.  Tokens are added at the PCN-
   threshold-rate, to a maximum value TB1.max.  Tokens are removed equal
   to the size in bits of the metered-packet, to a minimum TB1.fill=0.

   The token bucket has a configured token bucket depth (between 0 and
   TB1.max), termed TB1.threshold.  If TB1.fill < TB1.threshold, then
   the meter indicates to the Marking function that the packet is to be
   threshold-marked; otherwise it does not.

2.4.  Excess traffic meter function

   A packet SHOULD NOT be metered (by this excess traffic meter
   function) in the following two cases:

   o  If the packet is already excess-traffic-marked;

   o  If this PCN-node drops (downgrades) the packet because the link is
      overloaded.

   Otherwise it is metered by the Excess traffic Meter.

   The Excess traffic Meter MUST have behaviour that is functionally
   equivalent to the following.

   The meter is a token bucket, which is sized in bits and has a



(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


   configured bit rate, termed PCN-excess-rate.  The amount of tokens in
   the token bucket is termed TB2.fill.  Tokens are added at the PCN-
   excess-rate, to a maximum value TB2.max.  Tokens are removed equal to
   the size in bits of the metered-packet, to a minimum value of 0.  The
   PCN-excess-rate is greater than (or equal to) the PCN-threshold-rate.

   If the token bucket is empty (TB2.fill = 0), then the meter indicates
   to the Marking function that the packet is to be excess-traffic-
   marked.  If the token bucket is within an MTU of being empty, then
   the meter SHOULD indicate to the Marking function that the packet is
   to be excess-traffic-marked; MTU means the maximum size of PCN-
   packets on the link.  Otherwise the meter does not indicate marking.

2.5.  Marking function

   If the packet is not a PCN-packet, then it MUST NOT be marked.  A
   PCN-packet MUST be marked to reflect the metering results by setting
   its encoding state appropriately, as specified below.  The encoding
   states are defined values of the DSCP and ECN fields, as specified in
   [pcn-encoding].

   There are three possibilities, depending on how many encoding states
   are available:

   o  if three encoding states are available (one for threshold-marked,
      one for excess-traffic-marked and one for "not PCN-marked") then:

      *  the encoding state of a packet that has already been excess-
         traffic-marked is not altered, whatever the meters indicate;

      *  Otherwise:

         +  if both meters indicate marking, then the packet is excess-
            traffic-marked;

         +  if one meter indicates marking and the other doesn't, then
            that marking is applied;

         +  if neither meter indicates marking, then the packet's
            encoding state is not altered.

   o  if two encoding states are available (one for threshold-marked and
      one for "not PCN-marked") then:

      *  if the Threshold Meter indicates marking, then the packet is
         threshold-marked;





(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


      *  otherwise the packet's encoding state is not altered.

   o  if two encoding states are available (one for excess-traffic-
      marked and one for "not PCN-marked") then:

      *  if the Excess traffic Meter indicates marking, then the packet
         is excess-traffic-marked;

      *  otherwise the packet's encoding state is not altered.


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


4.  Security Considerations

   See [draft-pcn-architecture]


5.  Acknowledgements

   Michael Menth, Joe Babiarz, Anna Charny reviewed this draft.

   All the work by many people in the PCN WG.


6.  Authors

   Many people need to be added.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [t]        "", 2004.





(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


Appendix A.  Example algorithms

   Note: This Appendix is informative, not normative.  It is an example
   of algorithms that implement Section 2 and is based on
   [draft-charny-pcn-comparison] and
   [http://www3.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de/staff/menth/Publications/
   Menth08-PCN-Comparison.pdf].

   There is no attempt to optimise the algorithms.  It implements the
   metering and marking functions together.  It is assumed that three
   encoding states are available (one for threshold-marked, one for
   excess-traffic-marked and one for "not PCN-marked").  It is assumed
   that all metered-packets are PCN-packets and that the link is never
   overloaded. <example should be added?>

A.1.  Threshold metering and marking

   A token bucket with the following parameters:

   o  TB1.PCN-threshold-rate: token rate of token bucket (bits/second)

   o  TB1.max: depth of token bucket (bits)

   o  TB1.threshold: marking threshold of token bucket (bits)

   o  TB1.lastUpdate: time the token bucket was last updated (seconds)

   o  TB1.fill: amount of tokens in token bucket (bits)

   A PCN-packet has the following parameters:

   o  packet.size: the size of the PCN-packet (bits)

   o  packet.mark: the PCN encoding state of the packet

   In addition there are the parameters:

   o  now: the current time (seconds)

   The following steps are performed when a PCN-packet arrives on a
   link:

   o  TB1.fill = min(TB1.max, TB1.fill + (now - TB1.lastUpdate) *
      TB1.PCN-threshold-rate); // add tokens to token bucket

   o  TB1.fill = max(0, TB1.fill - packet.size); // remove tokens from
      token bucket




(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


   o  if ((TB1.fill < TB1.threshold) AND (packet.mark != excess-traffic-
      marked)) then packet.mark = threshold-marked; // do threshold
      marking, but don't re-mark packets that are already excess-
      traffic-marked

   o  TB1.lastUpdate = now

A.2.  Excess traffic metering and marking

   A token bucket with the following parameters:

   o  TB2.PCN-excess-rate: token rate of token bucket (bits/second)

   o  TB2.max: depth of TB in token bucket (bits)

   o  TB2.lastUpdate: time the token bucket was last updated (seconds)

   o  TB2.fill: amount of tokens in token bucket (bits)

   A PCN-packet has the following parameters:

   o  packet.size: the size of the PCN-packet (bits)

   o  packet.mark: the PCN encoding state of the packet

   In addition there are the parameters:

   o  now: the current time (seconds)

   o  MTU: the maximum transfer unit of the link (or the known maximum
      size of PCN-packets on the link) (bits)

   The following steps are performed when a PCN-packet arrives on a
   link:

   o  TB2.fill = min(TB2.max, TB2.fill + (now - TB2.lastUpdate) *
      TB2.PCN-excess-rate); // add tokens to token bucket

   o  if (packet.mark != excess-traffic-marked) then TB2.fill = max(0,
      TB2.fill - packet.size); // remove tokens from token bucket, but
      do not meter packets that are already excess-traffic-marked

   o  if (TB2.fill < MTU) then packet.mark = excess-traffic-marked; //
      do (packet size independent) excess traffic marking

   o  TB1.lastUpdate = now





(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


Appendix B.  Implementation notes

   Note: This Appendix is informative, not normative.  It comments on
   Section 2.

B.1.  Scope

   It may be known, eg by the design of the network topology, that some
   links can never be pre-congested (even in unusual circumstances, eg
   after the failure of some links).  There is then no need to implement
   PCN behaviour on those links.

   The meter and marker can be implemented on the ingoing or outgoing
   interface of a PCN-node.  It may be that existing hardware can
   support only one meter and marker per ingoing interface and one per
   outgoing interface.  Then for instance threshold metering and marking
   could be run on all the ingoing interfaces and excess traffic
   metering and marking on all the outgoing interfaces; note that the
   same choice must be made for all the links in a PCN-domain to ensure
   that the two metering behaviours are applied exactly once for all the
   links.

   Note that even if there is only one encoding state both the meters
   are still implemented, in order to ease compatibility between
   equipment and remove a configuration option and associated
   complexity.  Although this means that the Marking function ignores
   indications from one of the meters, they might be logged or acted
   upon in some other way, for example by the management system or an
   explicit signalling protocol; such considerations are out of scope of
   PCN.

B.2.  Classify and condition

   Traffic that has a higher DiffServ priority than PCN, but shares the
   same capacity, is metered as though it were PCN-traffic but cannot be
   PCN-marked.  This means that a meter may indicate a packet is to be
   PCN-marked, but the Marking function knows it cannot be marked.  It
   is left open to the implementation exactly what to do in this case;
   one simple possibility is to mark the next PCN-packet.  Note that
   unless the PCN-packets are a large fraction of all the metered-
   packets then the PCN mechanisms may not work well.

   Preferential dropping of excess-traffic-marked packets: Section 2.2
   specifies: "If the level of traffic is sufficiently high to overload
   the PCN behaviour aggregate(s), then traffic MUST be conditioned ...
   excess-traffic-marked PCN-packets SHOULD be preferentially dropped
   (downgraded)".  This avoids over-termination, with the CL/SM edge
   behaviour, in the event of multiple bottlenecks in the PCN-domain



(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


   [ref].

   Exactly what "preferentially dropped" means is left to the
   implementation.  It is also left to the implementation what to do if
   there are no excess-traffic-marked PCN-packets available at a
   particular instant.

   <should we leave it this open or give some options, eg: definitely
   drop an excess-traffic-marked packet or drop with a higher
   probability; or, if there are no excess rate marked PCN-packets
   available, drop any PCN-packet, drop the next excess-traffic-marked
   PCN-packet>

   Section 2.2 also specifies: "PCN-packets that are dropped
   (downgraded) SHOULD NOT be metered by the Excess traffic Meter."
   This avoids over-termination, with the CL/SM edge behaviour, in the
   event of multiple bottlenecks [ref].

B.3.  Threshold metering

   The description is in terms of a 'token bucket with threshold',
   however the implementation is not standardised.  For example, it
   could equally well be implemented as a virtual queue [ref].

   The behaviour must be functionally equivalent to the description
   above.  "Functionally equivalent" is intended to allow implementation
   freedom over matters such as:

   <is this list helpful? accurate? trying to clarify that there is some
   implementation freedom here>

   o  whether tokens are added to the token bucket at regular time
      intervals or only when a packet is processed

   o  whether the new token bucket depth is calculated before or after
      it is decided whether to mark the packet.  The effect of this is
      simply to shift the sequence of marks by one packet.

   o  when the token bucket is very nearly empty and a packet arrives
      larger than TB1.fill, then the precise change in TB1.fill is up to
      the implementation.  Essentially any behaviour is functionally
      equivalent if either precisely the same set of packets is marked,
      or if the set is shifted by one packet.  For instance, the
      following should all be considered as "functionally equivalent":

      *  set TB1.fill = 0 and indicate threshold-mark to the Marking
         function.




(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


      *  check whether TB1.fill < TB1.threshold and if it is then
         indicate threshold-mark to the Marking function; then set
         TB1.fill = 0.

      *  leave TB1.fill unaltered and indicate threshold-mark to the
         Marking function.

   o  similarly, when the token bucket is very nearly full and a packet
      arrives large than (TB1.max - TB1.fill), then the precise change
      in TB1.fill is up to the implementation.

B.4.  Excess traffic metering

   The description is in terms of a token bucket, however the
   implementation is not standardised.

   As in Section B.3, "functionally equivalent" allows some
   implementation flexibility when the token bucket is very nearly empty
   or very nearly full.

   Packet size independent marking is specified as a SHOULD in Section
   2.4 ( "If the token bucket is within an MTU of being empty, then the
   meter SHOULD indicate to the Marking function that the packet is to
   be excess-traffic-marked; MTU means the maximum size of PCN-packets
   on the link.")  Without it, large packets are more likely to be
   excess-traffic-marked than small packets and this means that, with
   some edge behaviours, flows with large packets are more likely to be
   terminated than flows with small packets [refs: http://
   www3.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de/staff/menth/Publications/
   Menth08-PCN-MFT.pdf & http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
   draft-briscoe-tsvwg-byte-pkt-mark-02.txt].

   Section 2.4 specifies: "A metered-packet SHOULD NOT be metered (by
   this excess traffic meter function) ...  If the packet is already
   excess-traffic-marked".  This avoids over-termination (with some edge
   behaviours) in the event that the PCN-traffic passes through multiple
   bottlenecks in the PCN-domain [ref].  Note that an implementation
   could determine whether the packet is already excess-traffic-marked
   as an integral part of its Classification function.

   Note that TB2.max is independent of TB1.max; TB2.fill is independent
   of TB1.fill (except in that a packet changes both); and the two
   configured rates, PCN-excess-rate and PCN-threshold-rate are
   independent (except that PCN-excess-rate >= PCN-threshold-rate).







(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


B.5.  Marking

   Although the metering functions are described separately from the
   Marking function, they can be implemented in an integrated fashion.

   [pcn-encoding] specifies the encoding states.  In some environments
   encoding states may be scarce, for example MPLS, and then only one
   encoding state may be preferable.

   Section 2.5 states: "if three encoding states are available ... if
   one meter indicates marking and the other doesn't, then that marking
   is applies".  Normally this means that the Threshold Meter indicates
   marking and the Excess traffic Meter doesn't.  However, the reverse
   is possible for a short time - because the meters react at different
   speeds when the traffic rate changes.


Author's Address

   Philip Eardley +++
   BT
   Adastral Park, Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Email: philip.eardley@bt.com

























(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Marking behaviour of PCN-nodes           April 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





(Editor)                Expires October 31, 2008               [Page 15]

