



ENUM                                                           P. Pfautz
Internet-Draft                                                      AT&T
Expires: December 5, 2005                                        S. Lind
                                                               AT&T Labs
                                                            T. Creighton
                                            Comcast Cable Communications
                                                            June 3, 2005


               IANA Carrier/User enumservice Registration
                 draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-user-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she becomes
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 5, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document registers, pursuant to the guidelines in RFC 3761,
   tElephone NUmber Mapping (ENUM) services to allow a single registry
   to support end user and carrier services with independent name



Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


   servers holding the terminal NAPTR (Naming Authority Pointer) records
   identifying the communication services for each.  The to-be-
   registered enumservices make use of non-terminal NAPTR records and
   DDDS (Dynamic Delegation Discovery System) replacement to achieve
   this end.

Conventions used in this document

   RFC2119 [1] provides the interpretations for the key words "MUST",
   "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" found in this document.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   User and Carrier Non-Terminal NAPTRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.   ENUM Service Registration for Carrier ENUM . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.   ENUM Service Registration for User ENUM  . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.   Control of Records in Tier 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   9.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 9


























Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


1.  Introduction

   Work on the implementation of ENUM RFC3761 [2] in the ITU [3] and
   various national bodies [4] to date has been based on a tiered
   architecture with a Tier 0 registry, authoritative for the domain
   e164.arpa, containing NS records delegating domains corresponding to
   country codes (e.g., 1.e164.arpa) to a Tier 1 registry containing NS
   records that in turn delegate domains associated with individual
   E.164 numbers in a given country code.  A Tier 1 registry in these
   instances contains NS records that point to the Tier 2 that contains
   the actual NATPR records for a given E.164 number[3].  Implementation
   of these architectures has tended to assume an end user focus with
   number assignees proactively and uniquely controlling whether their
   numbers are registered into ENUM and being able to select the Tier 2
   registry that contains the actual NATPR records.  As the GSTN is seen
   to evolve towards an application on an underlying IP network,
   carriers have become increasingly interested in using ENUM for
   interconnection, i.e., to provide information, such as a SIP address
   of record, about where interconnecting carriers should direct calls
   to a number which the carrier serves, even where the customer's
   ultimate connection to the carrier's network and the customer's
   premise equipment may not be IP-based.  Also, as VoIP carriers
   proliferate there is an understandable desire to be able to connect
   calls between users of such services without going through the
   circuit switched GSTN.

   These needs have led to proposals for separate "carrier" or
   "infrastructure" ENUM based on a root other than e164.arpa or to
   suggestions that carriers be able to populate NAPTR records in their
   own Tier 2 if the number assignee does not choose to register or in
   the number assignee's Tier 2 if the assignee selects a Tier 2
   provider other than that used by the carrier by which the number is
   served in the GSTN.

   The difficulties with such proposals are that they either require
   construction of a separate parallel tree or complicate provisioning
   and may not support carrier grade service.  In the first case, a
   separate tree raises issues about who would be allowed to populate
   information into it and who would have the ability to access
   information.  In the second case, for example, if the number assignee
   selects a Tier 2 other than the one chosen by the carrier that serves
   their number in the GSTN, the carrier would need to find a way to
   provision its NAPTRs into that Tier 2 which may also not meet carrier
   reliability needs.  Further, obtaining user consent for registration,
   while essential for applications that may open vulnerabilities to an
   end user, is burdensome where all numbers must be registered for
   effective interconnection of carriers and may be unnecessary where
   registration only involves association of E.164 numbers with carrier



Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


   network elements rather than the end user directly.

2.  User and Carrier Non-Terminal NAPTRs

   As discussed above, ENUM implementation has been based on a tiered
   architecture with Tier 1 containing NS records that point to the Tier
   2 that contains the actual NATPR records for a given E.164 number[3].
   It is here proposed that, instead of using NS records to delegate to
   a Tier 2 name server, the DDDS substitution capability be employed to
   allow non-terminal NAPTR records to generate new DNS queries for
   terminal NAPTRs to different domains based on the enumservice
   designation of "carrier" or "user."  Section 1.3 of RFC 3761
   ("Application of local policy") states "there are ... cases (non-
   terminal Rules) where two different Rules both match the given
   Application Unique String...  For example, by using a non-terminal
   NAPTR a given set of numbers is sent to some private-dialing-plan-
   specific zone."  Section 2.4 ("Flags") states "If this [the terminal
   "u" ] flag is not present then this Rule is non-terminal.  If a Rule
   is non-terminal then clients MUST use the key produced by this
   Rewrite Rule as the new key in the DDDS loop (i.e., causing the
   client to query for new NAPTR records at the domain name that is the
   result of this Rule)."

   Because the object of the query to Tier 1 is to obtain a domain name
   to query rather than a URI, we use the Replacement field of the NAPTR
   rather than the Regexp as described in RFC 3403 RFC3403 [5].  Thus
   records for a number in Tier 1 might look like:

   $Origin 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.7.9.4.1.e164.arpa.

   IN NAPTR 100 50 "" "E2U+user"   "" 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.7.9.4.1.joesenum.com

   IN NAPTR 100 50 "" "E2U+carrier"   "" 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.7.9.4.1.telco.net

   The first record would result in a query to the nameserver designated
   by the end user assignee of the E.164 number and the second to the
   nameserver designated by the carrier of record in the GSTN for the
   E.164 number.  Note that as the Tier 1 NAPTRs are non-terminal,
   neither contains a specific communication protocol type in the
   enumservice spec (e.g., "sip").  NAPTR records for acutal
   communication services would only be provided in the corresponding
   user or carrier name server where the NAPTR records are terminal and
   would include the enumservice specs such as for SIP, i.e., "E2U+sip".

3.  ENUM Service Registration for Carrier ENUM

   As defined in RFC3761 [2], the following is a template for the
   registration of the enumservice specified in this document.



Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


   ENUMservice Name: "E2U+carrier"

   Type(s) "carrier"

   Subtypes: N/A

   URI Schemes(s) N/A

   Functional Specification: see Section 2

   Security Considerations: see Section 6

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Penn Pfautz (ppfautz@att.com)

   Any other information the author deems interesting: This ENUMservice
   is only to be used with non-terminal NAPTR records.  See Section 5.

4.  ENUM Service Registration for User ENUM

   As defined in RFC3761 [2], the following is a template for the
   registration of the enumservice specified in this document.

   ENUMservice Name: "E2U+user"

   Type(s) "user"

   Subtypes: N/A

   URI Schemes(s) N/A

   Functional Specification: see Section 2

   Security Considerations: see Section 6

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author: Penn Pfautz (ppfautz@att.com)

   Any other information the author deems interesting: This ENUMservice
   is only to be used with non-terminal NAPTR records.  See Section 5.

5.  Control of Records in Tier 1

   Although two records are populated in Tier 1, the lines of authority
   for each are clear.  The E2U+user record is controlled by, and only
   populated at the request of, the end user assignee of the E.164



Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


   number.  The assignee has the right to select a registrar and a name
   server ("Tier 2") provider of their choice in a competitive
   enivronment.  The E2U+carrier record, on the other hand, is
   controlled by the GSTN carrier of record for the E.164 number (i.e.,
   the service provider who has been allocated the block of numbers in
   which the number in question is contained or to which the number has
   been ported).

   Both end users and carriers may populate different NAPTR records in
   their respective domains.  In such cases the client originating the
   ENUM query will be responsible for obtaining all (or as many as
   possible) ENUM records and for deciding which records to make use of
   in initiating communication.

6.  Security Considerations

   Existing security considerations for ENUM detailed in RFC3761 [2]
   still apply.  Note that some registration validation issues
   concerning end user ENUM may not apply to carrier ENUM.  Where the
   Tier 1 registry is able to identify the carrier serving a number
   e.g., based on industry data for number block assignments and number
   portability, registration might be more easily automated and a
   separate registrar not required.

   Some parties have expressed concern that a carrier ENUM could
   compromise end user privacy by making it possible for others to
   identify unlisted or unpublished numbers based on their registration
   in ENUM.  This can be avoided if carriers register all of the their
   allocated (as opposed to assigned) numbers.  Unassigned numbers
   should be provisioned to route to the carrier's network in the same
   fashion as assigned numbers and only then provide an indication that
   they are unassigned.  In that way, carrier registration of a number
   in ENUM provides no more information about status of a number than
   could be obtained by dialing it.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the 'E2U+carrier' and 'E2U+user' enumservices
   under the enumservice registry described in the IANA considerations
   in RFC 3761.  Details of the registration are given in sections 3 and
   4.

8.  Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to thank Rich Shockey and Patrik Faltstrom for their
   helpful discussion on this topic.





Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


9.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [3]  International Telecommunications Union, "Supplement 3 to
        Recommendation E.164: Operational and administrative issues
        associated with national implementations of the ENUM functions",
        2004.

   [4]  ENUM Forum, "ENUM Forum Specifications for US Implementation of
        ENUM, Document 6000_1 0", March 2003.

   [5]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403,
        October 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Penn Pfautz
   AT&T
   200 S. Laurel Ave
   Middletown, NJ  07748
   USA

   Email: ppfautz@att.com


   Steven Lind
   AT&T Labs
   180 Park Ave
   Florham Park, NJ  07932-0971
   USA

   Email: slind@att.com











Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


   Tom Creighton
   Comcast Cable Communications
   1500 Market Street
   Philadelphia, PA  19102
   USA

   Email: tom_creighton@cable.comcast.com












































Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.





Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              User/Carrier ENUM                  June 2005


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Pfautz, et al.          Expires December 5, 2005               [Page 10]


