





Internet Engineering Task Force                         Scott Hollenbeck
Internet-Draft                          Network Solutions, Inc. Registry
March 9, 2000                                 Expires: September 9, 2000
Category-to-be: Informational


        Generic Registry Registrar Protocol (GRRP) Requirements
                  <draft-hollenbeck-grrp-reqs-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
  provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
  or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

  This document describes high-level functional and interface
  requirements for a client-server protocol for the registration and
  management of Internet domain names in both generic Top Level Domain
  (gTLD) registries and country code Top Level Domain (ccTLD)
  registries.  Specific technical requirements detailed for protocol
  design are not presented here.  Instead, this document focuses on the
  basic functions and interfaces required of a protocol to support
  multiple registry and registrar operational models.

Conventions Used In This Document

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].






Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


Table of Contents

    1. Introduction .................................................    2
    1.1 Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations ....................    2
    2. General Description ..........................................    3
    2.1 System Perspective ..........................................    3
    2.2 System Functions ............................................    4
    2.3 User Characteristics ........................................    4
    2.4 Assumptions and Dependencies ................................    4
    3. Specific Requirements ........................................    5
    3.1 Functional Requirements .....................................    5
    3.2 External Interface Requirements .............................    7
    3.3 Performance Requirements ....................................    7
    3.4 Design Constraints ..........................................    7
    3.5 Service Attributes ..........................................    8
    3.6 Other Requirements ..........................................    9
    4. Internationalization Considerations ..........................    9
    5. IANA Considerations ..........................................   10
    6. Security Considerations ......................................   10
    7. References ...................................................   11
    8. Author's Address .............................................   11
    9. Full Copyright Statement .....................................   11

1. Introduction

  The advent of shared domain name registration systems illustrates the
  utility of a generic protocol for registry-registrar interaction.  A
  standard generic protocol will allow registrars to communicate with
  multiple registries through a common interface, reducing operational
  complexity and expanding business opportunities.  This document
  describes the high-level functional and interface requirements for a
  generic registry registrar protocol.  Detailed technical requirements
  are not addressed in this document.

  This document is being discussed on the "rrp" mailing list.  To join
  the list, send a message to <majordomo@NSIRegistry.net> with the words
  "subscribe rrp" in the body of the message.  There is a web site for
  the list archives at <http://www.NSIRegistry.net/maillist/rrp>.

1.1 Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations

  ccTLD: Country Code Top Level Domain.  ".us" is an example of a ccTLD.

  CORE: Council of Registrars

  Exclusive Registration System: A domain name registration system in
  which registry services are limited to a single registrar.  Exclusive
  Registration Systems may be either loosely coupled (in which case the



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  separation between registry and registrar systems is readily evident),
  or tightly coupled (in which case the separation between registry and
  registrar systems is obscure).

  gTLD: Generic Top Level Domain.  ".com" is an example of a gTLD.

  IANA: Internet Assigned Numbers Authority

  IETF: Internet Engineering Task Force

  NSI: Network Solutions, Inc.

  Registrant: An entity that registers domain names in a registry
  through the services provided by a registrar.  Registrants include
  individuals, organizations, and corporations.

  Registrar: An entity that provides front-end domain name registration
  services to registrants, providing a public interface to registry
  services.

  Registry: An entity that provides back-end domain name registration
  services to registrars, managing a central repository of information
  for a given TLD.

  Shared Registration System: A domain name registration system in which
  registry services are shared among multiple independent registrars.
  Shared Registration Systems require a loose coupling between
  registrars and the registry.

  TLD: Top Level Domain.  A generic term used to describe both gTLDs and
  ccTLDs.

2. General Description

  A basic understanding of domain name registration systems provides
  focus for the enumeration of functional and interface requirements of
  a protocol to serve those systems.  This section provides a high-level
  description of domain name registration systems to provide context for
  the requirements identified later in this document.

2.1 System Perspective

  A domain name registration system consists of a protocol and
  associated software and hardware that permits registrars to provide
  Internet domain name registration services within the TLDs
  administered by a registry.  A registration system may be shared among
  multiple competing registrars, or it may be served by a single
  registrar that is either tightly or loosely coupled with back-end



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  registry services.  The system providing registration services for the
  .com, .net, and .org gTLDs is an example of a shared registration
  system serving multiple competing registrars.  The systems providing
  registration services for many ccTLDs and the .gov and .mil gTLDs are
  examples of TLDs served by a single registrar.

2.2 System Functions

  Registrars access a registry through a protocol to register domain
  names and perform domain name management functions.  Management
  functions include the registration of contacts and name servers;
  renewal or extension of a domain name registration period; deletions
  of domain names, name servers, and contacts; transfers of domain
  names; modification of domain names, name servers, and contacts;
  registration queries; and status queries.

  The registry generates DNS zone files for the TLDs it serves.  These
  zone files are updated and distributed to a series of name servers
  that provide the foundation for the domain name system.

  Registries also provide a whois search capability that allows non-
  registrar users to perform basic information queries for the objects
  managed by the registry.  Registry whois services may be centralized
  or distributed.  A centralized registry whois service provides access
  to all registered objects without the need for referral to other whois
  services.  A distributed registry whois service provides basic object
  information at the registry level, and requires referral to other
  registry or registrar whois services to obtain information for objects
  not registered with the queried registry.

2.3 User Characteristics

  Protocol users fall into two broad categories: registrars who develop
  or use protocol client implementations, and registries who develop or
  use protocol server implementations.  The protocol provides a loose
  coupling between a registry and the registrars that access the
  registry.

2.4 Assumptions and Dependencies

  There is one and only one registry for a given TLD.

  A registry can be authoritative for more than one TLD.

  Some registry operations MAY be billable.  The impact of a billable
  operation SHOULD be mitigated through the specification of non-
  billable operations that allow a registrar to make an informed
  decision before executing a billable operation.



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


3. Specific Requirements

  This section describes the complete, high-level requirements for a
  generic registry registrar protocol.  Specific sub-sections that are
  not relevant are explicitly noted to clearly indicate the absence of
  requirements in particular areas.

3.1 Functional Requirements

  Functional requirements define the object registration and management
  services that must be provided by a generic registry registrar
  protocol.

3.1.1 Object Registration

  The protocol MUST provide services to register Internet domain names.
  Domain names MUST be registered for a yearly period with a definite
  expiration date and time derived from the date and time of initial
  registration.

  The protocol MUST provide services to register name servers.  Name
  server registration MUST NOT be limited to a specific period of time.

  The protocol MUST provide services to register contact information
  describing entities associated with the registration of domain names
  and name servers.  Contact registration MUST NOT be limited to a
  specific period of time.

3.1.2 Object Association

  The protocol MUST provide services to associate name servers with
  domain names.

  The protocol MUST provide services to associate contacts with name
  servers and domain names.

3.1.3 Object Modification

  The protocol MUST provide services to modify information associated
  with registered Internet domain names.

  The protocol MUST provide services to modify information associated
  with registered name servers.

  The protocol MUST provide services to modify information associated
  with registered contacts.

3.1.4 Object Transfer



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  The protocol MUST provide services to transfer domain names among
  authorized registrars.

  The protocol MUST provide services to transfer name servers among
  authorized registrars.

  The protocol MUST provides services to notify both the original
  sponsoring registrar and the potential new registrar of requested
  object transfers.

  The protocol MUST provide services that allow the original sponsoring
  registrar to explicitly approve or reject the transfer of an object.

3.1.5 Object Renewal/Extension

  The protocol MUST provide services to renew or extend the registration
  of registered Internet domain names.  The renewal or extension period
  MUST be measured in annual increments.

3.1.6 Object Registration Status

  The protocol MUST provide services to determine if a domain name
  exists in the registry.

  The protocol MUST provide services to determine if a name server
  exists in the registry.

  The protocol MUST provide services to determine if a contact exists in
  the registry.

3.1.7 Object Deletion

  The protocol MUST provide services to remove a domain name from the
  registry.

  The protocol MUST provide services to remove a name server from the
  registry.

  The protocol MUST provide services to remove a contact from the
  registry.

3.1.8 Object Information Query

  The protocol MUST provide services to retrieve information describing
  a domain name from the registry.

  The protocol MUST provide services to retrieve information describing
  a name server from the registry.



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  The protocol MUST provide services to retrieve information describing
  a contact from the registry.

3.2 External Interface Requirements

  External interfaces define the interaction points between a system and
  entities that communicate with the system.  Specific areas of interest
  include user interfaces, hardware interfaces, software interfaces, and
  communications interfaces.

3.2.1 User Interfaces

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST NOT define any features
  that introduce user interface limitations.

3.2.2 Hardware Interfaces

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST NOT define any features
  that introduce hardware interface limitations.

3.2.3 Software Interfaces

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST NOT define any features
  that introduce software interface limitations.

3.2.4 Communications Interfaces

  Registries, registrars, and registrants interact using a wide spectrum
  of communications interfaces built upon multiple protocols, including
  transport layer protocols such as TCP and application layer protocols
  such as SMTP.  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST be
  serviceable over multiple standard communications protocols.

3.3 Performance Requirements

  Run-time performance is an absolutely critical aspect of protocol
  usability.  While performance is very heavily dependent on the
  hardware and software architecture that implements a protocol,
  protocol features can have a direct impact on the ability of the
  underlying architecture to provide optimal performance.  A generic
  registry registrar protocol MUST be usable in both high volume and low
  volume operating environments.

3.4 Design Constraints

  Protocol designers need to be aware of issues beyond functional and
  interface requirements when balancing protocol design decisions.  This
  section describes additional factors that may have an impact on



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  protocol design, including standards compliance and hardware
  limitations.

3.4.1 Standards Compliance

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST conform to current IETF
  standards.  Standards for domain and host name syntax, IP address
  syntax, and security are particularly relevant.  Emerging standards
  for the domain name system SHOULD be considered as they approach
  maturity.

3.4.2 Hardware Limitations

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST NOT define any features
  that preclude hardware independence.

3.5 Service Attributes

  Elements of service beyond functional and interface requirements are
  essential factors to consider as part of a protocol design effort.
  This section describes several important service elements that MUST be
  addressed by protocol designers, including reliability, availability,
  scalability, and maintainability.

3.5.1 Reliability

  Reliability is a measure of the extent to which a protocol provides a
  consistent, dependable level of service.  Reliability is an important
  attribute for a domain name management protocol.  An unreliable
  protocol increases the risk of data exchange errors, which at one
  extreme may have a direct impact on protocol usability and at the
  other extreme may introduce discontinuity between registry and
  registrar data stores.  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST
  thus include features that maximize reliability at the application
  protocol layer.  Services provided by underlying transport, session,
  and presentation protocols SHOULD also be considered when addressing
  application protocol reliability.

3.5.2 Availability

  Availability is a measure of the extent to which the services provided
  by a protocol are accessible for an intended use.  Availability of an
  application layer protocol is primarily dependent on the software and
  hardware systems that implement the protocol.  That is, the systems
  that implement the protocol must themselves be inherently available.
  As such, a generic registry registrar protocol MUST NOT include any
  features that impinge on the underlying reliability of the software
  and hardware systems needed to implement the protocol.



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


3.5.3 Scalability

  Scalability is a measure of the extent to which a protocol can
  accommodate use growth while preserving acceptable operational
  characteristics.  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST be
  capable of operating at an acceptable level as the load on registry
  and registrar systems increases.

3.5.4 Maintainability

  Maintainability is a measure of the extent to which a protocol can be
  adapted or modified to address unforeseen operational needs or
  defects.  A generic registry registrar protocol SHOULD be developed
  under the nominal working group processes of the IETF to provide a
  well-known channel for ongoing maintenance.

3.6 Other Requirements

  Certain aspects of anticipated operational environments should be
  considered when designing a generic registry registrar protocol.
  Areas of concern include database operations, daily operations, and
  site adaptation.

3.6.1 Database Requirements

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST NOT have any database
  dependencies.  However, efficient use of database operations and
  resources MUST be considered as part of the protocol design effort.
  The protocol SHOULD provide atomic features that can be efficiently
  implemented to minimize database load for anticipated high volume
  transactions.

3.6.2 Operations Requirements

  Registry-registrar interactions at the protocol level SHOULD operate
  without human intervention.  A generic registry registrar protocol
  SHOULD NOT require operator involvement to complete transactions.

3.6.3 Site Adaptation Requirements

  Registries and registrars have varying business and operational
  requirements.  Several factors, including governance standards, local
  laws, customs, and business practices all play roles in determining
  how registries and registrars are operated.  A generic registry
  registrar protocol MUST be flexible enough to operate in diverse
  registry-registrar environments.

4. Internationalization Considerations



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  Current Internet standards restrict the encoding of Internet host and
  domain names to a subset of the 7-bit US-ASCII character set.
  Registries and registrars now serve customers whose native languages
  require encodings other than US-ASCII, which automatically disallows
  use of those languages when registering host and domain names.
  Support for internationalized host and domain names will greatly
  increase world-wide usability of a generic registry registrar
  protocol, so standards for internationalized host and domain names
  MUST be considered during the protocol design process.

5. IANA Considerations

  IANA has assigned several TCP and UDP ports for use within shared
  domain name registration systems.  The assignments can be identified
  in two broad categories: those assigned for use with the CORE Shared
  Registry System Protocol (SRSP) and those assigned for use with the
  NSI Registry Registrar Protocol (RRP).

  The CORE SRSP assignments are as follows:

  srssend         362/tcp    SRS Send
  srssend         362/udp    SRS Send
  srsp            2682/tcp   SRSP
  srsp            2682/udp   SRSP

  The NSI RRP assignments are as follows:

  rrp             648/tcp    Registry Registrar Protocol (RRP)
  rrp             648/udp    Registry Registrar Protocol (RRP)

  These assignments should be preserved as long as the corresponding
  systems are operational.  Additional port assignments may be required
  of IANA if the design of the generic registry registrar protocol
  specifies transport using TCP and/or UDP.

6. Security Considerations

  A generic registry registrar protocol MUST provide several security
  services including confidentiality, authentication, access control,
  integrity, and non-repudiation.  Confidentiality services are required
  to protect sensitive exchanged information from inadvertent
  disclosure.  Authentication services are required to confirm the
  claimed identity of registries and registrars before engaging in
  online transactions.  Access control services are required to restrict
  registrar access to data that belongs to other registrars.  Integrity
  services are required to guarantee that exchanged data has not been
  altered between the registry and the registrar.  Non-repudiation
  services are required to assure that the sender of a transaction can



Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Generic RRP Requirements           March 9, 2000


  not deny being the source of the transaction, and that the recipient
  cannot deny being the receiver of the transaction.

7. References

  [RFC2119] S. Bradner: "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate
  Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8. Author's Address

  Scott Hollenbeck
  Network Solutions, Inc. Registry
  505 Huntmar Park Dr.
  Herndon, VA 20170
  USA
  shollenb@netsol.com

9. Full Copyright Statement

  Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2000.  All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
  distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
  provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
  Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined
  in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to
  translate it into languages other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
  NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
  WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.








Hollenbeck             Expires September 9, 2000               [Page 11]
