


Network Working Group                                             F. Xia
Internet-Draft                                               B. Sarikaya
Expires: August 21, 2007                                      Huawei USA
                                                       February 17, 2007


    Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6 Operation on Point-to-Point Links
                     draft-xia-mipshop-fmip-ptp-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


Abstract

   FMIPv6 standard currently assumes that the mobile nodes are connected
   to the access routers using a shared link and does not define the
   operation over Point-to-Point links.  In this document we define
   FMIPv6 operation over the Point-to-Point links.  A PAR advertises
   PrRtAdv including one or more aggregate prefixes of a NAR to an MN;
   The MN formulates it's provisional NCoAs with the aggregate
   prefix(es); The MN initiates FMIPv6 procedure including the
   provisional NCoAs.  Once detecting provisional NCoAs of the MN, the
   NAR assigns a unique prefix called the dedicated prefix to MN and the
   MN configures it's final NCoAs.  Both reactive and predictive modes
   of FMIPv6 are explained.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  FMIPv6 Operation on Point-to-Point Links  . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  IANA consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     8.2.  Informative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9






















Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


1.  Introduction

   Fast handovers for Mobile IPv6 (FMIPv6) [RFC4068] aims at reducing
   the handover latency by reducing the time to configure a new
   CoA(NCoA) for a mobile node (MN).  In FMIPv6, MN formulates a
   prospective NCoA when it is still present on the previous access
   router (PAR)'s link.  However, FMIPv6 assumes that MN is on a shared
   link.

   [I-D.ietf-16ng-ipv6-link-model-analysis] provides different IPv6 link
   models that are suitable for 802.16 based networks and provides
   analysis of various considerations for each link model and the
   applicability of each link model under different deployment
   scenarios.  [I-D.ietf-16ng-ipv6-over-ipv6cs] specifies the addressing
   and operation of IPv6 over the IPv6 specific part of the packet
   convergence sublayer of IEEE Std 802.16e [802.16e], and Point-to-
   Point Link Model is recommended.  Also, 3GPP and 3GPP2 have earlier
   adopted the Point-to-Point link model.

   It is impossible to formulate a prospective NCoA as per [RFC4068]
   when Point-to-Point model is adopted.  MN configures its NCoA from
   the prefix shared by NAR breaks the Point-to-Point link model.

   In this document, we first explain the problems associated with
   FMIPv6 on Point-to-Point links followed by a detailed explanation of
   the modified FMIPv6 operation on Point-to-Point links.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The terminology in this document is based on the definitions in
   [RFC4068], in addition to the ones specified in this section.

   Point-to-Point Link Model:  In this model, a set of MAC transport
      connections between an MN and an AR are treated as a single link.
      Each link is allocated one or more separate, unique prefixes by
      the AR.
   Aggregate Prefix:  In Point-to-Point Link Model, AR should broadcast
      the prefixes (MNs route information) dynamically upstream, and
      this causes high routing protocol traffic ( OSPF, etc.).  To solve
      the problem, route aggregation should be used.  For example, each
      AR can be assigned a /48 prefix, while an MN's /64 prefix is
      derived from the /48 prefix extension.  The main, higher-level
      prefix is called the Aggregate Prefix.  An AR only broadcasts the



Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


      aggregate prefix upstream.
   Dedicated Prefix:  The prefix derived from the aggregate prefix and
      allocated for an MN is called a Dedicated Prefix.
   Provisional NCoA:  NCoA obtained from the aggregate prefix.
   Modified NCoA:  NCoA obtained from the dedicated prefix.


3.  Problem Statement

   The following are operations as per [RFC4068]:
   o  NCoA configuration.  An MN sends a Router Solicitation for Proxy
      Advertisement (RtSolPr) to its access router to resolve one or
      more Access Point Identifiers to subnet-specific information.  In
      response, the access router sends a Proxy Router Advertisement
      (PrRtAdv) message containing one or more [AP-ID, AR-Info] tuples.
      AR-Info contains an NAR's L2 and IP addresses, and the prefix
      valid on the interface to which the Access Point (identified by
      AP-ID) is attached.  With the prefix provided in the PrRtAdv
      message, the MN formulates a prospective NCoA.

   In Point-to-Point link model, each MN has one or more dedicated
   prefixes, that is, different MNs have different prefixes.  The
   prefixes could be allocated dynamically.  When an MN attaches an AR,
   the AR should delegate one or more dedicated prefixes for it; when
   the MN detaches from the AR, the MN's prefixes are released, and can
   be reused by other MNs.  The number of unique prefixes in this
   operation can be huge.

   In [RFC4068], the prefix in AR-Info is one of valid interfaces to
   which the Access Point (identified by AP-ID) is attached, and the
   prefix is not a dedicated prefix.  An MN can't use the prefix in AR-
   info to formulate it's NCoA.  A PAR can't get NCoA's prefix of an MN
   without complicated signaling exchange with NAR.


4.  FMIPv6 Operation on Point-to-Point Links

   The simplest fix to the problem described in the previous section is
   as follows: NARs assign a unique prefix to each MN that could
   handover under this NAR.  This prefix will be included in AR-Info.
   PAR sends this prefix in the PrRtAdv message.

   The disadvantages of the simplistic approach are that it makes prefix
   management complicated on NARs and that there are extra signaling
   exchanges between PAR and NAR.  If MN does not handover then the
   prefix assigned should be reclaimed and assigned to another MN.
   There could potentially be large number of such prefixes in high
   mobility areas.  Because of this we propose the following approach in



Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


   which MN is assigned a dedicated prefix only if MN handovers to this
   NAR.

   The main idea of our solution is to include the aggregate prefix in
   the AR-Info.  Then the MN can use the prefix to formulate NCoA.  We
   call it provisional NCoA.  Each aggregate prefix advertised by the
   candidate NARs MUST be unique.

   The following adaptation can be used in the predictive mode of
   FMIPv6:
   o  An MN receives aggregate prefix in AR-Info of PrRtAdv, and
      formulates its provisional NCoA.  Then, the MN sends FBU message
      to PAR with NCoA option, link layer information of the MN, and so
      on.  The PAR sends this information to an NAR in HI message.
   o  On receiving the HI, NAR processes the message as per [RFC4068] if
      the prefix of the NCoA is not an aggregate prefix of the NAR.
      Otherwise, the NAR allocates one or more dedicated prefixes for
      the MN based on it's link-layer address (MAC).  NAR generates a
      new NCoA by replacing the provisional NCoA's prefix part with the
      dedicated prefix.  The modified NCoA is then delivered to the MN
      through HAck and FBack message.  The MN MUST use the modified
      NCoA.

   The following adaptation can be used in the reactive mode of FMIPv6:
   o  An MN encapsulates FBU in FNA and sends them together to NAR.  The
      source address of FNA is the provisional NCoA.  If the prefix of
      the NCoA corresponding to the FNA message is not an aggregate
      prefix, the NAR processes the message as per [RFC4068].
      Otherwise, the NAR assigns one or more prefixes for the MN based
      on Mobility Header Link-Layer Address (MH-LLA) option in the FNA.
      A modified NCoA is then formulated by replacing the provisional
      NCoA's prefix part.  The NAR sends a Router Advertisement with the
      NAACK option in which it includes the modified NCoA.  The MN then
      sends another FNA with modified NCoA as source IP address to NAR.
      The NAR processes the FNA as per [RFC4068].


5.  Security Considerations

   FMIPv6 operation on Point-to-Point links does not introduce any new
   security threats and the security provided by FMIPv6 applies
   completely.


6.  IANA consideration

   None.




Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


7.  Acknowledgements


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative references

   [802.16e]  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer,
              "Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers
              for Combined Fixed  and Mobile Operation in Licensed
              Bands",  IEEE 802.16e/D12.

   [802.21]   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer, "Draft
              IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks:
              Media  Independent Handover Services",  IEEE P802.21/
              D00.05.

   [RFC4068]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068,
              July 2005.

   [I-D.haddad-mipshop-optisend]
              Haddad, W., "Secure Neighbor Discovery (SEND) Optimization
              and Adaptation for Mobility:  The OptiSEND Protocol",
              draft-haddad-mipshop-optisend-02 (work in progress),
              October 2006.

   [I-D.haddad-mipshop-fmipv6-auth]
              Haddad, W. and S. Krishnan, "Authenticating FMIPv6
              Handovers", draft-haddad-mipshop-fmipv6-auth-02 (work in
              progress), September 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-mipshop-fh80216e]
              Jang, H., "Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers over IEEE 802.16e
              Networks", draft-ietf-mipshop-fh80216e-01 (work in
              progress), January 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-16ng-ipv6-over-ipv6cs]
              Patil, B., "IPv6 Over the IP Specific part of the Packet
              Convergence sublayer in 802.16  Networks",
              draft-ietf-16ng-ipv6-over-ipv6cs-07 (work in progress),
              January 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-16ng-ipv6-link-model-analysis]



Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


              Madanapalli, S., "Analysis of IPv6 Link Models for 802.16
              based Networks",
              draft-ietf-16ng-ipv6-link-model-analysis-02 (work in
              progress), January 2007.















































Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Frank Xia
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr. Suite 100
   Plano, TX  75075

   Phone: +1 972-509-5599
   Email: xiayangsong@huawei.com


   Behcet Sarikaya
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr. Suite 100
   Plano, TX  75075

   Phone: +1 972-509-5599
   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org

































Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      FMIPv6 over Point-to-Point Links       February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Xia & Sarikaya           Expires August 21, 2007                [Page 9]


