RADIUSEXT Working Group                                       Paul Funk 
Internet-Draft                                      Funk Software, Inc. 
Category: Standards Track  
<draft-funk-radiusext-shared-secret-amp-00.txt>             August 2004 

                                     

              RADIUS Shared Secret Security Amplification 
                                     

Status of this Memo 

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions 
   of Section 10 of RFC2026. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved. 

Abstract 

   This draft describes how a mechanism defined in [PKCS-5] can be used 
   to amplify the security of a RADIUS shared secret; namely, that a 
   precursor secret is hashed many times to produce an amplified shared 
   secret for use in RADIUS. 

   A dictionary attack against the resulting shared secret will be 
   infeasible due to its high entropy. A dictionary attack against the 
   precursor secret will require the attacker to apply the same hashing 
   process to each candidate precursor secret to derive a candidate 
   RADIUS shared secret, prior to applying it to the RADIUS packet. 

   This approach allows administrators to use the same types of secrets 
   that they are comfortable with as precursor secrets. The algorithm 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


   to generate the amplified shared secret is deterministic, so the 
   precursor shared secret is all that needs to be remembered. 

   Unlike approaches that require changes to RADIUS servers and 
   clients, the amplification approach is compatible with all current 
   equipment. It is simply a means to generate a shared secret, which 
   then may be configured in the NAS or RADIUS server just as any 
   shared secret would be. For example, a simple utility can accept the 
   precursor secret, amplify it, and present it to the administrator, 
   who may copy and paste it into the configuration application of a 
   RADIUS server or NAS. 

Table of Contents 

1.  Introduction......................................................2 
2.  The Amplification Algorithm.......................................3 
2.1    The Salt......................................................4 
3.  Deployment Options................................................5 
4.  Security Considerations...........................................6 
5.  References........................................................6 
6.  Author's Address..................................................7 
7.  Full Copyright Statement..........................................7 
    

1. Introduction 

   The RADIUS protocol relies on a shared secret to authenticate 
   messages between client and server, as well as to encrypt sensitive 
   data such as session keys. The cryptography used with shared secrets 
   involves nothing stronger than hashing functions, making them 
   vulnerable to off-line dictionary attack by anyone capable of 
   eavesdropping on RADIUS traffic. 

   Though it is often recommended that high entropy shared secrets be 
   chosen, or that IPsec be used to provide yet stronger protection 
   [RFC3580], such recommendations do not typically induce the hoped for 
   behavior modification in network administrators, who by and large 
   continue to use shared secrets they find easy to remember. 

   This is hardly surprising. The choice of a strong password must be 
   weighed against the likelihood of forgetting it, or the security 
   implications of having to write it down. IPsec, for its part, is 
   difficult to set up, nor is it even available on many NAS platforms. 

   While these vulnerabilities and the means of exploiting them have 
   long been understood, RADIUS shared secrets have recently become the 
   object of renewed despite. For example, [VULN] describes how a layer 
   2 attack can attract RADIUS packets to the attacker's network 
   device, after which an off-line dictionary attack may be mounted.  





Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


   The authors of [VULN] suggest that IPsec protection of RADIUS 
   traffic be made a requirement, not just a recommendation. But it can 
   hardly be expected that changing a "SHOULD" to a "MUST" will alter 
   reality. Nor would it necessarily be desirable, given the costs of 
   introducing IPsec on NAS platforms as well as the IPsec deployment 
   challenges that many administrators can only contemplate with dread. 

   Fortunately, the means of mitigating this variation of the "weak 
   password" problem is as well understood as the problem itself. This 
   draft describes how a mechanism defined in [PKCS-5] can be used to 
   amplify the security of a shared secret; namely, that a precursor 
   secret is hashed many times to produce an amplified shared secret 
   for use in RADIUS.  

   A dictionary attack against the resulting shared secret will be 
   infeasible due to its high entropy. A dictionary attack against the 
   precursor secret will require the attacker to apply the same hashing 
   process to each candidate precursor secret to derive a candidate 
   RADIUS shared secret, prior to applying it to the RADIUS packet. 

   This strategy effectively multiplies the difficulty in mounting a 
   dictionary attack by the number of hash iterations used to derive 
   the shared secret. Thus, if 1,000,000 (2 ^ 20) hash iterations are 
   used, a unamplified shared secret that might take one hour to crack 
   would take over a hundred years if amplified. Differently stated, 20 
   bits of effective entropy are added to a secret when hashed one 
   million times; thus, a secret with 40 bits of entropy provides 60 
   bits of effective entropy after amplification. 

   This approach allows administrators to use the same types of secrets 
   that they are comfortable with as precursor secrets. The algorithm 
   to generate the amplified shared secret is deterministic, so the 
   precursor secret is all that needs to be remembered. 

   Unlike approaches that require changes to RADIUS servers and NASes, 
   the amplification approach is compatible with all current equipment. 
   It is simply a means to generate a shared secret, which then may be 
   configured in the NAS or RADIUS server just as any shared secret 
   would be. For example, a simple utility can accept the precursor 
   secret, amplify it, and present it to the administrator, who may 
   copy and paste it into the configuration application of a RADIUS 
   server or NAS. 

2. The Amplification Algorithm 

   The amplification algorithm applies the PBKDF2 function defined in 
   [PKCS-5] against the precursor secret and an optional salt value to 
   produce an octet sequence, which is then Base64-encoded to produce 
   the RADIUS shared secret. 





Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


   The PBKDF2 function applies an underlying pseudo-random function 
   iteratively to produce an octet sequence of arbitrary length. The 
   number of iterations determines the amount of security amplification 
   that results. 

   The PBKDF2 function takes arguments as follows: 

      PBKDF2(P, S, c, dkLen) 

   where: 

      P is the precursor secret 

      S is the optional salt 

      c is the iteration count 

      dkLen is the number of octets of binary output. 

   Both precursor secret and salt are UTF-8 encoded text. Null-
   terminators are not included. Note that ASCII is a subset of UTF-8 
   and thus automatically conforms to this requirement. 

   The salt is optional. If a salt is not provided, zero octets are 
   used as salt.  

   Rather than suggesting that administrators select input variables to 
   the algorithm, this draft defines the following standard choices in 
   the interest of interoperability: 

   -  The underlying pseudo-random function is HMAC-SHA-1 (as suggested 
      by [PCKS-5]). 

   -  The number of iterations (c) is 2 ^ 20, or hex 100000, providing 
      an amplification factor of over one million. 

   -  The number of octets of binary output (dkLen) is 12, resulting in 
      a 16 character shared secret after Base64-encoding, with 96 bits 
      of apparent entropy. 

2.1 The Salt 

   The salt input to PBKDF2 may be used to guarantee the minimum 
   entropy of the information that is input to the amplification 
   algorithm. 

   For example, an administrator may select a phrase of reasonable 
   entropy as the salt for all RADIUS equipment in a domain. This salt 
   may be used as a permanent configuration value in a utility for 
   generating amplified shared secrets. Other personnel may then use 
   this utility to create shared secrets based on precursor secrets 



Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


   they select. Even if the precursor secrets are low entropy, 
   including the salt in the computation increases the final entropy of 
   the shared secret. Specifically, the number of bits of effective 
   entropy will be equal to the entropy of the salt plus the entropy of 
   the precursor secret plus the 20 bits that result from 
   amplification. This allows security configuration of RADIUS 
   equipment to be delegated to personnel who may not fully appreciate 
   the weak password problem. 

   Salts may also be used across domains. For example, administrators 
   of separate domains beween which RADIUS traffic flows may select a 
   common salt to be used between their organizations. 

3. Deployment Options 

   The following mechanisms are options for deploying shared secret 
   amplification: 

   -  Native support in RADIUS equipment 

      The RADIUS client or server may provide shared secret 
      amplification as part of its configuration application.  

      The configuration application SHOULD configure the amplified 
      shared secret, not the precursor secret, into the database of the 
      device. This avoids having to perform amplication dynamically at 
      run time. The amplification algorithm typically takes a number of 
      seconds; this time is better spent once while configuring than 
      many times while running. 

   -  Amplification utility 

      An amplification utility may be created that administrators can 
      run on their desktops. The amplified shared secret may be copied 
      from the utility and pasted into the configuration application of 
      the RADIUS device. 

   -  Web service 

      A web service may be deployed that accepts a precursor secret and 
      returns the amplified shared secret via a browser. 

      This is an attractive approach when using a salt. The salt value 
      can be configured into the web service, and the user merely 
      enters the precursor secret. This allows the confidentiality of 
      the salt value to be protected from users of the service. 

      However, if a web service or any other network service is used, 
      it MUST be made secure against eavesdroppers. For example, HTTPS 
      should be used, and the network on which it is made available 
      should be properly restricted.  



Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


      If a salt is used, user authentication should be performed to 
      preclude dictionary attacks against the salt. If a hostile user 
      is permitted access to a web service containing a salt, and if 
      low-entropy precursor secrets are deployed in reliance on the 
      additional entropy provided by the salt, a combination on-
      line/off-line dictionary attack may be mounted: The hostile user 
      captures a RADIUS packet, then uses the web service with a 
      sequence of trial precursor secrets to retrieve amplified shared 
      secrets, which it then tests against the captured RADIUS packet. 
      While amplification is still effective, it is so in a reduced 
      manner, as the entropy of the salt is subtracted from the total 
      effective entropy during the dictionary attack. 

4. Security Considerations 

   The amplification algorithm described in this draft mitigates the 
   weak shared secret problem; however it does not solve it. 
   Administrators must still select precursor secrets of adequate 
   entropy.  

   A general rule for ordinary text is that each character provides 
   about 2.5 bits of entropy. Thus, a password of 12 characters might 
   have 30 bits of entropy. Choosing passwords that seem unreadable, 
   that is, that don't conform to the usual conditional probabilities 
   from one character to the next, provide greater entropy per 
   character. 

   Another rough statement that might be made is that 40 or fewer bits 
   of password entropy is weak, 50 bits is reasonable, and 60 bits or 
   greater is strong. The amplification algorithm adds 20 bits to the 
   effective entropy of a secret. Thus, a secret with 30 bits of 
   entropy results in an amplified shared secret with 50 bits of 
   entropy. 

   The recommendation for a precursor secret that looks like ordinary 
   text is therefore that it be at least 12 characters long, for 50 
   bits of effective entropy after amplification, and preferably be 16 
   characters or longer, for 60 or more bits of effective entropy after 
   amplification. 

   References 

   [VULN]     Chou, R., Andrade, M., and J. Wright, "RADIUS 
              Vulnerabilities in a Wireless Environment", 
              http://www.drizzle.com/~aboba/RADEXT/radius_vuln_00.txt, 
              July 2004. 

   [PKCS-5]   RSA Laboratories, "PKCS #5 v2.0: Password-Based 
              Cryptography Standard", March 25, 1999. 





Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


   [HMAC]     Krawczyk, H., Bellare, M., and R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-
              Hashing for Message Authentication", RFC 2104, February 
              1997.  

   [SHA-1]    National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
              "FIPS Publication 180-1: Secure Hash Standard", April 
              1994. 

   [RADIUS]   Rigney, C., Rubens, A., Simpson, W., and Willens, S., 
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", 
              RFC 2865, June 2000. 

   [RFC3579]  Aboba, B. and P. Calhoun, "RADIUS (Remote Authentication 
              Dial In User Service) Support For Extensible 
              Authentication Protocol (EAP)", RFC 3579, September 
              2003. 

   [RFC3580]  Congdon, P., Aboba, B., Smith, A., Zorn, G. and J. 
              Roese, "IEEE 802.1X Remote Authentication Dial In User 
              Service (RADIUS) Usage Guidelines", RFC 3580, September 
              2003. 

5. Author's Address 

   Questions about this memo can be directed to: 

      Paul Funk 
      Funk Software, Inc. 
      222 Third Street 
      Cambridge, MA 02142 
      USA 

      Phone:  +1 617 497-6339 
      E-mail: paul@funk.com 

6. Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved. 

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 




Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft                                             August 2004         


   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 










































Paul Funk                expires February 2005                 [Page 8] 



