
PKIX Working Group                                      D. Pinkas (Bull)
INTERNET-DRAFT                                           T. Gindin (IBM)
Expires: March 2005                                       September 2004
Target category: Standard Track



                 Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
                          Permanent Identifier
                       <draft-ietf-pkix-pi-11.txt>


Status of this Memo


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each co-editor certifies that 
   he is not aware of any related applicable patent or other IPR 
   claims, and that any of which he may become aware will be disclosed 
   until publication of the draft as an RFC, in accordance with 
   section 6 of BCP 79 [RFC 3668].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.html.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Please send comments on this document to the ietf-pkix@imc.org
   mailing list.

Abstract

   This document define a new form of name, called permanent 
   identifier, that may be included in the subjectAltName extension 
   of a public key certificate issued to an entity.

   The permanent identifier is an optional feature that may be used 
   by a CA to indicate that two or more certificates relate to the 
   same entity, even if they contain different subject name (DNs) or 
   different names in the subjectAltName extension, or if the name 
   or the affiliation of that entity stored in the subject or another 
   name form in the subjectAltName extension has changed.

   The subject name, carried in the subject field, is only unique 
   for each subject entity certified by the one CA as defined by the 
   issuer name field. However, the new name form can carry a 
   name that is unique for each subject entity certified by a CA.

Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 1]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

Table of Contents

   1.       Introduction...............................................2
   2.       Definition of a Permanent Identifier.......................3
   3.       IANA Considerations........................................5
   4.       Security considerations....................................6
   5.       References.................................................7
      5.1      Normative...............................................7
      5.2      Informative.............................................7
   6.       Author's Addresses.........................................8
   7.       Intellectual Property Rights...............................8
   Appendix A. ASN.1 syntax............................................9
      A.1      1988 ASN.1  Module.....................................10
      A.2      1993 ASN.1  Module.....................................11
   Appendix B. OID's for organizations................................12
      B.1      Using IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority).......12
      B.2      Using an ISO member body...............................12
      B.3      Using an ICD (International Code Designator) from 
               British Standards Institution to specify a new or 
               an existing identification scheme......................13
   Full Copyright Statement...........................................14

1  Introduction

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

   This specification is based on RFC 3280, which defines underlying 
   certificate formats and semantics needed for a full implementation 
   of this standard.

   The subject field of a public key certificate identifies the entity 
   associated with the public key stored in the subject public key 
   field. Names and identities of a subject may be carried in the 
   subject field and/or the subjectAltName extension. Where subject 
   field is non-empty, it MUST contain an X.500 distinguished 
   name (DN). The DN MUST be unique for each subject entity certified 
   by a single CA as defined by the issuer name field.

   The subject name changes whenever any of the components of that 
   name gets changed. There are several reasons for such a change to 
   happen.

         For employees of a company or organization, the person may get 
         a different position within the same company and thus will 
         move from one organization unit to another one. Including the 
         organization unit in the name may however be very useful to 
         allow the relying parties (RP's) using that certificate to 
         identify the right individual.

         For citizens, an individual may change their name by legal 
         processes, especially as a result of marriage.


Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 2]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004


         Any certificate subject identified by geographical location may
         relocate and change at least some of the location attributes 
         (e.g. country name, state or province, locality, or street).

   A permanent identifier consists of an identifier value assigned
   within a given naming space by the organization which is 
   authoritative for that naming space.  The organization assigning 
   the identifier value may be the CA that has issued the certificate 
   or a different organization called an Assigner Authority.

   An Assigner Authority may be a government, a government agency, a
   corporation, or any other sort of organization.  It MUST have a 
   unique identifier to distinguish it from any other such authority.
   In this standard, that identifier MUST be an object identifier.

   A permanent identifier may be useful in three contexts: access 
   control, non-repudiation and audit records.

         For access control, the permanent identifier may be used in 
         an ACL (Access Control List) instead of the DN or any other 
         form of name and would not need to be changed, even if the 
         subject name of the entity changes.
         For non-repudiation, the permanent identifier may be used to 
         link different transactions to the same entity, even when 
         the subject name of the entity changes.

         For audit records, the permanent identifier may be used to 
         link different audit records to the same entity, even when 
         the subject name of the entity changes.

   For two certificates which have been both verified to be valid 
   according to a given validation policy and which contain a permanent 
   identifier, those certificates relate to the same entity if their 
   permanent identifiers match, whatever the content of the DN or 
   other subjectAltName components may be.

   Since the use of permanent identifiers may conflict with privacy, 
   CAs SHOULD advertise to purchasers of certificates the use of 
   permanent identifiers in certificates.

2. Definition of a Permanent Identifier

   This Permanent Identifier is a name defined as a form of otherName 
   from the GeneralName structure in SubjectAltName.

   A CA which includes a permanent identifier in a certificate is 
   certifying that any public key certificate containing the same 
   values for that identifier refers to the same entity.

   The use of a permanent identifier is OPTIONAL. The permanent 
   identifier is defined as follows:

   id-on-permanentIdentifier   OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-on 3 }

Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 3]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004


     PermanentIdentifier ::=     SEQUENCE {
        identifierValue    UTF8String             OPTIONAL,
                        -- if absent, use a serialNumber attribute, 
                        -- if there is such an attribute present
                        -- in the subject DN
        assigner           OBJECT IDENTIFIER      OPTIONAL
                        -- if absent, the assigner is
                        -- the certificate issuer 
}

The identifierValue field is optional. 

   When the identifierValue field is present, then the identifierValue 
   supports one syntax: UTF8String. 

   When the identifierValue field is absent, then the value of the 
   serialNumber attribute from the deepest RDN of the subject DN is 
   the value to be taken for the identifierValue. In such a case, 
   there MUST be at least one serialNumber attribute in the subject DN, 
   otherwise the PermanentIdentifier SHALL NOT be used.

The assigner field is optional. 

   When the assigner field is present, then it is an OID which 
   identifies a naming space, i.e. both an Assigner Authority and the 
   type of that field. Characteristically, the prefix of the OID 
   identifies the Assigner Authority, and a suffix is used to identify 
   the type of permanent identifier. 

   When the assigner field is absent, then the permanent identifier is
   locally unique to the CA.

The various combinations are detailed below:

1- Both the assigner and the identifierValue fields are present: 

   The identifierValue is the value for that type of identifier. The 
   assigner field identifies the Assigner Authority and the type 
   of permanent identifier being identified.

   The permanent identifier is globally unique among all CAs. In such 
   a case, two permanent identifiers of this type match if and only if 
   their assigner fields match and the contents of the identifierValue 
   field in the two permanent identifiers consist of the same Unicode 
   code points presented in the same order.

2 - The assigner field is absent and the identifierValue field is 
    present:

   The Assigner Authority is the CA that has issued the certificate. 
   The identifierValue is given by the CA and the permanent identifier 
   is only local to the CA that has issued the certificate. 


Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 4]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

   In such a case, two permanent identifiers of this type match if and 
   only if the issuer DN's in the certificates which contain them 
   match using the distinguishedNameMatch rule, as defined in X.501 ,
   and the two values of the identifierValue field consist of the same 
   Unicode code points presented in the same order.

3 - Both the assigner and the identifierValue fields are absent: 

   If there are one or more RDNs containing a serialNumber attribute 
   (alone or accompanied by other attributes), then the value 
   contained in the serialNumber of the deepest such RDN SHALL be 
   used as the identifierValue; otherwise, the Permanent Identifier 
   definition is invalid and the Permanent Identifier SHALL NOT be 
   used.

   The permanent identifier is only local to the CA that has issued 
   the certificate. In such a case, two permanent identifiers of this 
   type match if and only if the issuer DN's in the certificates which 
   contain them match and the serialNumber attributes within the 
   subject DN's of those same certificates also match using the 
   caseIgnoreMatch rule.

4 - The assigner field is present and the identifierValue field is 
    absent:

   If there are one or more RDNs containing a serialNumber attribute 
   (alone or accompanied by other attributes), then the value 
   contained in the serialNumber of the deepest such RDN SHALL be 
   used as the identifierValue; otherwise, the Permanent Identifier 
   definition is invalid and the Permanent Identifier SHALL not be 
   used.

   The assigner field identifies the Assigner Authority and the type 
   of permanent identifier being identified. 

   The permanent identifier is globally unique among all CAs. In such 
   a case, two permanent identifiers of this type match if and only if 
   their assigner fields match and the contents the serialNumber 
   attributes within the subject DN's of those same certificates match 
   using the caseIgnoreMatch rule.

Note: the full arc of the object identifier used to identify the 
      permanent identifier name form is derived using:

     id-pkix OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { iso(1) identified-organization(3) 
        dod(6) internet(1) security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) }

     id-on OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 8 }   -- other name forms


3. IANA Considerations

No IANA actions are necessary.  However, a Private Enterprise Number may be used 
to construct an OID for the assigner field (see Annex B1).

Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 5]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004


4. Security considerations

   A given entity may have at an instant of time or at different 
   instants of time multiple forms of identities. If the permanent 
   identifier is locally unique to the CA (i.e. the assigner field is 
   not present), then two certificates from the same CA can be 
   compared. 

   When they contain two identical permanent identifiers, then a 
   relying party may determine that they refer to the same entity.

   If the permanent identifier is globally unique among all CAs (i.e. 
   the assigner field is present), then two certificates from different 
   CAs can be compared. When they contain two identical permanent 
   identifiers, then a relying party may determine that they refer to 
   the same entity. It is the responsibility of the CA to verify that 
   the permanent identifier being included in the certificate refers 
   to the subject being certified.

   The permanent identifier identifies the entity, irrespective of any 
   attribute extension. When a public key certificate contains 
   attribute extensions, the permanent identifier, if present, should 
   not be used for access control purposes but only for audit purposes. 
   The reason is that since these attributes may change, access could 
   be granted on attributes that were originally present in a 
   certificate issued to that entity but are no longer present in the 
   current certificate.

   Subject names in certificates are chosen by the issuing CA and are 
   mandated to be unique for each CA; so there can be no name collision 
   between subject names from the same CA. These names may be an 
   end-entity name when the certificate is a leaf certificate, or a 
   CA name, when it is a CA certificate.

   Since a name is only unique towards its superior CA, unless some 
   naming constraints are being used, a name would only be guaranteed 
   to be globally unique when considered to include a sequence of all 
   the names of the superior CAs.  Thus, two certificates that are 
   issued under the same issuer DN and which contain the same 
   permanent identifier extension without an assigner field do not 
   necessarily refer to the same entity. 

   Additional checks need to be done, e.g. to check if the public key 
   values of the two CAs which have issued the certificates to be 
   compared are identical or if the sequence of CA names in the 
   certification path from the trust anchor to the CA are identical.

   When the above checks fail, the permanents identifiers may still 
   match if there has been a CA key rollover. In such a case the 
   checking is more complicated.




Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 6]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

   The certification of different CAs with the same DN by different 
   CAs has other negative consequences in various parts of the PKI, 
   notably rendering the IssuerAndSerialNumber structure in [RFC 3852] 
   section 10.2.4 ambiguous.

   The permanent identifier allows organizations to create links 
   between different certificates associated with an entity issued 
   with or without overlapping validity periods.  This ability to link 
   different certificates may conflict with privacy.  It is therefore 
   important that a CA clearly disclose any plans to issue certificates 
   which include a permanent identifier to potential subjects of those 
   certificates.

5. References

5.1. Normative

   [RFC 3667] S. Bradner. BCP 78. IETF Rights in Contributions, 
   February 2004.

   [RFC 3668]. S. Bradner. BCP 79. Intellectual Property Rights in 
   IETF Technology, February 2004.

   [RFC 2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [RFC 3280] R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and D. Solo, "Internet X.509
   Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and CRL Profile", April 2002.

   [Unicode] The Unicode Consortium, "The Unicode Standard, Version 
   3.2.0" is defined by "The Unicode Standard, Version 3.0" 
   (Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley, 2000. ISBN 0-201-61633-5), as amended 
   by the "Unicode Standard Annex #27: Unicode 3.1"
   (http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr27/) and by the "Unicode Standard 
   Annex #28: Unicode 3.2" (http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr28/).

   [ISO10646] Universal Multiple-Octet Coded Character Set (UCS) - 
   Architecture and Basic Multilingual Plane, ISO/IEC 10646-1: 1993. 

   [UTF-8] RFC 2279. F. Yergeau. UTF-8, a transformation format of 
   ISO 10646, January 1998.

   [X.501] ITU-T Rec X.501 | ISO 9594-2: 2001 Information technology. 
   Open Systems Interconnection. The Directory: Models

5.2. Informative

   [RFC 3852] R.Housley. Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS), July 2004.

   [X.509]  ITU-T Recommendation X.509 (1997 E): Information Technology
   - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory: Authentication
   Framework, June 1997.



Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 7]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

   [X.520]  ITU-T Recommendation X.520: Information Technology - Open
   Systems Interconnection - The Directory: Selected Attribute Types,
   June 1997.

   [X.660]  ITU-T Recommendation X.660: Information Technology -
   Open Systems Interconnection - Procedures for the Operation of 
   OSI Registration Authorities: General Procedures, 1992.

   [X.680]  ITU-T Recommendation X.680: Information Technology -
   Abstract Syntax Notation One, 1997.

6. Author's Addresses

   Denis Pinkas
   Bull
   Rue Jean-Jaurˆs. BP 68
   78340 Les Clayes-sous-Bois
   FRANCE
   Email: Denis.Pinkas@bull.net

   Thomas Gindin
   IBM Corporation
   6710 Rockledge Drive
   Bethesda, MD 20817
   USA
   Email: tgindin@us.ibm.com

7. Intellectual Property Rights

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.







Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 8]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004


APPENDIX A. ASN.1 syntax

   As in RFC 2459, ASN.1 modules are supplied in two different variants
   of the ASN.1 syntax.

   This section describes data objects used by conforming PKI components
   in an "ASN.1-like" syntax.  This syntax is a hybrid of the 1988 and
   1993 ASN.1 syntaxes.  The 1988 ASN.1 syntax is augmented with 1993
   the UNIVERSAL Type UTF8String.

   The ASN.1 syntax does not permit the inclusion of type statements in
   the ASN.1 module, and the 1993 ASN.1 standard does not permit use of
   the new UNIVERSAL types in modules using the 1988 syntax.  As a
   result, this module does not conform to either version of the ASN.1
   standard.

   Appendix A.1 may be parsed by an 1988 ASN.1-parser by replacing the
   definitions for the UNIVERSAL Types with the 1988 catch-all "ANY".

   Appendix A.2 may be parsed by an 1993 ASN.1-parser by removing the 
   UTF8String choice from the definition of IdentifierValue in the 
   module. Appendix A.2 may be parsed "as is" by an 1997-compliant
   ASN.1 parser.

   In case of discrepancies between these modules, the 1988 module is
   the normative one.




























Pinkas, Gindin                                                  [Page 9]


Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

APPENDIX A.1. 1988 ASN.1  Module

PKIXpermanentidentifier88 {iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6)
       internet(1) security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
       id-mod-perm-id-88(28) }

DEFINITIONS EXPLICIT TAGS ::=

   BEGIN

   -- EXPORTS ALL --

   IMPORTS

-- UTF8String, / move hyphens before slash if UTF8String does not 
-- resolve with your compiler
-- The content of this type conforms to RFC 2279.

        id-pkix
              FROM PKIX1Explicit88 { iso(1) identified-organization(3) 
              dod(6) internet(1) security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 
              id-mod(0) id-pkix1-explicit(18) } ;
              -- from [RFC 3280]


   -- Permanent identifier Object Identifier and Syntax

   id-on   OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 8 }

   id-on-permanentIdentifier   OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-on 3 }

   PermanentIdentifier ::= SEQUENCE {
        identifierValue    UTF8String             OPTIONAL,
                        -- if absent, use the serialNumber attribute 
                        -- if there is a single such attribute present
                        -- in the subject DN
        assigner           OBJECT IDENTIFIER      OPTIONAL
                        -- if absent, the assigner is
                        -- the certificate issuer 
}

END













Pinkas, Gindin                                                 [Page 10]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

APPENDIX A.2. 1993 ASN.1  Module

PKIXpermanentidentifier93 {iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6)
       internet(1) security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
       id-mod-perm-id-93(29) }

   DEFINITIONS EXPLICIT TAGS ::=

   BEGIN

   -- EXPORTS ALL --

   IMPORTS

        id-pkix
              FROM PKIX1Explicit88 { iso(1) identified-organization(3) 
              dod(6) internet(1) security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 
              id-mod(0) id-pkix1-explicit(18) }
               -- from [RFC 3280]

        ATTRIBUTE
              FROM InformationFramework {joint-iso-itu-t ds(5) module(1) 
              informationFramework(1) 4};
               -- from [X.501]

   -- Permanent identifier Object Identifiers

   id-on   OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 8 }

   id-on-permanentIdentifier   OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-on 3 }

   -- Permanent Identifier

   permanentIdentifier ATTRIBUTE ::= {
          WITH SYNTAX     PermanentIdentifier
          ID              id-on-permanentIdentifier }

   PermanentIdentifier ::= SEQUENCE {
        identifierValue    UTF8String             OPTIONAL,
                        -- if absent, use the serialNumber attribute 
                        -- if there is a single such attribute present
                        -- in the subject DN
        assigner           OBJECT IDENTIFIER      OPTIONAL
                        -- if absent, the assigner is
                        -- the certificate issuer 
}


END






Pinkas, Gindin                                                 [Page 11]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004


APPENDIX B. OID's for organizations

In order to construct an OID for the assigner field, organizations need 
first to have a registered OID for themselves. In some cases, OID's are 
provided for free. In other cases a one-time fee is required. The main 
difference lies in the nature of the information that is collected at 
the time of registration and how this information is verified for its 
accuracy.

B.1. Using IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority)

The application form for a Private Enterprise Number in the IANA's 
OID list is: http://www.iana.org/cgi-bin/enterprise.pl. 

Currently IANA assigns numbers for free. The IANA-registered Private 
Enterprises prefix is: iso.org.dod.internet.private.enterprise 
(1.3.6.1.4.1)

These numbers are used, among other things, for defining private 
SNMP MIBs.

The official assignments under this OID are stored in the IANA file 
"enterprise-numbers" available at: 
http://www.iana.org/assignments/enterprise-numbers

B.2. Using an ISO member body

ISO has defined the OID structure in a such a way so that every ISO 
member-body has its own unique OID. Then every ISO member-body is free 
to allocate its own arc space below. 

Organizations and enterprises may contact the ISO member-body where 
their organization or enterprise is established to obtain an 
organization/enterprise OID.

Currently, ISO members do not assign organization/enterprise OID's for 
free. 

Most of them do not publish registries of such OID's which they have 
assigned, sometimes restricting the access to registered organizations 
or preferring to charge inquirers for the assignee of an OID on a 
per-inquiry basis. The use of OID's from an ISO member organization 
which does not publish such a registry may impose extra costs on the 
CA that needs to make sure that the OID corresponds to the registered 
organization.

As an example, AFNOR (Association Francaise de Normalisation - the 
French organization that is a member of ISO) has defined an arc to 
allocate OID's for companies: 

{iso (1) member-body (2) fr (250) type-org (1) organisation (n)}



Pinkas, Gindin                                                 [Page 12]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004

B.3. Using an ICD (International Code Designator) from British Standards
Institution to specify a new or an existing identification scheme

The International Code Designator (ICD) is used to uniquely identify an 
ISO 6523 compliant organization identification scheme. ISO 6523 is a 
standard that defines the proper structure of an identifier and the 
registration procedure for an ICD. The conjunction of the ICD with an 
identifier issued by the registration authority is worldwide unique.

The basic structure of the code contains the following components:

   - the ICD value: The International Code Designator issued to the
     identification scheme makes the identifier worldwide unique 
     (up to 4 digits),

   - the Organization, usually a company or governmental body 
     (up to 35 characters),

   - an Organization Part (OPI - Organization Part Identifier). 
     An identifier allocated to a particular Organization Part
     (optional, up to 35 characters)

The ICD is also equivalent to an object identifier (OID) under the arc 
{1(iso). 3(identified organization)}. 

On behalf of ISO, British Standards Institution (BSI) is the 
Registration Authority for organizations under the arc {iso (1) org(3)}. 
This means BSI registers code issuing authorities (organizations) by 
ICD values which are equivalent to OIDs of the form {iso (1) org(3) 
icd(xxxx)}. The corresponding IdentifierValue is the code value of the 
scheme identified by icd(xxxx).

As an example, the ICD 0012 was allocated to European Computer 
Manufacturers Association: ECMA. Thus the OID for ECMA is 
{iso(1) org(3) ecma(12)}.

For registration with BSI, a "Sponsoring Authority" has to vouch for the
Applying organization. Registration is not free. Recognized "Sponsoring 
Authorities" are: ISO Technical Committees or (Sub)Committees, Member 
Bodies of ISO or International Organizations having a liaison status 
with ISO or with any of its Technical (Sub)Committees.

An example of a Sponsoring Authority is the EDIRA Association 
(EDI/EC Registration Authority, web: http://www.edira.org, 
email:info@edira.org). 

The numerical list of all ICDs that have been issued is posted on its 
webpage: http://www.edira.org/documents.htm#icd-List

Note: IANA owns ICD code 0090, but that (presumably) it isn't intending 
to use it for the present purpose.




Pinkas, Gindin                                                 [Page 13]

Permanent Identifier                                      September 2004


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  In addition, the
   ASN.1 modules presented in Appendices A and B may be used in whole or
   in part without inclusion of the copyright notice.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process shall be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78 [RFC 3667], and except as set forth therein, 
   the authors retain all their rights."

   This document and the information contained herein are provided 
   on an"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



















Pinkas, Gindin                                                 [Page 14]

