
Networking Working Group                                JP. Vasseur, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                        Cisco Systems, Inc
Intended status: Standards Track                                R. Zhang
Expires: September 3, 2007                                    BT Infonet
                                                                N. Bitar
                                                                 Verizon
                                                             JL. Le Roux
                                                          France Telecom
                                                           March 2, 2007


 A Backward Recursive PCE-based Computation (BRPC) procedure to compute
     shortest inter-domain Traffic Engineering Label Switched Paths
                       draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   The ability to compute shortest constrained Traffic Engineering (TE)
   Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks across multiple domains (where
   a domain is referred to as a collection of network elements within a
   common sphere of address management or path computational
   responsibility such as IGP areas and Autonomous Systems) has been
   identified as a key requirement .  This document specifies a
   procedure relying on the use of multiple Path Computation Elements
   (PCEs) in order to compute such inter-domain shortest constrained
   paths along a determined sequence of domains, using a backward
   recursive path computation technique while preserving confidentiality
   across domains, which is sometimes required when domains are managed
   by different Service Providers.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


































Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  General assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  BRPC Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Domain path selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Mode of Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  PCEP Protocol Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Inter-AS TE Links  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Usage in conjunction with per-domain path computation  . . . .  9
   8.  BRPC procedure completion failure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     9.1.  Diverse end-to-end path computation  . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     9.2.  Path optimality  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. Reoptimization of an inter-domain TE LSP . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Path Computation failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Metric normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   13. Manageability Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     13.1. Control of Function and Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     13.2. Information and Data Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     13.3. Liveness Detection and Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     13.4. Verifying Correct Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     13.5. Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional
           Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     13.6. Impact on Network Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     13.7. Path computation chain monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   14. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     14.1. New flag of the RP object  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     14.2. New flag of the NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   15. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   16. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   17. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     17.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     17.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  Proposed Status and Discussion [To Be Removed
                Upon Publication] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18












Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


1.  Terminology

   ABR: routers used to connect two IGP areas (areas in OSPF or levels
   in IS-IS).

   ASBR: routers used to connect together ASes of the same or different
   Service Provider(s) via one or more Inter-AS links.

   Boundary Node (BN): a boundary node is either an ABR in the context
   of inter-area Traffic Engineering or an ASBR in the context of
   inter-AS Traffic Engineering.

   Entry BN of domain(n): a BN connecting domain(n-1) to domain(n) along
   a determined sequence of domains.

   Exit BN of domain(n): a BN connecting domain(n) to domain(n+1) along
   a determined sequence of domains.

   Inter-AS TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an AS boundary.

   Inter-area TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an IGP area boundary.

   LSR: Label Switching Router.

   LSP: Label Switched Path.

   PCC: Path Computation Client.  Any client application requesting a
   path computation to be performed by the Path Computation Element.

   PCE (Path Computation Element): an entity (component, application or
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route
   based on a network graph and applying computational constraints.

   PCE(i) is a PCE with the scope of domain(i).

   TED: Traffic Engineering Database.

   VSPT: Virtual Shortest Path Tree.

   The notion of contiguous, stitched and nested TE LSPs is defined in
   [RFC4726] and will not be repeated here.


2.  Introduction

   The requirements for inter-area and inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering
   have been developed by the Traffic Engineering Working Group (TE WG)
   and have been stated in [RFC4105] and [RFC4216], respectively.



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   The framework for inter-domain MPLS Traffic Engineering has been
   provided in [RFC4726].

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp] defines a technique for
   establishing inter-domain (G)MPLS TE LSP whereby the path is computed
   during the signalling process on a per-domain basis by the entry
   boundary node of each domain (each node in charge of computing a
   section of an inter-domain TE LSP path is always along the path of
   such TE LSP).  Such path computation technique fulfills some of the
   requirements stated in [RFC4105] and [RFC4216] but not all of them.
   In particular, it cannot guarantee to find an optimal (shortest)
   inter-domain constrained path.  Furthermore, it cannot be efficiently
   used to compute a set of inter-domain diversely routed TE LSPs.

   The PCE architecture is defined in [RFC4655].  The aim of this
   document is to describe a PCE-based TE LSP computation procedure to
   compute optimal inter-domain constrained (G)MPLS TE LSPs.

   Qualifying a path as optimal requires some clarification.  Indeed, a
   globally optimal TE LSP placement usually refers to a set of TE LSPs
   whose placements optimize the network resources with regards to a
   specified objective function (e.g. a placement that reduces the
   maximum or average network load while satisfying the TE LSP
   constraints).  In this document, an optimal inter-domain constrained
   TE LSP is defined as the shortest path satisfying the set of required
   constraints that would be obtained in the absence of multiple domains
   (in other words, in a totally flat IGP network between the source and
   destination of the TE LSP).


3.  General assumptions

   In the rest of this document, we make the following set of
   assumptions common to inter-area and inter-AS MPLS TE:

   - Each IGP area or AS is assumed to be Traffic Engineering enabled
   (i.e. running OSPF-TE or ISIS-TE and RSVP-TE).

   - No topology or resource information is distributed between domains
   (as mandated per [RFC4105] and [RFC4216]), which is critical to
   preserve IGP/BGP scalability and confidentiality.

   - While certain constraints like bandwidth can be used across
   different domains, other TE constraints like resource affinity,
   color, metric, etc. as listed in [RFC2702] could be translated at
   domain boundaries.  If required, it is assumed that, at the domain
   boundary nodes, there will exist some sort of local mapping based on
   policy agreement, in order to translate such constraints across



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   domain boundaries during the inter-PCE communication process.

   - Each AS can be made of several IGP areas.  The path computation
   procedure described in this document applies to the case of a single
   AS made of multiple IGP areas, multiples ASes made of a single IGP
   area or any combination of the above.  For the sake of simplicity,
   each AS will be considered to be made of a single area in this
   document.  The case of an Inter-AS TE LSP spanning multiple ASes
   where some of those ASes are themselves made of multiple IGP areas
   can be easily derived from this case by applying the BRPC procedure
   described in this document, recursively.

   - The domain path (set of domains traversed to reach the destination
   domain) is either administratively pre-determined or discovered by
   some means that are outside of the scope of this document.


4.  BRPC Procedure

   The BRPC procedure is a Multiple-PCE path computation technique as
   described in [RFC4655].  A possible model consists of hosting the PCE
   function on boundary nodes (e.g., ABR or ASBR) but this is not
   mandated by the BRPC procedure.

   The BRPC procedure does not make any assumptions with regards to the
   nature of the inter-domain TE LSP that could be contiguous, nested or
   stitched.

   Furthermore, no assumption is made on the actual path computation
   algorithm in use by a PCE (it can be any variant of CSPF, algorithm
   based on linear-programming to solve multi-constraints optimization
   problems and so on).

4.1.  Domain path selection

   The PCE-based BRPC procedure applies to the computation of an optimal
   constrained inter-domain TE LSP.  The sequence of domains to be
   traversed can either be determined a priori or during the path
   computation procedure.  The BRPC procedure guarantees to compute the
   optimal path across a specific sequence of traversed domains (which
   constitutes an additional constraint).  In the case of an arbitrary
   set of meshed domains, the BRPC procedure can be used to compute the
   optimal path across each domain set in order to get the optimal
   constrained path between the source and the destination of the TE
   LSP.  The BRPC procedure can also be used across a subset of all
   domain sequences, and the best path among these sequences is then
   selected.




Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


4.2.  Mode of Operation

   Definition of VSPT(i)

   In each domain i:

   * There is a set of X-en(i) entry BNs noted BN-en(k,i) where BN-
   en(k,i) is the kth entry BN of domain(i).

   * There is a set of X-ex(i) exit BNs noted BN-ex(k,i) where BN-
   ex(k,i) is the kth exit BN of domain(i).

   VSPT(i): MP2P (MultiPoint To Point) tree returned by PCE(i) to
   PCE(i-1):


               Root (TE LSP destination)
               /         I            \
         BN-en(1,i)   BN-en(2,i) ... BN-en((j), i).

   Where [X-en(i)] is the number of entry BN in domain i
   and j<= [X-en(i)]



   Each link of tree VSPT(i) represents the shortest path between BN-
   en(j,i) (identified by its TE Router-ID) and the destination that
   satisfies the set of required constraints for the TE LSP (bandwidth,
   affinities, ...).  These are path segments to reach the destination
   from BN-en(j,i).

   Note that PCE(i) only considers the entry BNs that provide
   connectivity from domain(i-1).  That is, the set BN-en(k,i-1) is only
   made of those BNs that provide connectivity from domain (i-1) to
   domain(i).  Furthermore, some BNs may be excluded according to policy
   constraints (either due to local policy or policies signaled in the
   path computation request).

   Step 1: the PCC needs to first determine the PCE capable of serving
   its path computation request (this can be done thanks to local
   configuration or via IGP discovery (see
   [I-D.ietf-pce-disco-proto-ospf] and
   [I-D.ietf-pce-disco-proto-isis])).  The path computation request is
   then relayed until reaching a PCE(n) such that the TE LSP destination
   resides in the domain(n).  At each step of the process, the next PCE
   can either be statically configured or dynamically discovered via
   IGP/BGP extensions.  If no next PCE can be found or the next hop PCE
   of choice is unavailable, the procedure stops and a path computation



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   error is returned (see Section 8).  If multiple PCEs are discovered,
   the PCE may select a subset of these PCEs based on some local
   policies or heuristics.  Note also that a sequence of PCEs might be
   enforced by policy on the PCC and this constraint can be carried in
   the PCEP path computation request (as defined in
   [I-D.vasseur-pce-monitoring]).

   Step 2: PCE(n) computes VSPT(n) made of the list of shortest
   constrained path(s) between every BN-en(j,n) and the TE LSP
   destination using a suitable path computation algorithm (e.g.  CSPF)
   and returns the computed VSPT(n) to PCE(n-1).

   Step i:

   - For i=n-1 to 2: PCE(i) concatenates the topology of domain(i)
   (using its TED) with the received VSPT(i+1).  In the case of Inter-AS
   TE LSP computation, this requires to also add the inter-AS TE links
   connecting the domain(i) to the domain(i+1).  Then PCE(i) computes
   VSPT(i) (MP2P (Multi-Point to Point) tree made of the shortest
   constrained paths between each BN-en(j,i) and the TE LSP
   destination).

   End

   Finally PCE(1) computes the end-to-end shortest constrained path from
   the source to the destination and returns the corresponding path to
   the requesting PCC in the form of a PCRep message as defined in
   [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep].

   Each branch of the VSPT tree (path) may be returned in the form of an
   explicit path (in which case all the hops along the path segment are
   listed) or a loose path (in which case only the BR is specified) so
   as to preserve confidentiality along with the respective cost.  In
   the later case, various techniques can used in order to retrieve the
   computed explicit paths on a per domain basis during the signaling
   process thanks to the use of path keys as described in
   [I-D.bradford-pce-path-key].

   BRPC guarantees to find the optimal (shortest) constrained inter-
   domain TE LSP according to a set of defined domains to be traversed.
   Note that other variants of the BRPC procedure relying on the same
   principles are also possible.

   Note also that in case of ECMP paths, more than one path could be
   returned to the requesting LSR.






Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


5.  PCEP Protocol Extensions

   The BRPC procedure requires the specification of a new flag of the RP
   object carried within the PCReq message (defined in
   [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]), the aim of which is to specify that the
   shortest path(s) satisfying the constraints from the destination to
   the set of entry boundary nodes are requested (such set of path(s)
   forms the downstream VSPT as specified in Section 4.2).

   The following new flag of the RP object is defined: VSPT (V) flag:
   0x60.  When set, this indicates that the PCC requests the computation
   of an inter-domain TE LSP using the BRPC procedure.

   Because path segment(s) computed by a downstream PCE in the context
   of the BRPC procedure must be provided along with their respective
   path cost(s), the C flag of the METRIC object carried within the
   PCReq message MUST be set.  It is the choice of the requester to
   appropriately set the O bit of the RP object.


6.  Inter-AS TE Links

   In the case of Inter-AS TE LSP path computation, the BRPC procedure
   requires the knowledge of the traffic engineering attributes of the
   Inter-AS TE links: the process by which the PCE acquires this
   information is out of the scope of the BRPC procedure (which is
   compliant with the PCE architecture defined in [RFC4655]).

   That said, a straitghforward solution consists of allowing the ASBRs
   to flood the TE information related to the inter-ASBR link(s)
   although no IGP TE is enabled over those links (there is no IGP
   adjacency over the inter-ASBR links).  This allows the PCE of a
   domain to get entire TE visibility up to the set of entry ASBRs in
   the downstream domain.


7.  Usage in conjunction with per-domain path computation

   The BRPC procedure may be used to compute path segments in
   conjunction with other path computation techniques (such as the per-
   domain path computation technique defined in
   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp]) to compute the end-to-end
   path.  In this case end-to-end path optimality can no longer be
   guaranteed.







Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


8.  BRPC procedure completion failure

   If the BRPC procedure cannot be completed because a PCE along the
   domain path does not support the procedure, a PCErr message MUST be
   returned to the upstream PCE with a Error-Type "BRPC procedure
   completion failure".  The PCErr message MUST be relayed to the
   requesting PCC.

   PCEP-ERROR objects are used to report a PCEP protocol error and are
   characterized by an Error-Type which specifies the type of error and
   an Error-value that provides additional information about the error
   type.  Both the Error-Type and the Error-Value are managed by IANA.
   A new Error-Type is defined that relates to the BRPC procedure.

 Error-type          Meaning
     13              BRPC procedure completion failure
                      Error-value
                          1: BRPC procedure not supported by one or more PCEs
                             along the domain path


9.  Applicability

   As discussed in section Section 3, the requirements for inter-area
   and inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering have been developed by the
   Traffic Engineering Working Group (TE WG) and have been stated in
   [RFC4105] and [RFC4216], respectively.  Among the set of
   requirements, both documents indicate the need for some solution
   providing the ability to compute an optimal (shortest) constrained
   inter-domain TE LSP and to compute a set of diverse inter-domain TE
   LSPs.

9.1.  Diverse end-to-end path computation

   PCEP allows a PCC to request the computation of a set of diverse TE
   LSPs thanks to the SVEC object by setting the flags L, N or S to
   request link, node or SRLG diversity respectively.  Such request MUST
   be taken into account by each PCE along the path computation chain
   during the VSPT computation.  In the context of the BRPC procedure, a
   set of diversely routed TE LSP between two LSRs can be computed since
   the paths segment(s) of the VSPT are simultaneously computed by a
   given PCE.  The BRPC procedure allows for the computation of diverse
   paths under various objective functions (such as minimizing the sum
   of the costs of the N diverse paths, etc) thus avoiding the well-
   known "trapping" problem.  Indeed, with a 2-step approach consisting
   of computing the first path followed by the computation of the second
   path after having removed the set of network elements traversed by
   the first path (if that does not violate confidentiality



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   preservation), one cannot guarantee that a solution will be found
   even if such solution exists.  Furthermore, even if a solution is
   found, it may not be the most optimal one with respect to an
   objective function such as minimizing the sum of the paths costs,
   bounding the path delays of both paths and so on.  Finally, it must
   be noted that such a 2-step path computation approach is usually less
   efficient in term of signalling delays since it requires two
   serialized TE LSP set up.

9.2.  Path optimality

   BRPC guarantees that the optimal (shortest) constrained inter-domain
   path will always be found subject to policy constraints.  When
   combined with other local path computation techniques (e.g. in the
   case of stitched/nested TE LSP) and in the case where a domain has
   more than one BR-en or more than one BR-ex, optimality after some
   network change within the domain can only be guaranteed by re-
   executing the BRPC procedure.


10.  Reoptimization of an inter-domain TE LSP

   The ability to reoptimize an existing inter-domain TE LSP path has
   been explicitly listed as a requirement in [RFC4105] and [RFC4216].
   In the case of a TE LSP reoptimization request, the reoptimization
   procedures defined in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep] apply where the path in use
   (if available on the head-end) is provided as part of the path
   computation request in order for the PCEs involved in the
   reoptimization request to avoid double bandwidth accounting.


11.  Path Computation failure

   If a PCE requires to relay a path computation request acccording to
   the BRPC procedure defined in this document to a downstream PCE and
   no such PCE is available, the PCE MUST send a negative path
   computation reply to the requester using a PCReq message as specified
   in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep] that contains a NO-PATH object.  In such case,
   the NO-PATH object MUST carry a NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV (defined in
   [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]) with the newly defined bit named "BRPC Path
   Computation chain unvailable" set.

   0x04: BRPC Path computation chain unavailable








Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


12.  Metric normalization

   In the case of inter-area TE, the same IGP/TE metric scheme is
   usually adopted for all the IGP areas (e.g. based on the link-speed,
   propagation delay or some other combination of link attributes).
   Hence, the proposed set of mechanisms always computes the shortest
   path across multiple areas obeying the required set of constraints
   with respect to a well-specified objective function.  Conversely, in
   the case of Inter-AS TE, in order for this path computation to be
   meaningful, a metric normalization between ASes may be required.  One
   solution to avoid IGP metric modification would be for the SPs to
   agree on a TE metric normalization scheme and use the TE metric for
   TE LSP path computation (in that case, this must be requested in the
   PCEP Path computation request) thanks to the METRIC object (defined
   in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]).


13.  Manageability Considerations

   This section is compliant with
   [I-D.ietf-pce-manageability-requirements].

13.1.  Control of Function and Policy

   The only configurable item is the support of the BRPC procedure on a
   PCE.  The support of the BRPC procedure by the PCE MAY be controlled
   by a policy module governing the conditions under which a PCE should
   participate to the BRPC procedure (origin of the requests, number of
   requests per second, ...).  If the BRPC is not supported/allowed on a
   PCE, it MUST send a PCErr message as specified in Section 8.

13.2.  Information and Data Models

   A BRPC MIB module will be specified in a separate document.

13.3.  Liveness Detection and Monitoring

   The BRPC procedure is a Multiple-PCE path computation technique and
   as such a set of PCEs are involved in the path computation chain.  If
   the path computation chain is not operational either because at least
   one PCE does not support the BRPC procedure or because one of the
   PCEs that must be involved in the path computation chain is not
   available, procedures are defined to report such failures in
   Section 8 and Section 11 respectively.  Furthermore, a built in
   diagnostic tool to check the availability and performances of a PCE
   chain is defined in [I-D.vasseur-pce-monitoring].





Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


13.4.  Verifying Correct Operation

   Verifying the correct operation of BRPC can be done by looking at the
   TEDs related to the various domains traversed by a TE LSP at the time
   the BRPC procedure was invoked and verify that the path computed by
   the BRPC procedure is the expected optimal path (the path that would
   be obtained in the absence of multiple domains).

13.5.  Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional Components

   The BRPC procedure does not put any new requirements on other
   protocol.  That said, since the BRPC procedure relies on the PCEP
   protocol, there is a dependency between BRPC and PCEP; consequently
   the BRPC procedure inherently makes use of the management functions
   developped for PCEP.

13.6.  Impact on Network Operation

   The BRPC procudure does not have any significant impact on network
   operation: indeed, BRPC is a Multiple-PCE path computation scheme as
   defined in [RFC4655] and does not differ from any other path
   computation request.

13.7.  Path computation chain monitoring

   [I-D.vasseur-pce-monitoring] specifies a set of mechanisms that can
   be used to gather PCE state metrics.  Because BRPC is a Multiple-PCE
   path computation techniques, such mechanims could be advantageously
   used in the context of the BRPC procedure to check the liveness of
   the path computation chain, locate a faulty component, monitor the
   overall performance and so on.


14.  IANA Considerations

14.1.  New flag of the RP object

   A new flag of the RP object (specified in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]) is
   defined in this document.

   Name: VSPT (V)

   Bit Number: 10

   Value: 0x60

   When set, this indicates that the PCC requests the computation of an
   inter-domain TE LSP using the BRPC procedure.



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   A new Error-Type is defined in this document (Error-Type and Error-
   value to be assigned by IANA).

 Error-type          Meaning
     13              BRPC procedure completion failure
                      Error-value
                          1: BRPC procedure not supported by one or PCEs
                             along the domain path

14.2.  New flag of the NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV

   A new flag of the NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV defined in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep])
   is specified in this document.


Defining RFC: draft-ietf-pce-pcep (to be replaced by RFC number when pusblished)
Name of bit: BRPC Path computation chain unavailable
Bit number (suggested value): 0x04


15.  Security Considerations

   The BRPC procedure relies on the use of the PCEP protocol and as such
   is subjected to the potential attacks listed in section 11 of
   [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep].  In addition to the security mechanisms
   described in [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep] with regards to spoofing, snooping,
   falsification and Denial of Service, an implementation MAY support a
   policy module governing the condditions under which a PCE should
   participate to the BRPC procedure.

   The BRPC procedure does not increase the information exchanged
   between ASes and preserves topology confidentiality, in compliance
   with [RFC4105] and [RFC4216].


16.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Arthi Ayyangar, Dimitri Papadimitriou
   and Siva Sivabalan for their useful comments.  A special thank to
   Adrian Farrel for his useful comments and suggestions.


17.  References

17.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-pce-pcep]
              Roux, J. and J. Vasseur, "Path Computation Element (PCE)



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


              communication Protocol (PCEP)", draft-ietf-pce-pcep-06
              (work in progress), February 2007.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4655]  Farrel, A., Vasseur, J., and J. Ash, "A Path Computation
              Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655, August 2006.

17.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bradford-pce-path-key]
              Bradford, R., "Preserving Topology Confidentiality in
              Inter-Domain Path Computation using a  key based
              mechanism", draft-bradford-pce-path-key-02 (work in
              progress), January 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp]
              Vasseur, J., "A Per-domain path computation method for
              establishing Inter-domain Traffic  Engineering (TE) Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-pd-path-comp-04 (work in
              progress), February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-rsvp-te]
              Ayyangar, A., "Inter domain Multiprotocol Label Switching
              (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS  (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering -
              RSVP-TE extensions",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-inter-domain-rsvp-te-05 (work in
              progress), March 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-pce-disco-proto-isis]
              Roux, J., "IS-IS protocol extensions for Path Computation
              Element (PCE) Discovery",
              draft-ietf-pce-disco-proto-isis-02 (work in progress),
              February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-pce-disco-proto-ospf]
              Roux, J., "OSPF protocol extensions for Path Computation
              Element (PCE) Discovery",
              draft-ietf-pce-disco-proto-ospf-02 (work in progress),
              February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-pce-manageability-requirements]
              Farrel, A., "Inclusion of Manageability Sections in PCE
              Working Group Drafts",
              draft-ietf-pce-manageability-requirements-01 (work in
              progress), March 2007.



Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   [I-D.vasseur-pce-monitoring]
              Roux, J. and J. Vasseur, "A set of monitoring tools for
              Path Computation Element based Architecture",
              draft-vasseur-pce-monitoring-02 (work in progress),
              March 2007.

   [RFC2702]  Awduche, D., Malcolm, J., Agogbua, J., O'Dell, M., and J.
              McManus, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS",
              RFC 2702, September 1999.

   [RFC4105]  Le Roux, J., Vasseur, J., and J. Boyle, "Requirements for
              Inter-Area MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4105, June 2005.

   [RFC4216]  Zhang, R. and J. Vasseur, "MPLS Inter-Autonomous System
              (AS) Traffic Engineering (TE) Requirements", RFC 4216,
              November 2005.

   [RFC4726]  Farrel, A., Vasseur, J., and A. Ayyangar, "A Framework for
              Inter-Domain Multiprotocol Label Switching Traffic
              Engineering", RFC 4726, November 2006.


Appendix A.  Proposed Status and Discussion [To Be Removed Upon
             Publication]

   This Internet-Draft is being submitted for eventual publication as an
   RFC with a proposed status of Standard.  Discussion of this proposal
   should take place on the following mailing list: pce@ietf.org.


Authors' Addresses

   JP Vasseur (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   USA

   Email: jpv@cisco.com












Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


   Raymond Zhang
   BT Infonet
   2160 E. Grand Ave.
   El Segundo, CA  90025
   USA

   Email: raymond_zhang@bt.infonet.com


   Nabil Bitar
   Verizon
   40 Sylvan Road
   Waltham, MA  02145
   USA

   Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com


   JL Le Roux
   France Telecom
   2, Avenue Pierre-Marzin
   Lannion,   22307
   FRANCE

   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@orange-ft.com


























Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         draft-ietf-pce-brpc-04.txt             March 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Vasseur, et al.         Expires September 3, 2007              [Page 18]



