

   Network Working Group                                                
   Internet Draft                                           C. Kularski 
                                                        Highland School 
                                                          of Technology 
   Expires: February 2004                                   August 2003 
    
    
                SPAM Reduction Through Creative Addressing 
                                      
                   draft-kularski-spam-spamreduce-00.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i].  
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   SPAM/UCE (Unsolicited Commercial Email) has become a problem for most 
   Internet users. This document aims to establish a procedure that 
   users can follow to significantly cut down on the amount of SPAM that 
   they receive. Once in place the user can expect to spend about 30 
   days from the time of the first SPAM creating a list of mailboxes 
   that should be made invalid.  
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [ii]. 
    
   A Virtual Address as used in this document is an email address not 
   directly existing on the server, but it specified by a catch-all.  
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires û February 2004               [Page 1] 
                            SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. General Description............................................2 
   2. Mailbox 1......................................................2 
      2.1 The Email Server Software..................................3 
      2.2 When SPAM Occurs...........................................3 
   3. Mailbox 2......................................................3 
   4. Combining Both Mailboxes.......................................4 
   5. Future Considerations..........................................4 
   Security Considerations...........................................4 
   References........................................................4  
   Author's Addresses................................................5 
    
    
1. General Description 
    
   The key to making this procedure for SPAM elimination work with 
   currently available server software is having two email boxes 
   available. Each of these boxes MUST meet a different set of criteria 
   described later in this document.   
    
2. Mailbox 1 
    
   This mailbox can be used with automated systems, and just about any 
   other purpose, except for those purposes noted for Mailbox 2 in 
   Section 3. This is the only mailbox that is valid for use with non-
   human senders.   
    
   For this mailbox the server will need to recognize each user as their 
   own sub-domain (ex. Jane Doe uses janedoe.example.net). The mailbox 
   MUST have a sub-domain or FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name) 
   associated with it. An MX (Mail Exchanger) record should point the 
   domain to the email server on which the account resides. The mailbox 
   will be a general collection box for receiving all of the email 
   pointed at a catch-all mailbox. The address of the real email box 
   should remain private, unless Section 4 is utilized. If Jane uses 
   jane@janedoe.example.net to login to her email box, she should never 
   release jane@janedoe.example.net to anyone as her email address. Each 
   entity that is to receive an email address from the user should be 
   given a unique address, so that the user has the ability to terminate 
   an email address that has been SPAMed and possibly sold to a mass 
   mailing list. If Jane were communicating with the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force she could communicate her email address as 
   being IETF@janedoe.example.net.       
    

 
 
KULARSKI               Expires û February 2004               [Page 2] 
                            SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
2.1 The Email Server Software 
    
   The Email server MUST have software capable of handling a catch-all 
   system. The catch all mailbox needs to point to a single mailbox on 
   the server. The mailbox may reside on the same domain or a separate 
   domain, depending upon the userÆs needs and the server capabilities. 
   The email server SHOULD support the ôX-RCPT-TOö email header to allow 
   for identifying mail that may be disguised.    
    
   Some email servers will often tell the sending server the destination 
   of any type of forwarded address, including for catch-alls. This MUST 
   NOT be allowed to occur on a server where the procedure described in 
   this document is implemented.  
    
2.2 When SPAM Occurs 
    
   After a short amount of time in circulation one or more of the userÆs 
   virtual addresses will begin to attract SPAM. As soon as SPAM is 
   received the ôX-RCPT-TOö or ôTOö lines in the header should be 
   checked to verify the address that the mail was destined for. The 
   virtual address should be immediately discontinued from use.   
    
   A few options exist for what to do with the virtual address after it 
   is identified as a SPAM recipient. First, the virtual address can be 
   created as an alias and forwarded to a dead-end mailbox that is 
   automatically cleared after a certain amount of time (or is never 
   permanently recorded). The second option is a little less drastic, 
   the virtual address can be created as an alias and pointed to another 
   actual account residing on the userÆs domain. For example, Jane can 
   get all of her SPAMed virtual addresses pointed to 
   spam@janedoe.example.net where she can later sort the mail by hand, 
   or by a conventional SPAM identification program.   
    
    
3. Mailbox 2 
    
   This mailbox can be used for personal communication, public 
   newsgroups, web page contact or a situation where the address will 
   only be used by humans.  
    
   For this mailbox the server must support intelligent white listing. 
   Intelligent white listing involves the email box only receiving email 
   from senders listed on the white list, but sending an email to those 
   who are not on the white list to give them a chance to verify that 
   they are human by accepting an email at a special address, once that 
   mail is received and the sender is confirmed the sender is 
   automatically added to the white list, and the mail is released from 
   the queue and delivered to the user.  
    
 
 
KULARSKI               Expires û February 2004               [Page 3] 
                            SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
   White listing by itself is effective in eliminating SPAM, but is 
   horribly inconvenient, so it MUST be used in conjunction with the 
   catch-all mailbox in Section 2.   
    
   If SPAM is found in the white listed mailbox the senderÆs email 
   address should be removed from the white list and added to the 
   blacklist.  
    
    
4. Combining Both Mailboxes 
    
   Maintaining two independent email boxes is not user friendly, nor 
   does it maintain a low amount of network traffic. Maintaining two 
   separate mailboxes is quite resource heavy for both the server and 
   client. The two mailboxes can be combined on most servers that 
   support both catch-all and white list functions.  
    
   The proper way to configure both systems as a single mailbox is to 
   set up the catch-all system as specified, and then configure an alias 
   to use white listing. If mail to the white listed alias passes the 
   white list it can be delivered to the userÆs main mailbox that they 
   keep secret.  
    
5. Future Considerations 
    
   In the future the developers of email server software may want to 
   write the software with the ability to assign each user to their own 
   sub-domain and not have to specify the sub-domain as an independent 
   domain within the sever software configuration.  
    
Security Considerations 
    
   The actual address of the mailbox that the mail is pointed to as its 
   final destination should never be revealed. If it is revealed to an 
   inappropriate entity the user could begin receiving SPAM that canÆt 
   be prevented. In the event the primary mailbox is divulged it should 
   be renamed by the administration as soon as possible.   
    
   Because this document does not specify an Internet standard of any 
   kind there are no direct security considerations.  
    
    
References 
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    


 
 
KULARSKI               Expires û February 2004               [Page 4] 
                            SPAM Reduction                 August 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
   ii  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Curtis M. Kularski 
   219 Best St 
   Bessemer City, NC 28016-9330 
   United States 
   Phone: +1 (704) 629-2498 
   Email: curtis@kularski.net 

   Comments about this document should be sent to 
   internet-draft@curtis.kularski.us    


































 
 
KULARSKI               Expires û February 2004               [Page 5] 

