Network Working Group                                          T.Hardie 
Internet-Draft                                           Qualcomm, Inc.
							     April 2004


	The HMAC-MD5 and HMAC-SHA-1 HTTP Digest Algorithms Tokens

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    <http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html>.

    This Internet-Draft will expire in November 2004.




Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

    RFC 3230 sets out a process for registering HTTP Digest algorithm
    values with IANA.  This document registers the tokens "hmac-md5" and
    "hmac-sha-1".


1. Introduction.

    RFC 3230 [1] sets out a process for registering HTTP digest [2]
    algorithm values with IANA.  This document registers two new values
    in the IANA registry created by RFC 3230.


2.  Newly registered Digest Algorithms.

   The following are to be considered http digest algorithm tokens, as
   per Section 4.1.1. of RFC 3230 [1].

   HMAC-MD5          The HMAC-MD5 algorithm, as specified in RFC 2104
   [3].
		     The output of this algorithm is encoded using the
		     base64 encoding [4].

   HMAC-SHA-1        The HMAC-SHA-1 algorithm, as specificed in RFC
   2104[3].
		     The output of this algorithm is encoded using the
		     base64 encoding [4].

3.  IANA Considerations.

    The IANA is requested to insert the new values into the HTTP digest
    algorithm registry.


4. Security Considerations.

    In general, the registration of algorithm names and the association
    of those names with identifiable specifications helps ensure that
    all parties to a communication share a common understanding of the
    algorithm.

    Note that the two algorithms registered by this action are keyed
    digests, and that they are appropriately used only in cases where
    the two parties can securely share the key.  Because RFC 3230 does
    not include a "parameters" field in the Digest: or Want-Digest:
    header (e.g. Want-Digest: hmac-md5;keyid=17), usage scenarios must
    not require the headers to indicate which key is in use through such
    a method.


5. Normative References

[1]  Mogul, J. and Van Hoff, A. "Instance Digests in HTTP".  RFC 3230.
	January 2002.

[2]  Franks, J., Hallam-Baker, P., Hostetler, J., Lawrence, S.,
	Leach, P., Luotonen, A. and L. Stewart, "HTTP Authentication:
	Basic and Digest Access Authentication", RFC 2617, June 1999.

[3] Krawczyk, H., Bellare M., and Canetti, R. "HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for
	Message Authentication".  RFC 2140.  February 1997.

[4] Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
	Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies",
	RFC 2045, November 1996.

6. Non-Normative References

None.

7. Acknowledgements.

   AC Mahendran and Jun Wang originally suggested that these values be
   registered.  Jeff Mogul was kind enough to review the first draft of
   this document and to suggest updated text for the Security
   Considerations section.

8. Author's Address

    Ted Hardie Qualcomm, Inc.  675 Campbell Technology Parkway Suite 200
    Campbell, CA U.S.A.

    EMail: hardie@qualcomm.com


Full Copyright Statement


    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
    Internet Society.






















