


AUTOCONF                                                      S. Ruffino
Internet-Draft                                                 P. Stupar
Expires: July 5, 2006                                              TILAB
                                                              T. Clausen
                                                                     LIX
                                                                S. Singh
                                                             SAMSUNG AIT
                                                            January 2006


                    Connectivity Scenarios for MANET
                draft-ruffino-autoconf-conn-scenarios-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 5, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This Internet Draft aims at describing a wide spread set of possible
   connectivity scenarios involving mobile ad-hoc networks, in order to
   provide a reference for the AUTOCONF Working Group.  The aspects
   considered for definition and classification of the scenarios are



Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


   number and characteristics of the gateways that connect MANET nodes
   to external networks.  Analysis will range from a scenario where no
   connectivity is provided, i.e. an isolated MANET, to more complex
   scenario where a MANET has multiple mobile gateways.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1   Isolated MANET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2   MANET connected to an external network . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2.1   Fixed Gateways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.2   Mobile Gateways scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3   MANET intermittently connected to external networks  . . . 10
   4.  Roaming from a MANET to an Infrastructure Network  . . . . . . 11
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   A.  Changes from previous versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   B.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 18




























Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


1.  Introduction

   MANET were initially designed to be employed in highly dynamic and
   unpredictable environments, characterized by high mobility of users
   and terminals.  MANETs are autonomous, self-configuring, self-healing
   networks, whose mobile nodes discover other nodes and supported
   services in an automatic fashion.  MANET routing protocols, as
   defined in IETF, enable two generic MANET nodes to exchange data
   traffic through multi-hop connections, if a 1-hop radio link between
   them is not available.  In this way, nodes can freely move within the
   MANET: routing protocols dynamically react to movement and constantly
   discover the optimal path according to a predifined metric, e.g.
   number of hops.  If an intermediary node, belonging to a path between
   a source and a destination, fails, traffic is automatically re-routed
   through an alternative path.

   RFC2501 [1] gives a definition of a MANET and also introduces the
   possibility to connect a MANET to an external network, by means of
   gateways.  These are devices equipped with two or more network
   interfaces: a MANET interface and an interface typically connected to
   one or more non-MANET networks.  MANET nodes exchange traffic among
   themselves using multi-hop paths and can reach outside hosts and the
   Internet by means of the gateways.  In this case the MANET acts as a
   "stub" network, whose nodes route traffic originating and/or
   terminating within the MANET itself.

   Operators, Network and Service providers are showing increasing
   interest in this type of network, as a consequence of the wide spread
   deployment of low-cost radio technologies such as IEEE802.11a/b/g/h
   and the increasing customer base.  MANETs are expected to be deployed
   as an extension to the traditional infrastructure networks, to
   realize the so-called hybrid networks.

   A common example are the so-called Mesh Networks, used to extend the
   coverage area of public hot-spots or to realize large-scale low-cost
   wireless coverage in urban areas.  A further interesting application
   and research field is represented by multi-hop cellular networks:
   MANETs connected to cellular WAN networks.  In this case MANETs can
   be used to realize an extended wireless coverage in areas where
   "traditional" cellular network is not available.  Many proposals and
   projects that analyse integration of MANET and 3G+ networks exist:
   for example, see [2], [3], [4] and [5].

   This Internet Draft aims at describing and analyzing connectivity
   scenarios for MANET, to provide a reference for AUTOCONF WG.  In
   fact, the scenarios described herein can be used as a guideline for
   the design of address autoconfiguration mechanisms, especially during
   problem statement and requirements definition.



Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


   Analysis will range from a scenario where no connectivity is
   provided, i.e. an isolated MANET, to more complex scenarios where a
   MANET has multiple mobile gateways.  This document is structured in
   the following way: in Section 2 a glossary for commonly used terms is
   given; in Section 3 connectivity scenarios for a MANET are listed.
   In this section particular attention is paid to the connection of a
   MANET with other external networks, by means of one or more fixed (
   Section 3.2.1 ) or mobile wireless gateways ( Section 3.2.2 ).  In
   Section 4 the roaming of a node from a Infrastractured wireless LAN
   to an ad-hoc network is considered.









































Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


2.  Terminology

   [[This section will be updated (or deleted), according to terminology
   sections in other AUTOCONF specifications.]]

   Node
      An IPv4/IPv6 device which is a MANET element: it runs a MANET
      routing protocol and exchanges data with other nodes within a
      MANET and with hosts located within external networks.  A node has
      at least one physical interface connecting it to the MANET.


   Gateway
      A node equipped with at least two interfaces, one of which
      connects it to an external network, i.e. non-MANET, and can be
      wired or wireless.


   Host
      An IPv4/IPv6 terminal/computer, external to the MANET.  Host is
      defined here as only "External" to differentiate it from the nodes
      of the MANET.


   Wireless Interface (or MANET interface)
      The physical network interface that connects a node to the MANET.


   Radio Interface (or Cellular Interface)
      The physical network interface that can connect a gateway to an
      external Wireless Wide Area Network, owned and administered by an
      operator.



















Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


3.  Scenarios

   In this section, we describe typical connectivity scenarios for a
   MANET.  This section is structured as follows: first, the case of an
   isolated MANET is examined, where no gateways exist.  Then, various
   scenarios of a connected MANET are presented, classified by the
   characteristics and the number of gateways, which can be fixed and/or
   mobile.  In the end, the case of an intermittently connected MANET is
   analyzed.

3.1  Isolated MANET

   An isolated MANET is a network that is autonomously set-up among
   wireless mobile nodes localized in the same geographical area.  Nodes
   activate Layer-2 radio links, by which they can exchange traffic with
   their immediate neighbors, and run an ad-hoc routing protocol, which
   enables multi-hop data forwarding across multiple links.  Routing
   protocol constantly discovers routes between nodes, in a proactive (
   [13] , [15] ) or reactive fashion ( [14] , [16] ): this enables each
   node to route traffic to all other nodes within the MANET also during
   movements.

   In this type of MANET there is no connection to an external network:
   all traffic is generated by MANET nodes and destined to MANET nodes.

   Typical applications of this scenario are temporary networks, that
   must be set-up in areas where neither wireless coverage nor network
   infrastructure exist.  Examples can be emergency networks used for
   disaster recovery, battlefield applications, electronic surveillance.
   Other examples can be found in occasional work meetings, where
   networks are set-up to enable file sharing among co-workers.

3.2  MANET connected to an external network

   In this scenario a MANET is connected to an external network (e.g.
   the Internet) by means of one or more gateways (Figure 1).  A MANET
   node can exchange data traffic with every other node through multi-
   hop paths and communicate with hosts located in the external network,
   routing its upward traffic towards a gateway.  Such gateway, in turn,
   will receive return traffic from the external host(s) and will route
   it to the source node.










Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


                                     H1
                                      |
                               +---------------+
                               |   Internet    |**
                               +---------------+  *
                                 *           *     *
                                 *           *      *
                             GW1**           *       GW3
                               |         +--GW2-------+
                               |         |   |
                            ---N1--------+   |
                           /      \          |
                         N4        \        N2
                                    N3-----/



   Figure 1: Example of a MANET interconnected to an external network by
                        means of multiple gayeways

   It is worth stressing gateways play a critical role in this scenario,
   from the point of view of both global MANET performance and
   interworking functionalities.

   When the number of nodes in the MANET increases, gateways can become
   bottlenecks, as they aggregate more data flows and must route an
   increasing amount of traffic to/from the Internet.  This can have
   severe consequences also on the performance experienced by other
   MANET nodes, depending on the characteristics of gateways: e.g.,
   processing power and available bandwidth on the uplink interface.  In
   fact, the interface connecting gateways to the Internet can be either
   wired or wireless, which can, in turn, be of a different type with
   respect to the MANET interface.  In the first case gateways are fixed
   devices, while in the second case they can also be mobile, as the
   other MANET nodes.

   A MANET can have a single gateway (fixed or mobile) or multiple
   gateways (fixed or mobile).  Other than providing more reliability
   and fault tolerance to the entire MANET, multiple gateways enable
   load balancing of data flows to/from the Internet.  Single traffic
   flows of multiple nodes or multiple flows of a single node can be
   routed through different gateways, possibly improving the overall
   performances of the MANET.  This can be a desiderable feature,
   especially when the external network is a low-throughput cellular
   WAN, such as GPRS/EDGE, in order not to overload a single gateway
   with traffic potentially generated by many nodes at the same time.

   Moreover, gateways can be equipped with a number of additional



Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


   features.  For example, they could participate to an external routing
   protocol, in order to announce internal routes to external routers
   and hosts.  They can act as enforcement points for security purposes:
   they can control access to external networks and, following a common
   best practice, they can enforce Ingress Filtering on MANET generated
   traffic.  Finally they can also provide services like address
   configuration and/or DNS to MANET nodes.

   Gateways can also be equipped with additional resources, to grant
   higher fault tolerance to the whole MANET: additional energy
   resources, more processing power, more volatile and non-volatile
   memory.  This is especially true in case of fixed gateways, that can
   be directly powered and operated by an network administrator.

   The following sections detail usage scenarios for fixed and mobile
   gateways.

3.2.1  Fixed Gateways

   In this scenario, gateways are deployed in predefined locations
   planned by the network operator.  Each gateway is connected to the
   external network by means of a wired or wireless interface.

   Mesh networks and networks used for environmental surveillance can be
   categorized under this scenario.

   o  Mesh Networks: these are probably the most widespread ad-hoc
      networks.  In a Mesh Network, nodes (e.g. user terminals) exchange
      traffic among them directly, through a layer-2 radio link, or
      using other nodes or fixed wireless devices as intermediate
      relays.  A Mesh Network is typically connected to an external
      infrastructure network by means of fixed wired Access Points,
      which act as gateways and typically connect the Mesh to an
      external infrastructure network.
      Mesh Networks can be further classified depending on the kind of
      devices which form the mesh itself.  In fact, in some deployments,
      the mesh is formed only among the wireless Access Points, which
      are endowed with two wireless interfaces: the first radio
      interface forms the mesh with other peer access points,
      participating to a routing protocol, while the second radio
      provides local connectivity to nodes, which cannot set-up a
      network themselves, as they don't run any routing protocol.  In
      other deployments, the mesh is realized among all the nodes, which
      have to run a routing protocol.
      Applications of this networks are Internet public access
      (browsing, e-mail etc.) by mobile users from outdoor areas,
      wireless coverage of corporate building to give employees access
      to shared data and company services (email, Intranet browsing).



Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


      These solutions can bring to savings on cabling and maintenance
      costs.


   o  Surveillance networks: several wireless nodes endowed with sensors
      of various kinds are spread over high enviromental risk areas
      (e.g. fires in wooden areas).  They communicate through multi-hop
      connections and run a routing protocol.  When an emergency
      situation arises, data collected by sensors are transmitted from
      the collecting nodes upwards one or more gateways (which can have
      both a wired or wireless interface) and conveyed to a manned
      monitoring station.
      Topologies of this kind of network are typically static, as the
      nodes are installed in fixed positions within the monitored areas.
      Moreover, these networks are characterized by multiple constant
      low-throughput data flows going from the sensors to the gateways.


3.2.2  Mobile Gateways scenario

   In this scenario, the gateway's radio interface, connecting the MANET
   to the external network, can be a cellular WAN interface (e.g.  GSM,
   GPRS, EDGE, UMTS), a broadband wireless MAN (WMAN) interface (e.g.
   IEEE 802.16x, 802.20) or a WLAN interface (e.g.  IEEE 802.11).  In
   each of these cases, gateways can forward upward traffic only if
   located within the transmission/reception range of one or more Base
   Stations or Access points.  Gateways can move within the coverage
   area, and they can also move outside this area, where they can't
   forward uplink traffic destined to external hosts anymore, nor
   downlink traffic destined to internal nodes.

   As a variant, most of the nodes can also be equipped with two
   heterogeneous interfaces (e.g.  UMTS/Wi-Fi).  In this case there may
   be "occasional" gateways: they can be nodes (e.g. mobile phones and
   PDAs) that, after setting up the radio link towards the external
   network, whenever located within its coverage area, can start
   forwarding other nodes' outbound packets.  In this scenario, gateways
   may be characterized by low computational power and limited energy
   resources.

   Although the MANET can again exploit benefits given by multiple
   occasional gateways, additional issues arise: in fact, gateways are
   not under operator's control anymore.  It's possible that the owner
   of the gateway abruptly turns his terminal off or switches off the
   connection towards the cellular network, in order to save battery
   life.  Thus, the number and the position of gateways are higly
   dynamic: this can cause frequent re-routing of uplink data flows, or,
   loss of connectivity due to partitioning of the MANET.



Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


   o  Coverage Extension: In this scenario, the MANET is used as a
      coverage extension of the radio infrastractured network to which
      the gateways are connected.  The primary benefit of such extension
      is that local communication between two nodes is performed without
      using any cellular radio resource, e.g. radio channels.  Another
      benefit is the possibility to grant network access also to those
      terminals that are not equipped with a cellular radio interface
      (e.g. access sharing).  The implication of this business model on
      security, accounting and rewarding aspects are out of the scope of
      this draft, neverthless must be carefully investigated.

   o  Automotive scenario: a MANET is set up by a group of vehicles.
      One or more of these may become a mobile gateway after connecting
      to the Wireless LAN of a petrol station or setting up an UMTS
      connection and, therefore, may be used by the other vehicles of
      the MANET to exchange traffic with the external hosts.



3.3  MANET intermittently connected to external networks

   Gateways in a MANET, especially if mobile and equipped with a radio
   interface, may not be permanently connected to the external network.
   MANETs of this kind have the characteristics of both MANET described
   in Section 3.1 (while not connected) and of the ones described in
   Section 3.2 (while connected).

   Most of the nodes belonging to a MANET of this kind shall exploit the
   connection temporally set up to the external network to communicate
   with hosts they can't reach while the MANET is isolated.  As a
   consequence, such MANETs may experience a burst of exchanged traffic
   while connected to the external network.  The amount and the
   distribution of such traffic depends on how long the MANET can be
   connected to an external network.

   o  Train network: a MANET built in a train, which is connected while
      stopped at the station and disconnected otherwise.  In particular,
      if the MANET is set up by some passengers, it may happen that
      while the train is stopped at the station, some of the nodes may
      become gateways.  For example, the station area may be covered by
      a wireless technology and some nodes equipped with a non-MANET
      interface of the same technology may therefore set up a connection
      to the external network.  In this case, most of the users may use
      the gateways to connect to their mail server, download and
      eventually send their e-mails: the MANET they belong to may
      therefore experience a burst of traffic exchanged with the
      external network.




Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


4.  Roaming from a MANET to an Infrastructure Network

   A mobile node, connected e.g. to a IEEE 802.11 network
   (infrastructure mode), can roam to a nearby IEEE 802.11 (ad-hoc mode)
   MANET.  This situation can be very commonly experienced by a mobile
   node, during its movement, even not voluntarily.  It is worth noting
   that such roaming doesn't involve only Link Layer operations.  It is
   possible that the procedures used within IEEE 802.11 network, e.g.
   for address configuration or duplicate address detection, are
   different from those used in a MANET.  This is mainly due to the fact
   that a MANET is characterized by multi-hop paths, while in an
   Infrastructure WLAN all hosts share the same link and can directly
   communicate with one or more on-link Access Router(s).

   Generally speaking, there can be situations where the destination
   MANET uses a different radio technology for multi-hop links.  This
   scenario, not addressed in this document, brings added technical
   issues, because radio interface should be dynamically switched to use
   a different Physical Layer and Link Layer technologies.
































Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   This document raises no security issue.
















































Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

7.  References

   [1]   Corson, S. and J. Macker, "Mobile ad hoc networking (MANET):
         Routing protocol performance issues and evaluation
         considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999.

   [2]   Siebert, M., "On Ad Hoc Networks in the 4G Integration
         Process", Med-Hoc 2004 , June 2004.

   [3]   "Ambient Networks", http://www.ambient-networks.org , 2004.

   [4]   "Daidalos", http://www.ist-daidalos.org , 2004.

   [5]   "World Wireless Research Forum",
         http://www.wireless-world-research.org , 2004.

   [6]   Wakikawa, R., Malinen, J., Perkins, C., Nilsson, A., and A.
         Tuominen, "Global connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad Hoc
         Networks", I-D draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-03.txt,
         October 2003.

   [7]   Cha, H., Park, J., and H. Kim, "Extended Support for Global
         Connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad Hoc Networks",
         I-D draft-cha-manet-extended-support-globalv6-00.txt,
         October 2003.

   [8]   Jeong, J., Park, J., Kim, H., and D. Kim, "Ad Hoc IP Address
         Autoconfiguration",
         I-D draft-jeong-adhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-02.txt, February 2004.

   [9]   Perkins, C., Malinen, J., Wakikawa, R., and E. Belding-Royer,
         "IP Address Autoconfiguration for Ad Hoc Networks",
         I-D draft-perkins-manet-autoconf-01.txt, November 2001.

   [10]  Singh, S., Kim, JH., Choi, YG., Kang, KL., and YS. Roh, "Mobile
         multi-gateway support for IPv6 mobile ad hoc networks",
         I-D draft-singh-manet-mmg-00.txt, June 2004.

   [11]  Paakkonen, P., Rantonen, M., and J. Latvakoski, "IPv6
         addressing in a heterogeneous MANET-network",
         I-D draft-paakkonen-addressing-htr-manet-00.txt, December 2003.

   [12]  Jelger, C., Noel, T., and A. Frey, "Gateway and address
         autoconfiguration for IPv6 adhoc networks",



Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


         I-D draft-jelger-manet-gateway-autoconf-v6-02.txt, April 2004.

   [13]  Clausen, T. and P. Jacquet, "Optimized link state routing
         protocol", RFC 3626, October 2003.

   [14]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-Demand
         Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561, July 2003.

   [15]  Ogier, R., Templin, F., and M. Lewis, "Topology Dissemination
         Based on Reverse-Path Forwarding (TBRPF)", RFC 3684,
         February 2004.

   [16]  Johnson, D., Maltz, D., and Y. Hu, "The Dynamic Source Routing
         Protocol for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (DSR)",
         I-D draft-ietf-manet-dsr-10.txt, July 2004.

   [17]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
         September 1981.

   [18]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
         Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [19]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
         Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   [20]  Aboba, B., "Dynamic Configuration of Link-Local IPv4
         Addresses", draft-ietf-zeroconf-ipv4-linklocal-17 (work in
         progress), July 2004.

   [21]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [22]  Sun, Y. and E. Belding-Royer, "A study of dynamic addressing
         techniques in mobile ad hod networks", I-D Wireless
         communication and mobile computing, May 2004.

   [23]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery
         for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December 1998.

   [24]  Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic Host
         Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633,
         December 2003.

   [25]  Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A., and G. Egeland,
         "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc
         Networks", First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad
         hoc Communications and Networks , October 2004.




Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Simone Ruffino
   Telecom Italia LAB
   Via G.Reiss Romoli 274
   Torino  10148
   Italy

   Phone: +39 011 228 7566
   Email: simone.ruffino@telecomitalia.it


   Patrick Stupar
   Telecom Italia LAB
   Via G.Reiss Romoli 274
   Torino  10148
   Italy

   Phone: +39 011 228 5727
   Email: patrick.stupar@telecomitalia.it


   Thomas Heide Clausen
   Laboratoire d'informatique
   Ecole Polytechnique
   Palaiseau Cedex  91128
   France

   Phone: +33 1 6933 2867
   Email: thomas.clausen@polytechnique.fr


   Shubhranshu Singh
   SAMSUNG Advanced Institute of Technology - i-Networking Laboratory
   San 14-1, Nongseo-ri, Giheung-eup
   Yongin-si,  Gyeonggi-do 449-712
   Korea

   Phone: +82 31 280 9569
   Email: shubhranshu@samsung.com











Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


Appendix A.  Changes from previous versions

   o  From draft-ruffino-conn-scenarios-01:

      *  Title and version number changed (now, "autoconf" is in the
         title and version is -00).  This was done to have the draft
         automatically listed in the IETF AUTOCONF WG web page.

      *  Editorial changes (mostly rewording)

   o  From draft-ruffino-conn-scenarios-00

      *  Some editorial changes

      *  Added "Coverage Extension" scenario in Section 3.2.2

      *  Added some explanatory text to Section 4


































Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


Appendix B.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Ivano Guardini for his valuable
   comments.















































Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             AUTOCONF scenarios               January 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Ruffino, et al.           Expires July 5, 2006                 [Page 18]

