
Internet-Draft                                                Ryan Moats
draft-ietf-urn-ietf-02.txt                                          AT&T
Expires in six months                                          July 1997

                   A URN Namespace for IETF Documents
                  Filename: draft-ietf-urn-ietf-02.txt


Status of This Memo

      This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
      documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
      areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
      distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
      Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as ``work
      in progress.''

      To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
      the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
      Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net
      (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
      Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   A system for Uniform Resource Names (URNs) must be capable of
   supporting new naming systems.  As an example of how a new namespace
   may be proposed, this document presents a naming system based on the
   RFC family of documents (RFCs, STDs, and FYIs) developed by the IETF
   and published by the RFC editor and the minutes of working groups
   (WG) and birds of a feather (BOF) meetings that occur during IETF
   conferences.  This namespace can be supported within the URN
   framework and the currently proposed syntax for URNs.

1. Namespace Syntax

   Consistent with the URN syntax specification [1], each namespace must
   specify syntax related information that is specific to that
   namespace.  This section covers these specifications.







Expires 1/31/98                                                 [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT     A URN Namespace for IETF Documents          July 1997


1.1. Namespace Identifier (NID)

   The namespace identifier for this namespace is "ietf".

1.2. Namespace Specific String (NSS)

   The Namespace Specific String has the following ABNF [2]
   specification:
           NSS = (family ":" number) / ("mtg-" number "-" wgbofname)

           family = "rfc" / "std" / "fyi"

           number = 1*DIGIT

           wgbofname = 1*LETDIGIT

           LETDIGIT = DIGIT / %x41..%x5a / %x61..%x7a

           DIGIT = %x30..%x39

   The ABNF specification for "family" is based on the current documents
   in the RFC family.  As new document series are added to the IETF
   family by the IESG (or its successor), this ABNF specification will
   need to be updated.  Any system intended to resolve names for this
   namespace should be written with the awareness that a new document
   series may be introduced at any time.

   The ABNF specification for "wgbofname" is based on the current and
   past abbreviations for working groups and BOFs in the IETF.  If a
   working group or BOF is created that used characters outside the
   range of this ABNF specification, this specification will need to be
   updated. Any system intended to resolve names for this namespace
   should be written with the awareness that this could occur at any
   time.

1.3. Assignment of URNs in this Namespace

   URNs are assigned in the namespace in two ways.  The first is when a
   new RFC, FYI or STD is passed by the IESG and published by the RFC
   Editor.  This new document will have a new series number and will
   therefore define a new URN.  The document mappings maintained by the
   RFC Editor (the index files "rfc-index.txt", "fyi-index.txt", "std-
   index.txt") are defined to be the definitive statement of the
   assignment of RFC Family URNs in this namespace.

   The second way a URN is assigned is when a working group or birds of
   a feather files meeting minutes as part of an IETF conference.  The
   list of minutes maintained by the IETF for each working group and



Expires 1/31/98                                                 [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT     A URN Namespace for IETF Documents          July 1997


   conference in the subtree pointed at by the URL ftp://ietf.org/ietf/
   is considered the definitive assignment of URNs for working group or
   birds of a feather minutes.

1.4. Additional Reserved Characters

   No characters in addition to those specified in [1] are reserved by
   this namespace.

1.5. Additional Lexical Equivalence Relations

   Note that the entire URN is case-insensitive, because of the
   definition of the NSS.

1.6. Functional Equivalence Relations

   Rules for equivalence in this namespace are embedded in the document
   mappings maintained by the RFC Editor (the index files "rfc-
   index.txt", "fyi-index.txt", "std-index.txt").  A resource is
   equivalent to the set of resources implied by the "(Also...)"
   construct in these mappings.  As an example, the URN
   "urn:ietf:rfc:1661" is equivalent to th URN "urn:ietf:std:51" because
   the "rfc-index.txt" map shows that RFC 1661 is also STD 51.  However,
   the URN "urn:ietf:std:51" is equivalent to the SET of URNs
   "urn:ietf:rfc:1661" and "urn:ietf:rfc:1662" since the "std-index.txt"
   shows that STD 51 is also RFC 1661 and RFC 1662.  Therefore, a
   resolver receiving a N2R request for "urn:ietf:std:51" MUST return
   either STD 51 or BOTH RFC 1661 and RFC 1662.

2. Comments

   Readers will notice that this namespace does not include internet
   drafts.  While these documents are published by the internet drafts
   editor, they were excluded because they do not provide persistent
   resources to refer to (all internet drafts expire after six months).
   This is as opposed to the RFC family of documents which never expire
   (an RFC may be obsoleted or superceded but the actual RFC document
   itself does not expire).

3. Security Considerations

   Because this namespace defines no additional reserved characters, it
   does not add any security considerations beyond those inherent from
   the existence of the reserved characters from [1].  Further, the
   definition of the NSS above does not use any of the reserved
   characters from [1], which means that resolvers for this namespace
   may be considered "secure" in the sense that any escaping of
   characters in the NSS MUST result in the resolver indicating that the



Expires 1/31/98                                                 [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT     A URN Namespace for IETF Documents          July 1997


   URN has incorrect syntax.

4. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to various members of the URN working group for comments on
   earlier drafts of this document.  The work described in this document
   is partially supported by the National Science Foundation,
   Cooperative Agreement NCR-9218179.

4. References

   Request For Comments (RFC) and Internet Draft documents are available
   from <URL:ftp://ftp.internic.net> and numerous mirror sites.

         [1]         R. Moats, "URN Syntax," RFC 2141, May 5, 1997.

         [2]         D. Crocker, P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
                     Specifications: ABNF," Internet Draft (work in pro-
                     gress), January 1997.

5. Author's Address

   Ryan Moats
   AT&T
   15621 Drexel Circle
   Omaha, NE 68135-2358
   USA

   Phone:  +1 402 894-9456
   EMail:  jayhawk@att.com


               This Internet Draft expires January 31, 1998.


















Expires 1/31/98                                                 [Page 4]


