



MILE                                                           C. Inacio
Internet-Draft                                                       CMU
Intended status: Informational                               D. Miyamoto
Expires: May 17, 2017                                             UTokyo
                                                       November 13, 2016


                       MILE Implementation Report
                   draft-ietf-mile-implementreport-10

Abstract

   This document is a collection of implementation reports from vendors,
   consortiums, and researchers who have implemented one or more of the
   standards published from the IETF INCident Handling (INCH) and
   Management Incident Lightweight Exchange (MILE) working groups.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 17, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Consortiums and Information Sharing and Analysis Centers
       (ISACs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Anti-Phishing Working Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Advanced Cyber Defence Centre . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  Research and Education Networking Information Sharing and
           Analysis Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Open Source Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  EMC/RSA RID Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  NICT IODEF-SCI implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  n6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Vendor Implementations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Deep Secure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  IncMan Suite, DFLabs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Surevine Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.4.  MANTIS Cyber-Intelligence Management Framework  . . . . .   8
   5.  Vendors with Planned Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.1.  Threat Central, HP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.2.  DAEDALUS, NICT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Other Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.1.  Collaborative Incident Management System  . . . . . . . .   9
     6.2.  Automated Incident Reporting - AirCERT  . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.3.  US Department of Energy CyberFed  . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Implementation Guide  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.1.  Code Generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.2.  iodeflib  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     7.3.  iodefpm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.4.  Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   11. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16

1.  Introduction

   This draft is a collection of information about Security Incident
   reporting protocols, and the implementation of systems that use them
   to share such information.  It is simply a collection of information,
   it makes no attempt to compare the various standards or
   implementations.  As such, it will be of interest to Network
   Operators who wish to collect and share such data.

   Operationally, Operators would need to decide which incident data
   collection group they want to be part of, that choice will strongly




Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   influence their choice of reporting protocol and applications to
   gather and distribute the data.

   This document is a collection of implementation reports from vendors
   and researchers who have implemented one or more of the standards
   published from the INCH and MILE working groups.  The standards
   include:

   o  Incident Object Description Exchange Format (IODEF) v1, RFC5070
      [RFC5070],

   o  Incident Object Description Exchange Format (IODEF) v2,
      RFC5070-bis [RFC5070-bis],

   o  Extensions to the IODEF-Document Class for Reporting Phishing,
      RFC5901 [RFC5901],

   o  Sharing Transaction Fraud Data, RFC5941 [RFC5941],

   o  Real-time Inter-network Defense (RID), RFC6545 [RFC6545],

   o  Transport of Real-time Inter-network Defense (RID) Messages over
      HTTP/TLS, RFC6546 [RFC6546],

   o  Incident Object Description Exchange Format (IODEF) Extension for
      Structured Cybersecurity Information (SCI), RFC7203 [RFC7203].

   The implementation reports included in this document have been
   provided by the team or product responsible for the implementations
   of the mentioned RFCs.  Additional submissions are welcome and should
   be sent to the draft editor.  A more complete list of
   implementations, including open source efforts and vendor products,
   can also be found at the following location:

      http://siis.realmv6.org/implementations/

2.  Consortiums and Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)

2.1.  Anti-Phishing Working Group

   The Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) is one of the biggest
   coalitions against cybercrime, especially phishing.  In order to
   collect threat information in a structured format, APWG provides a
   phishing and cybercrime reporting tool which sends threat information
   to APWG by tailoring information with IODEF format, based on RFC5070
   and RFC5901.





Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


2.2.  Advanced Cyber Defence Centre

   The Advanced Cyber Defense Centre (ACDC), is an European wide
   activity to fight against botnets.  ACDC provides solutions to
   mitigate on-going attacks, as well as consolidating information
   provided by various stakeholders into a pool of knowledge.  Within
   ACDC, IODEF is one of the supported schema for exchanging the
   information.

2.3.  Research and Education Networking Information Sharing and Analysis
      Center

   Research and Education Networking Information Sharing and Analysis
   Center (REN-ISAC) is a private community of the research and higher
   education members for sharing threat information, and employs IODEF
   formatted-messages to exchange information.

   REN-ISAC also recommends using an IODEF attachment provided with a
   notification email for processing rather than relying on parsing of
   the email body text.  The tools provided by REN-ISAC is designed to
   handle such email.

      http://www.ren-isac.net/notifications/using_iodef.html

3.  Open Source Implementations

3.1.  EMC/RSA RID Agent

   The EMC/RSA RID agent is an open source implementation of the IETF
   standards for the exchange of incident and indicator data.  The code
   has been released under a MIT license and development will continue
   with the open source community at the Github site for RSA
   Intelligence Sharing:

      https://github.com/RSAIntelShare/RID-Server.git

   The code implements the RFC6545, Real-time Inter-network Defense
   (RID) and RFC6546, Transport of RID over HTTP/TLS protocol.  The code
   supports the evolving RFC5070-bis Incident Object Description
   Exchange Format (IODEF) data model from the work in the IETF working
   group Managed Incident Lightweight Exchange (MILE).

3.2.  NICT IODEF-SCI implementation

   Japan's National Institute of Information and Communications
   Technology (NICT) Network Security Research Institute implemented
   open source tools for exchanging, accumulating, and locating IODEF-
   SCI (RFC7203, [RFC7203]documents.



Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   Three tools are available from GitHub.  These tools assist the
   exchange of IODEF-SCI documents between parties.  IODEF-SCI is
   RFC7203 that extends IODEF so that IODEF document can embed
   structured cybersecurity information (SCI).  For instance, it can
   embed MMDEF, CEE, MAEC in XML and CVE identifiers.

   The three tools are generator, exchanger, and parser.  The generator
   generates IODEF-SCI documents or appends an XML to an existing IODEF
   document.  The exchanger sends the IODEF document to a specified
   correspondent node.  The parser receives, parses, and stores the
   IODEF-SCI document.  The parser also creates an interface that
   enables users to locate IODEF-SCI documents which have previously
   been received.  The code has been released under a MIT license and
   development will continue on GitHub.

   Note that users can enjoy using this software at their own risk.

   Available Online:

      https://github.com/TakeshiTakahashi/IODEF-SCI

3.3.  n6

   n6 is a platform for processing security-related information,
   developed by NASK (Poland Research and Academic Computer Network),
   Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) Polska.  The n6 API provides
   a common and unified way of representing data across the different
   sources that participate in knowledge management.

   n6 exposes a REST-ful API over HTTPS with mandatory authentication
   via TLS client certificates, to ensure confidential and trustworthy
   communications.  Moreover, it uses an event-based data model for
   representation of all types of security information.

   Each event is represented as a JSON object with a set of mandatory
   and optional attributes. n6 also supports alternative output data
   formats for keeping compatibility with existing systems - IODEF and
   CSV - although these formats lack some of the attributes that may be
   present in the native JSON format.

   Available Online:

      https://github.com/CERT-Polska/n6sdk








Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


4.  Vendor Implementations

4.1.  Deep Secure

   Deep-Secure Guards are built to protect a trusted domain from:

   o  Releasing sensitive data that does not meet the organisational
      security policy

   o  Applications receiving badly constructed or malicious data which
      could exploit a vulnerability (known or unknown)

   Deep-Secure Guards support HTTPS and XMPP (optimised server to server
   protocol) transports.  The Deep-Secure Guards support transfer of XML
   based business content by creating a schema to translate the known
   good content to and from the intermediate format.  This means that
   the Deep-Secure Guards can be used to protect:

   o  IODEF/RID using the HTTPS transport binding (RFC6546)

   o  IODEF/RID using an XMPP binding

   o  ROLIE using HTTPS transport binding (XEP-0268, [XEP-0268])

   o  STIX/TAXII using the HTTPS transport binding

   Deep-Secure Guards also support the SMTP transport and perform deep
   content inspection of content including XML attachments.  The Mail
   Guard supports S/MIME and Deep Secure is working on support for the
   upcoming PLASMA standard which enables an information centric policy
   enforcement of data use.

4.2.  IncMan Suite, DFLabs

   The Incident Object Description Exchange Format, documented in the
   RFC5070, defines a data representation that provides a framework for
   sharing information commonly exchanged by Computer Security Incident
   Response Teams (CSIRTs) about computer security incidents.  IncMan
   Suite implements the IODEF standard for exchanging details about
   incidents, either for exporting or importing activities.  This has
   been introduced to enhance the capabilities of the various Computer
   Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRT), to facilitate collaboration
   and sharing of useful experiences, sharing awareness on specific
   cases.

   The IODEF implementation is specified as an XML schema, therefore all
   data are stored in an xml file; in this file all the data of an




Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   incident are organized in a hierarchical structure to describe the
   various objects and their relationships.

   The IncMan Suite relies on IODEF as a transport format, composed by
   various classes for describing the entities which are part of the
   incident description.  For instance the various relevant timestamps
   (detection time, start time, end time, and report time), the
   techniques used by the intruders to perpetrate the incident, the
   impact of the incident, technical and non-technical (time and
   monetary) and obviously all systems involved in the incident.

4.2.1.  Exporting Incidents

   Each incident defined in the IncMan Suite can be exported via a User
   Interface feature and it will create a xml document.  Due to the
   nature of the data processed, the IODEF extraction might be
   considered privacy sensitive by the parties exchanging the
   information or by those described by it.  For this reason, specific
   care needs to be taken in ensuring the distribution to an appropriate
   audience or third party, either during the document exchange and
   subsequent processing.

   The xml document generated will include description and details of
   the incident along with all the systems involved and the related
   information.  At this stage it can be distributed for import into a
   remote system.

4.2.2.  Importing Incidents

   The IncMan Suite provides the functionality to import incidents
   stored in files and transported via IODEF-compliant xml documents.
   The importing process comprises of two steps: first, the file is
   inspected to validate if it is well formed, then all data are
   uploaded inside the system.

   If the incident already exists in the system with the same incident
   id, the new one being imported will be created under a new id.  This
   approach prevents accidentally overwriting existing info or merging
   inconsistent data.

   The IncMan Suite also includes a feature to upload incidents from
   emails.

   The incident, described in xml format, can be stored directly into
   the body of the email message or transported as an attachment of the
   email.  At regular intervals, customizable by the user, the IncMan
   Suite monitors for incoming emails, filtered by a configurable white-
   list and black-list mechanism on the sender's email account, then a



Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   parser processes the received email and a new incident is created
   automatically, after having validated the email body or the
   attachment to ensure it is well formed format.

4.3.  Surevine Proof of Concept

   XMPP is enhanced and extended through the XMPP Extension Protocols
   (or XEPs).  XEP-0268 [XEP-0268] describes incident management (using
   IODEF) of the XMPP network itself, effectively supporting self-
   healing the XMPP network.  In order to more generically cover the
   incident management of a network over the same network, XEP-0268
   requires some updates.  We are working on these changes together with
   a new XEP that supports "social networking" over XMPP, enhancing the
   publish-and-subscribe XEP (XEP-0060 [XEP-0060]).  This now allows
   nodes to publish and subscribe to any type of content and therefore
   receive the content.  XEP-0060 will be used to describe IODEF
   content.  We now have an alpha version of the server-side software
   and client-side software required to demonstrate the "social
   networking" capability and are currently enhancing this to support
   Cyber Incident management in real-time.

4.4.  MANTIS Cyber-Intelligence Management Framework

   MANTIS provides an example implementation of a framework for managing
   cyber threat intelligence expressed in standards such as STIX, CybOX,
   IODEF, etc.  The aims of providing such an example implementation
   are:

   o  To facilitate discussions about emerging standards such as STIX,
      CybOX et al. with respect to questions regarding tooling: how
      would a certain aspect be implemented, how do changes affect an
      implementation?  Such discussions become much easier and have a
      better basis if they can be lead in the context of example tooling
      that is known to the community.

   o  To lower the barrier of entry for organizations and teams (esp.
      CSIRT/CERT teams) in using emerging standards for cyber-threat
      intelligence management and exchange.

   o  To provide a platform the basis of which research and community-
      driven development in the area of cyber-threat intelligence
      management can occur.

5.  Vendors with Planned Support







Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


5.1.  Threat Central, HP

   HP has developed HP Threat Central, a security intelligence platform
   that enables automated, real-time collaboration between organizations
   to combat today's increasingly sophisticated cyber attacks.  One way
   automated sharing of threat indicators is achieved is through close
   integration with the HP ArcSight SIEM for automated upload and
   consumption of information from the Threat Central Server.  In
   addition HP Threat Central supports open standards for sharing threat
   information so that participants who do not use HP Security Products
   can participate in the sharing ecosystem.  It is planned that future
   versions also support IODEF for the automated upload and download of
   threat information.

5.2.  DAEDALUS, NICT

   DAEDALUS is a real-time alert system based on a large-scale darknet
   monitoring facility that has been deployed as a part of the nicter
   system of NICT, Japan.  DAEDALUS consists of an analysis center
   (i.e., nicter) and several cooperative organizations.  Each
   organization installs a darknet sensor and establishes a secure
   channel between it and the analysis center, and continuously forwards
   darknet traffic toward the center.  In addition, each organization
   registers the IP address range of its livenet at the center in
   advance.  When these distributed darknet sensors observe malware
   activities from the IP address of a cooperate organization, then the
   analysis center sends an alert to the organization.  The future
   version of DAEDALUS will support IODEF for sending alert messages to
   the users.

6.  Other Implementations

6.1.  Collaborative Incident Management System

   Collaborative Incident Management System (CIMS) is a proof-of-concept
   system for collaborative incident handling and for the sharing of
   cyber defence situational awareness information between the
   participants, developed for the Cyber Coalition 2013 (CC13) exercise
   organized by NATO.  CIMS was implemented based on Request Tracker
   (RT), an open source software widely used for handling incident
   response by many CERTs and CSIRTs.

   One of the functionality implemented in CIMS was the ability to
   import and export IODEF messages in the body of emails.  The intent
   was to verify the suitability of IODEF to achieve the objective of
   collaborative incident handling.  The customized version of RT could
   be configured to send an email message containing an IODEF message
   whenever an incident ticket was created, modified or deleted.  These



Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   IODEF messages would then be imported into other incident handling
   systems in order to allow participating CSIRTs to use their usual
   means for incident handling, while still interacting with those using
   the proof-of-concept CIMS.  Having an IODEF message generated for
   every change made to the incident information in RT (and for the
   system to allow incoming IODEF email messages to be associated to an
   existing incident) would in some way allow all participating CSIRTs
   to actually work on a "common incident ticket", at least at the
   conceptual level.  Of particular importance was the ability for users
   to exchange information between each other concerning actions taken
   in the handling of a particular incident, thus creating a sort of
   common action log, as well as requesting/tasking others to provide
   information or perform specified action and correlating received
   responses to the original request or tasking.  As well, a specific
   "profile" was developed to identify a subset of the IODEF classes
   that would be used during the exercise, in an attempt to channel all
   users into a common usage pattern of the otherwise flexible IODEF
   standard.

6.2.  Automated Incident Reporting - AirCERT

   AirCERT was implemented by CERT/CC of Carnegie Mellon's Software
   Engineering Institute CERT division.  AirCERT was designed to be an
   Internet-scalable distributed system for sharing security event data.
   The AirCERT system was designed to be an automated collector of flow
   and IDS alerts.  AirCERT would collect that information into a
   relational database and be able to share reporting using IODEF and
   Intrusion Detection Message Exchange Format (RFC4765, [RFC4765]).
   AirCERT additionally used SNML [SNML] to exchange information about
   the network.  AirCERT was implemented in a combination of C and Perl
   modules and included periodic graphing capabilities leveraging
   RRDTool.

   AirCERT was intended for large scale distributed deployment and
   eventually the ability to sanitize data to be shared across
   administrative domains.  The architecture was designed to allow
   collection of data at a per site basis and to allow each site to
   create data sharing based on its own particular trust relationships.

6.3.  US Department of Energy CyberFed

   The CyberFed system was implemented and deployed by Argonne National
   Laboratory to automate the detection and response of attack activity
   against Department of Energy (DoE) computer networks.  CyberFed
   automates the collection of network alerting activity from various
   perimeter network defenses and logs those events into its database.
   CyberFed then automatically converts that information into blocking
   information transmitted to all participants.  The original



Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   implementation used IODEF messages wrapped in an XML extension to
   manage a large array of indicators.  The CyberFed system was not
   designed to describe a particular incident as much as to describe a
   set of current network blocking indicators that can be generated and
   deployed machine-to-machine.

   CyberFed is primarily implemented in Perl.  Included as part of the
   CyberFed system are scripts which interact with a large number of
   firewalls, IDS/IPS devices, DNS systems, and proxies which operate to
   implement both the automated collection of events as well as the
   automated deployment of black listing.

   Currently CyberFed supports multiple exchange formats including IODEF
   and STIX.  OpenIOC is also a potential exchange format that US DoE is
   considering.

7.  Implementation Guide

   The section aims at sharing the tips for development of IODEF-capable
   systems.

7.1.  Code Generators

   For implementing IODEF-capable systems, it is feasible to employ code
   generators for XML Schema Document (XSD).  The generators are used to
   save development costs since they automatically create useful
   libraries for accessing XML attributes, composing messages, and/or
   validating XML objects.  The IODEF XSD was defined in section 8 of
   RFC5070, and is availabe at http://www.iana.org/assignments/xml-
   registry/schema/iodef-1.0.xsd.

   However, there still remains some issues.  Due to the complexity of
   IODEF XSD, some code generators could not generate code from the XSD
   file.  The tested code generators were as follows.

   o  XML::Pastor [XSD:Perl] (Perl)

   o  RXSD [XSD:Ruby] (Ruby)

   o  PyXB [XSD:Python] (Python)

   o  JAXB [XSD:Java] (Java)

   o  CodeSynthesis XSD [XSD:Cxx] (C++)

   o  Xsd.exe [XSD:CS] (C#)





Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   For instance, we have tried to use XML::Pastor, but it could not
   properly understand its schema due to the complexity of IODEF XSD.
   The same applies to RXSD and JAXB.  Only PyXB, CodeSynthesis XSD and
   Xsd.exe were able to understand the complex schema.

   Unfortunately, there is no recommended workaround.  A possible
   workaround is a double conversion of XSD file.  This entails the XSD
   being serialized into XML, and afterwards the resulting XML is
   converted back into an XSD.  The resultant XSD was successfully
   processed by the all tools above.

   It should be noted that IODEF uses '-' (hyphen) symbols in its
   classes or attributes, listed as follows.

   o  IODEF-Document Class; it is the top level class in the IODEF data
      model described in section 3.1 of RFC5070.

   o  The vlan-name and vlan-num Attribute; according to section 3.16.2
      of RFC5070, they are the name and number of Virtual LAN and are
      the attributes for Address class.

   o  Extending the Enumerated Values of Attribute; according to section
      5.1 of RFC5070, it is a extension techniques to add new enumerated
      values to an attribute, and has a prefix of "ext-", e.g., ext-
      value, ext-category, ext-type, and so on.

   According to the language specification, many programing language
   prohibit having '-' symbols in the name of class.  The code
   generators must replace or remove the '-' when building the
   librarlies.  They should have the name space restore the '-' when
   outputting the XML along with IODEF XSD.

7.2.  iodeflib

   iodeflib is an open source implementation written in Python.  This
   provides simple but powerful APIs to create, parse and edit IODEF
   documents.  It was designed in order to keep its interface as simple
   as possible, whereas generated libraries tend to inherit the
   complexity of IODEF XSD.  In addition, the iodeflib interface
   includes functions to hide some unnecessarily nested structures of
   the IODEF schema, and adding more convenient shortcuts.

   This tool is available through the following link:

      http://www.decalage.info/python/iodeflib






Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


7.3.  iodefpm

   IODEF.pm is an open source implementation written in Perl.  This also
   provides a simple interface for creating and parsing IODEF documents,
   in order to facilitate the translation of the a key-value based
   format to the IODEF representation.  The module contains a generic
   XML DTD parser and includes a simplified node based representation of
   the IODEF DTD.  It can hence easily be upgraded or extended to
   support new XML nodes or other DTDs.

   This tool is available through the following link:

      http://search.cpan.org/~saxjazman/

7.4.  Usability

   Here notes some tips to avoid problems.

   o  IODEF has a category attribute for NodeRole class.  Though various
      categories are described, they are not sufficient.  For example,
      in the case of web mail servers, should the user choose "www" or
      "mail".  One suggestion is selecting "mail" as the category
      attribute and adding "www" for another attirbute.

   o  The numbering of Incident ID needs to be considered.  Otherwise,
      information, such as the number of incidents within certain period
      could be observed by document receivers.  This is easily mitigated
      by randomizing the assignment of incident IDs.

8.  Acknowledgements

   The MILE Implementation report has been compiled through the
   submissions of implementers of INCH and MILE working group standards.
   A special note of thanks to the following contributors:

      John Atherton, Surevine

      Humphrey Browning, Deep-Secure

      Dario Forte, DFLabs

      Tomas Sander, HP

      Ulrich Seldeslachts, ACDC

      Takeshi Takahashi, National Institute of Information and
      Communications Technology Network Security Research Institute




Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


      Kathleen Moriarty, EMC

      Bernd Grobauer, Siemens

      Dandurand Luc, NATO

      Pawel Pawlinski, NASK

9.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

10.  Security Considerations

   This draft provides a summary of implementation reports from
   researchers and vendors who have implemented RFCs and drafts from the
   MILE and INCH working groups.  There are no security considerations
   added in this draft because of the nature of the document.

11.  Informative References

   [RFC4765]  Debar, H., Curry, D., and B. Feinstein, "The Intrusion
              Detection Message Exchange Format (IDMEF)", RFC 4765,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4765, March 2007,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4765>.

   [RFC5070]  Danyliw, R., Meijer, J., and Y. Demchenko, "The Incident
              Object Description Exchange Format", RFC 5070,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5070, December 2007,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5070>.

   [RFC5070-bis]
              Danyliw, R., "The Incident Object Description Exchange
              Format v2", 2016, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              ietf-mile-rfc5070-bis>.

   [RFC5901]  Cain, P. and D. Jevans, "Extensions to the IODEF-Document
              Class for Reporting Phishing", RFC 5901,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5901, July 2010,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5901>.

   [RFC5941]  M'Raihi, D., Boeyen, S., Grandcolas, M., and S. Bajaj,
              "Sharing Transaction Fraud Data", RFC 5941,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5941, August 2010,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5941>.






Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   [RFC6545]  Moriarty, K., "Real-time Inter-network Defense (RID)",
              RFC 6545, DOI 10.17487/RFC6545, April 2012,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6545>.

   [RFC6546]  Trammell, B., "Transport of Real-time Inter-network
              Defense (RID) Messages over HTTP/TLS", RFC 6546,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6546, April 2012,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6546>.

   [RFC7203]  Takahashi, T., Landfield, K., and Y. Kadobayashi, "An
              Incident Object Description Exchange Format (IODEF)
              Extension for Structured Cybersecurity Information",
              RFC 7203, DOI 10.17487/RFC7203, April 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7203>.

   [SNML]     Trammell, B., Danyliw, R., Levy, S., and A. Kompanek,
              "AirCERT: The Definitive Guide", 2005,
              <http://aircert.sourceforge.net/docs/
              aircert_manual-06_2005.pdf>.

   [XEP-0060]
              Millard, P., Saint-Andre, P., and R. Meijer, "XEP-0060:
              Publish-Subscribe", 2016,
              <http://www.xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0060.html>.

   [XEP-0268]
              Hefczy, A., Jensen, F., Remond, M., Saint-Andre, P., and
              M. Wild, "XEP-0268: Incident Handling", 2012,
              <http://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0268.html>.

   [XSD:CS]   Microsoft, "XML Schema Definition Tool (Xsd.exe)",
              <http://www.microsoft.com/>.

   [XSD:Cxx]  CodeSynthesis, "XSD - XML Data Binding for C++",
              <http://www.codesynthesis.com/>.

   [XSD:Java]
              Project Kenai, "JAXB Reference Implementation",
              <https://jaxb.java.net/>.

   [XSD:Perl]
              Ulsoy, A., "XML::Pastor",
              <http://search.cpan.org/~aulusoy/XML-Pastor-1.0.4/>.

   [XSD:Python]
              Bigot, P., "PyXB: Python XML Schema Bindings",
              <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/PyXB>.




Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title              November 2016


   [XSD:Ruby]
              Morsi, M., "RXSD - XSD / Ruby Translator",
              <https://github.com/movitto/RXSD>.

Authors' Addresses

   Chris Inacio
   Carnegie Mellon University
   4500 5th Ave., SEI 4108
   Pittsburgh, PA  15213
   US

   Email: inacio@andrew.cmu.edu


   Daisuke Miyamoto
   The Univerisity of Tokyo
   2-11-16 Yayoi, Bunkyo
   Tokyo  113-8658
   JP

   Email: daisu-mi@nc.u-tokyo.ac.jp





























Inacio & Miyamoto         Expires May 17, 2017                 [Page 16]
