



Network Working Group                                    P. Hallam-Baker
Internet-Draft                                              May 12, 2019
Intended status: Informational
Expires: November 13, 2019


                Business Models for Content Aggregation
                  draft-hallambaker-iab-aggregation-00

Abstract

   This document is also available online at
   http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-iab-aggregation.html
   [1] .

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 13, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


Table of Contents

   1.  Where the Web failed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  How users pay for content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.2.  Concentration and its Consequences  . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.3.  User experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.4.  The wider context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  The Technology Gap  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Content Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  Payments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Mathematical Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  Management of private keys across devices . . . . . . . .   9
     3.2.  Dare Container  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  Creator-to-consumer end-to-end Web security.  . . . . . .  10
     3.4.  Deployment strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.5.  Shared Bookmarks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.1.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.2.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Where the Web failed

   Many if not most technologies that came to define the era in which
   they were created owe a large part of their success to the failed
   expectations of the technologies that immediately preceded them.  The
   telegraph and canals demonstrated the potential, but radio and the
   railways defined their age.  The World Wide Web was fortunate to
   arrive at the exact moment that home trials of Interactive TV had
   shown it to be an expensive flop.

   Apart from the name, the only part of Interactive TV that was
   'interactive' was the ability to buy branded merchandise associated
   with a program.  Interactive TV did little more than add a 'purchase'
   button to the remote control.  The Web in contrast offered much more
   because any user of the Web could become a content provider.

   It is with no little irony therefore that thirty years later, the Web
   has largely become the thing it was meant to destroy and a large part
   of the reason we have come to this point is the lack of a 'purchase'
   button on the remote control.

1.1.  How users pay for content

   Producing high quality content is an expensive business.  The
   question therefore is not whether users will pay for content but
   rather how they will pay for content.  They can pay directly, they




Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   can pay by giving their attention, they can pay by giving up
   information they own but they will pay one way or another.

   At the time the Web was begun, the dominant business model for
   television was paid advertising and so it was perhaps natural that
   the early evolution of the Web followed this model.  This choice was
   not for want of consideration of other choices, proposals for Web
   micropayments were made as early as 1993 and presented in technical
   form in 1995.  But advertising was the model understood by the
   established content providers and so advertising was the business
   model that they assumed they would eventually turn to when it finally
   came time to monetize the audiences they were developing.  The HTTP
   referer field was originally introduced as a means of supporting
   advertising through a performance-based model before the addition of
   client-state (cookies) to the protocol.

   In the event of course, the Web cannibalized classified advertising
   and many of the other revenue streams that established content
   providers had built their business on.  By the time the need to
   monetize was understood it was too late to develop new protocols or
   infrastructures to support new business models.  Having trained Web
   users to expect that content is free, many content providers turned
   to increasingly aggressive advertising presentations.  Even today it
   is not unusual to find Web site designs that leave the user trying to
   read articles a few sentences at a time on a screen where 90% of the
   pixels are occupied by advertising.

   The crucial flaw that the content providers did not anticipate is
   that content discovery is a vastly more attractive platform for
   advertisers than content provision.  Web search engine providers
   offer a predictable, verifiable return on an advertising investment
   that can be tightly focused to specific audiences.  Few content
   providers can compete and even those that can are at a disadvantage
   because click-fraud and other scams are rife in the content provider
   advertising market.

1.2.  Concentration and its Consequences

   According to the Interactive Advertising Bureau, online advertising
   saw a 22% year on year growth in 2018 [iab-avertising-2019] . As in
   previous years, the headline numbers show great potential, but the
   details show a market that is dysfunctional and ultimately
   unsustainable.  Ten companies account for three quarters of all the
   advertising revenues in 2018 and desktop revenues are actually
   declining.  Examination of the earnings reports of Facebook and
   Google over the same period indicate that the concentration is even
   more pronounced, and that content discovery is responsible for the




Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   majority of advertising revenues and this portion is rising while
   revenues for content providers are flat or falling.

   While the current situation is certainly good for the dominant
   content discovery services in short term, it is clearly
   unsustainable.  Content discovery is worthless unless there is
   content to be discovered.

   Whether this dysfunction in the market is ultimately resolved through
   regulatory action, technical changes or both, it is clear that change
   is inevitable.  Nor are the opinions of one particular legislation in
   one particular country constrained by one particular ideology going
   to be dispositive in this regard.  The Web is a global infrastructure
   and is regulated as such.  The deployment of GDPR in the EU has
   proved that regulatory arbitrage works in both directions and
   especially so when control is concentrated in a small number of
   enterprises.

1.3.  User experience

   When Cascading Style Sheets were first proposed in 1994, the design
   goal was to enable users to control the presentation of information
   to best suit their needs.  Needless to say, this goal is long since
   forgotten as the user has been transformed from customer to product.

   This conception of user-as-product is most apparent in the design of
   social media properties such as Facebook where the ability of the
   user to interact is ruthlessly constrained.  Users are given the
   absolute bare minimum of control over their environment possible so
   as to maintain the illusion of participation.

   Limiting the modes of user interaction was probably one of the
   essential innovations required for social media to scale before users
   were used to the modality.  But is it necessary now?  When social
   media was new to most users, an environment that only allowed
   favorable responses to posts provided a welcoming impression.  Today
   it means that there is no tool I can use to tell facebook that I do
   not wish to see material that is bigoted, ignorant or intentionally
   misleading unless the material is so egregious as to merit a report.

   The core failure here is that the Web only allows Web designers to
   create compelling user experiences for their users.  The Web does not
   allow users to create compelling user experiences for themselves.








Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


1.4.  The wider context

   IETF Working Groups are traditionally established with a charter
   focused on a scope that is as narrowly focused as possible so as to
   minimize both the time taken to arrive at consensus and the
   implementation burden.  While well intentioned, it is important to
   recognize that narrowing the problem scope necessarily reduces the
   incentives for early adopters.

   One of the chief difficulties in developing any new Web technology is
   that the incumbent technology and content providers are focused on
   serving a global market of several billion users.  New technologies
   are of little interest unless they provide immediate access to
   millions of users at the very least.  It is useful therefore to
   consider non-commercial applications with similar requirements and in
   particular specialist applications serving small communities that may
   be highly motivated to deploy.

   One area that is currently poorly served is the basis for most IETF
   work: mailing lists.  While mailing lists represented the pinnacle of
   technology in the 1980s, they are long past their prime.  Every
   member of a mailing list receives a copy of every message on every
   one of their devices that reads mail through a dedicated MUA.  The
   affordances for subscribing to (and unsubscribing!) from mailing
   lists are ad hoc contrivances and there is no support for end-to-end
   security with respect to either confidentiality or integrity.

   Another area that is underserved is bulletin boards and forums.  One
   of the reasons that social media has become highly concentrated is
   that bulletin boards represent isolated islands which many users only
   ever encounter by chance.  It is unlikely many people would discover
   that a site called Dewback Wing is the place to find plans for
   building an copy of the original Enterprise Captain's Chair unless
   someone who already knew this told them.  It is highly unlikely many
   people would know that such a guide even existed.

2.  The Technology Gap

   That the Web does not provide an ideal user experience for users is
   proved by the fact that most major content providers have developed
   special purpose mobile apps to view the content they provide.  Such
   apps allow the content provider to control every aspect of the
   presentation of the content to the user but rarely provide much if
   any incentive for the user.  Randall Monroe's summary of the user
   proposition is still accurate: "Want to visit an incomplete version
   of our Web site where you can't zoom?  Download our app!".





Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   Equally problematic is the fact that few mobile apps support
   hypertext linking and those that do rarely refer the user to the
   corresponding mobile app if installed.  So, despite the fact that
   most mobile apps are merely a thin veneer on a captive browser, they
   are a dead end as far as the network hypertext model goes.

   One of the few benefits that some mobile apps provide is the ability
   to read content in offline mode.  But this is rarely implemented in

2.1.  Content Interaction

   One of the core technology advances that is implicit in the workshop
   scope is the development of a generic application that serves as a
   reader for aggregate content.  For the purposes of discussion, it is
   assumed such an application would be separate from but tightly
   coupled to Web and News clients and share the same library
   foundations.

   Such a client should provide for user interaction and not just
   passive consumption of content and should put the user in direct
   control of their user experience selecting the information sources
   and the filtering criteria for content delivery.

   It is important to remember that just as Facebook is merely USENET on
   steroids, the next major advance in social networking might be merely
   a new twist on an old theme.

   For example, shared bookmarking has been explored in the past but is
   currently in abeyance.  Let us imagine that Alice, Bob and a few
   thousand close friends use a browser that allows them to bookmark Web
   pages as they view and nominate pages of interest (with optional
   annotations).  The users might make their trails publicly visible or
   limit distribution through access control.  The curated feeds
   generated through such a system might in turn be read by a separate
   constituency of curators who would use them to predict content that
   their subscribers might be interested in on the basis of their
   trails.

   This model is very close to what we see in social media today but
   with one crucial difference: the user chooses their feed curators and
   can switch at any time.  This might be a step towards restoring the
   balance between content provision and content discovery since users
   can subscribe to multiple curations of their feeds and drop those
   which provide too little that is of interest or too much that is
   objectionable.






Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


2.2.  Payments

   The biggest gap in current Web technology is that payment for content
   is largely limited to supporter and subscription models.  This
   provides a viable business proposition for content providers offering
   material important enough to be worth $30 a year or more.  But there
   is little support for the far more numerous content providers
   publishing individual articles.

   Credit card payment for individual articles disrupts the user
   experience.  But payment systems that are too seamless become rife
   with fraud as the situation with premium rate telephone calling
   demonstrates.

   One mechanism that might grow the market for paid content is a model
   in which subscribers to one content provider would receive no-cost
   access to normally paid content on other sites with a system of
   settlements to share revenues.  For example, Alice subscribes to
   Bob's Boy-Band fanzine which has a link to an article on Carol's
   Concert Club reviewing the band.  Since she is a subscriber to BBB,
   Alice doesn't need to pay to view the article, but Carol receives a
   small settlement from Bob.

   The precise details of the settlements system can probably be left to
   market forces, provided that the technology provides the necessary
   information and security controls.

3.  Mathematical Mesh

   The Mathematical Mesh is a cryptographic infrastructure designed to
   make the Internet easier to use by making it more secure.

   Many if not most of the frustrations users suffer when using Internet
   applications today can be traced back to use of security systems that
   are poorly designed and woefully implemented.  Passwords are
   difficult and expensive for users to use at the best of times.

   Correctly applied, public key cryptography offers the highest level
   of practical security with no compulsory impact on the user
   experience.  A security protocol that requires user effort is a
   protocol that isn't going to be used.  A security protocol should
   provide security without getting in the user's way or demanding their
   attention.  The only time when a security protocol should affect the
   user experience is when the user has a security concern at which
   point the application should provide the user with the information
   they need to make a security decision in a form they can understand.





Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   Like the Web, the Mesh is a collection of interdependent
   technologies, some of which are outside the scope of this workshop.
   The features of the Mesh that are relevant to the workshop scope
   include:

   o  The ability to provision keys to all the Mesh-enabled devices
      owned or controlled by the user.  These include desktop, laptop,
      mobile and IoT devices.

   o  The ability to share 'catalogs' comprising sets of data entries
      between devices.  These include catalogs of bookmarks, passwords
      and calendar items.

   o  A cryptographic container format that may be used as either an
      archive format or as a syndication format.

   o  A end-to-end secure infrastructure for short messages.

   Realizing these capabilities securely requires the use of
   cryptographic techniques not currently supported by OpenPGP [RFC4880]
   or CMS [RFC5652] . Rather than attempting to construct end-to-end
   security guarantees as a layer on top of an application protocol
   (e.g.  S/MIME over SMTP), the Mesh is built on a presentation layer
   (DARE) that provides end-to-end security by default.

   The academic field of cryptography has grown exponentially as a
   result of the Web and as a result of the market for commercial
   cryptography.  But the cryptographic repertoire employed in IETF
   protocols remains unchanged since the closure of the PEM working
   group.  We have improved signature, digest and encryption algorithms
   and we have formalized the definition of key wrapping and key
   derivation.  But we do not use any new cryptographic primitives
   beyond the original canon.

   Moving from one key cryptography to two revolutionized the
   information security field.  Use of separate keys for encryption and
   decryption enables the encryption role to be separated from the
   decryption role.  The Mesh makes use of public key protocols that
   make use of three keys and more.

   The Mesh enforces cryptographic hygiene making use of separate keys
   for separate purposes and for separate applications and for separate
   devices.  This results in a lot of keys but the consistency of
   requiring every system to apply a common set of best practices
   affords the simplicity necessary to make the system practical.






Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


3.1.  Management of private keys across devices

   The core of the Mesh is the ability to securely manage sets of
   cryptographic keys across multiple devices with minimal user
   interaction.  Almost every well-formed information security problem
   has a simple cryptographic solution provided that every device
   belonging to a user has a unique public key pair and the public keys
   belonging to the devices are known.

   The chief obstacle to using public key-based authentication in place
   of password credentials is that while every device that a user might
   use to surf the Web has an affordance for password entry, almost none
   allow entry of a private key.  Nor is this likely to change as
   devices become smaller and less likely to provide a standardized
   means of introducing a smart card or token.

   The Mesh provides a personal PKI which allows the user to provision
   device-specific authentication credentials to every device they
   'connect' to their personal Mesh.  This is combined with an end-to-
   end secure password manager which permits devices connected to a
   personal Mesh to access the user's legacy credentials.

   Public key pairs are provisioned in the Mesh using a co-generation
   approach based on work by Matt Blaze and Torben Pedersen.  Every
   device has a unique set of device key pairs that are either generated
   on the device itself or provisioned during manufacture.  When a
   device is connected to a user's profile, a second set of key pairs is
   generated by the user's administration device.  It is the combination
   of the two sets of keys that is used to perform every Mesh function
   on the device.  This provides protection against a single point of
   failure.

3.2.  Dare Container

   Data At Rest Encryption [draft-hallambaker-mesh-dare] is a
   cryptographic message syntax based on JSON/JOSE that provides a set
   of capabilities that may be loosely described as 'blockchain with
   encryption'.  As with Certificate Transparency [RFC6962] ,
   incremental integrity checking may be provided by a Merkle Tree.
   Incremental encryption is also supported allowing a single key
   exchange to be applied to multiple container entries by means of a
   uniquely salted Key Derivation Function [RFC5869]

   Dare Container is used within the Mesh to support creation of
   catalogs (which contain sets of items) and spools (which contain
   queues of messages).  The features it supports are also well suited
   for use as a syndication format or an archive format.




Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   There are clear advantages to employing an archive format designed to
   support encryption and authentication.  The Dare format allows large
   numbers of entries of any size (up to 2^63 bytes) to be encrypted
   under a single public key exchange and authenticated by means of a
   single signature.  Furthermore, containers may be redacted to drop
   entries that are irrelevant or have been updated without affecting
   confidentiality or integrity.

   This approach allows the same technology to be applied to package as
   a single file:

   o  A Web page consisting of a base HTML document, CSS style sheets,
      scripts and transcluded images.

   o  A Web site consisting of multiple base HTML documents referencing
      a shared set of images and scripts.

   o  Entries in a discussion on a Web page.

   Furthermore, containers may be aggregated or redacted as required.  A
   container describing an individual page may be extracted from a
   container describing a site and containers describing multiple pages
   may be combined to form a site.

3.3.  Creator-to-consumer end-to-end Web security.

   Since the release of TLS in 1994, Web security has focused on
   securing data in transit.  HTTPS is used to protect the provisioning
   of new content to Web servers and for distribution of the content
   from the Web server to the reader.  But the content itself sits in
   the clear in the cloud.  As a result, almost every disclosure breach
   is a breach of data at rest.

   The Mesh provides true Data At Rest security by applying key
   splitting techniques to the private key used to decrypt data.  As
   with existing CRM schemes, these techniques allow an administrator to
   grant or remove access privileges to data stored on a remote server.
   Unlike existing techniques, no decryption keys are stored on the
   server itself.  A breach of the server only results in disclosure of
   encrypted data and some random numbers.

3.4.  Deployment strategy

   The first stage in that strategy is focused on applications that
   deliver value to individual users even if there are no other users of
   the Mesh.  Management of credentials and keys across multiple devices
   is such an application.  Management of usernames and passwords is
   tedious for everyone.  Commercial password managers are expensive and



Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   currently offer vague security guarantees at best.  The Mesh is an
   open specification that offers true end-to-end security with seamless
   ease of use.  Management of OpenPGP, S/MIME and SSH keys pose similar
   challenges.  While every system manager uses SSH it is a very rare
   administrator who bothers to generate separate keypairs for each of
   their devices and even rarer that they delete device keys after a
   device is decommissioned.

   The second stage is to focus on applications that deliver value to
   compact groups of users within a niche community.  The CRM
   capabilities of the Mesh are likely to be of interest within
   enterprises focused on health care, defense and other industries
   where maintaining confidentiality is more important than direct
   interoperation with other enterprises.  The Mesh also provides an
   improvement on traditional second factor authentication schemes which
   allows the relying party to ask for confirmation of specific actions
   for specific purposes and for a non-repudiable audit trail of every
   interaction to be maintained.

   The final stage of the deployment strategy is to join up the
   communities of users established in phase two to form a sufficient
   critical mass to change the Internet as a whole.

3.5.  Shared Bookmarks

   The shared bookmarks environment described in this paper is a part of
   the second phase of the Mesh deployment strategy.  A large part of
   the value proposition offered by Facebook to users is the ability to
   share links to Web content and to comment on them.

   The Mesh allows bookmarks to be shared and commented on within closed
   groups of users such as a group of employees within a company or
   researchers within a field.

   While existing social media allows users to establish closed groups,
   ownership of those groups ultimately rests with the social media
   platform and not the members of the groups themselves.  Vesting
   ownership of the group in its members allows the membership to have
   control over the selection of administrators and moderators and the
   criteria for posting and admission to the group.

   Furthermore, selection of articles to view may be made by each
   individual member using the tools and platforms of their choice that
   best serve their needs.

   The content that is prioritized on such platforms today is the
   content that maximizes engagement and mouse clicks.  The hatemonger,




Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               PHB Aggregation                    May 2019


   the crank and the disinformation warrior are chosen because their
   lies generate more engagement than facts or expert opinion.

4.  References

4.1.  Informative References

   [draft-hallambaker-mesh-dare]
              Hallam-Baker, P., "Mathematical Mesh Part III : Data At
              Rest Encryption (DARE)", draft-hallambaker-mesh-dare-01
              (work in progress), April 2019.

   [iab-avertising-2019]
              "[Reference Not Found!]".

   [RFC4880]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., Shaw, D., and R.
              Thayer, "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 4880,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4880, November 2007.

   [RFC5652]  Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)", STD 70,
              RFC 5652, DOI 10.17487/RFC5652, September 2009.

   [RFC5869]  Krawczyk, H. and P. Eronen, "HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand
              Key Derivation Function (HKDF)", RFC 5869,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5869, May 2010.

   [RFC6962]  Laurie, B., Langley, A., and E. Kasper, "Certificate
              Transparency", RFC 6962, DOI 10.17487/RFC6962, June 2013.

4.2.  URIs

   [1] http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-iab-
       aggregation.html

Author's Address

   Phillip Hallam-Baker

   Email: phill@hallambaker.com












Hallam-Baker            Expires November 13, 2019              [Page 12]
