

 Internet-Draft                                             M. Wasserman
 Document: draft-wasserman-wg-process-00.txt                  Wind River
 Expires:  December 2003                                       June 2003

                       Working Group Document Process

    Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [RFC2026].

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
    progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    Abstract

    This document describes a process that IETF working groups may use
    to produce documents.  It defines terminology and process stages
    that may prove useful as we attempt to improve our WG processes.
    This document may also help new or struggling WG chairs to
    understanding how to control the flow and quality of their WG's
    output.

 Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

















    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       1
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003


    Table of Contents

    Status of this Memo...............................................1
    Abstract..........................................................1
    Copyright Notice..................................................1
    Table of Contents.................................................2
    1       Introduction..............................................3
    2       The Working Group Document Process........................3
    2.1     Initial Submission........................................3
    2.2     Author Refinement.........................................4
    2.3     WG Acceptance.............................................4
    2.4     Editor Selection..........................................5
    2.5     Working Group Refinement..................................5
    2.6     Working Group Last Call...................................6
    3       Security Considerations...................................6
    4       Informative References....................................7
    5       Acknowledgements..........................................7
    6       Editor's Contact Information..............................7

































    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       2
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003

 1  Introduction

    This document describes a process that IETF working groups may use
    to produce a WG document.  The process described in this document
    includes several discrete stages.  For each stage, there is a brief
    description and an explanation of the exit criteria for that stage.

    It is hoped that this document will serve two major purposes:

         - Provide useful terminology and a useful framework for
           discussing improvements to WG processes.
         - Give new or struggling WG chairs a better understanding of
           the process, and how they can use it to control the flow and
           quality of WG output.

    This document is intended to offer information and suggestions
    regarding WG document processes.  It does not mandate any
    particular behavior for WGs or WG chairs, and WG chairs should feel
    free to skip, modify or ignore any or all of this process for their
    individual WGs.

 2  The Working Group Document Process

    This document describes the production of a single WG document as a
    six step process.  At any given time, a WG may have several
    documents underway at different stages of the process.

 2.1 Initial Submission

     This stage is entered when someone (the "author") proposes an idea
     for a work item to an IETF WG.  The work item may be submitted via
     e-mail, or at a WG meeting.  A typical initial submission will be
     submitted as an individual Internet-draft (I-D), authored by one
     or more WG participants.  However, it is possible that an initial
     submission could take another form, such as a detailed e-mail
     message, a presentation at a WG meeting, a charter item assigned
     by the AD, or an I-D transferred from another WG.

     EXIT:  Before a work item can exit the Initial Submission stage,
     the chair(s) must determine, based on their judgement, that the
     work item fits within the scope of the WG charter.  If a submitted
     item does fit within the charter, a WG chair has three choices:

         - Reject the work item.
         - Suggest that the work item should be undertaken in a
           different WG, and work with the appropriate AD(s) and the
           chair(s) of that WG to transfer the work item.
         - Discuss a charter update with the AD, to expand the charter
           of this WG to include the new work item.

    Although some WGs allow brief presentation slots for new ideas, a
    work item should successfully exit the Initial Submission phase
    before significant WG resources, such as long/preferred


    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       3
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003

    presentation slots or lengthy mailing list discussions are applied
    to the work item.

 2.2 Author Refinement

    When a new idea or draft is first submitted to a WG, it is common
    for the WG to provide feedback.  It is also possible that the idea
    was submitted in some form other than an I-D, in which case the
    author will need to write an I-D.

    During this stage, change control for the document lies completely
    with the author(s).  Author(s) are encouraged not to submit a
    document for WG acceptance until they are ready to give up change
    control of the document to the WG, via an editor chosen by the WG
    chair(s).

    EXIT:  A document exits the Author Refinement stage when it is has
    been published as an I-D, and the author(s) and the WG chair(s)
    believe that the document is ready for consideration as a WG
    document.

    Note:  A document may go through several cycles of author
    refinement, before the author(s) or the WG chair(s) believe that it
    is ready for WG acceptance.

 2.3 WG Acceptance

    In this stage, the WG is asked to accept a document as a WG
    document.  The WG chair(s) control this process, and should make
    sure that all of the criteria are met before the work item is
    published as a WG document.

    EXIT:  For a document to successfully exit the WG acceptance stage,
    the WG chair must determine that the new work item meets all of the
    following criteria:

         - The work item fits within the WG charter (in the opinion of
           the chairs).  This should always be the case, since the work
           item was accepted as an Initial Submission.

         - There is significant support for this work item from the
           working group, including:

            - People with expertise in all applicable areas who are
              willing to invest time to review the document, provide
              feedback, etc.
            - Probable (or current) implementors, if applicable.

         - The document has been accepted as a work item by a rough
           consensus of the WG.

            - This should reflect WG belief that the document is taking
              the correct approach and would be a good starting place
              for a WG product.

    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       4
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003


         - The work item corresponds to existing goals/milestones in
           the charter.  If a corresponding milestone does not already
           exist, the chair should obtain AD approval to add a
           milestone before accepting the work item as a WG document.

    Note: A document should not be accepted without sufficient WG
    support.  In other words, silence does not indicate consent to
    accept the document.

    Once the work item has been accepted as a WG document, it should be
    published as WG I-D.

 2.4 Editor Selection

    After a document is accepted by the WG, the WG chair(s) should
    choose an editor for the document.  Although the editor is
    typically one of the original document authors, WG chairs are
    encouraged to make a careful decision at this point.

    The editor should meet the following criteria:

         - Have the time and interest to drive the work to completion
           consistent with the charter milestones.
         - Be willing to set aside his own personal agenda, and modify
           the document solely based on WG consensus.
         - Have the communications skills and patience to deal with the
           WG and IESG review cycles.
         - Have sufficient English-language skills to produce a clear,
           high-quality document.

    In addition to choosing the original editor for the document, WG
    chair(s) are also empowered to replace non-performing editors as
    needed.

    EXIT:  The document exits the Editor Selection stage when the
    editor is chosen and announced to the WG.

 2.5 Working Group Refinement

    During this stage, the original author(s) no longer have change
    control over the document.  The WG has change control, and it is
    the editor's job to update the document to match the consensus of
    the WG.  In many cases, WG consensus may be obvious from WG mailing
    list or meeting discussion.  Editors should also drive discussion
    of open issues in an effort to achieve consensus on the document
    contents.  In any situation where WG consensus is not clear to the
    editor, the editor should ask the WG chair(s) to make a consensus
    call.

    During this stage, all technical issues and proposed changes must
    be openly discussed on the WG mailing list and/or in WG meetings.
    All changes must be reviewed on the mailing list.  During this


    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       5
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003

    phase, silence from the WG will be interpreted as consent to make
    the changes posted by the editor or WG chair(s).

    EXIT:  A document exits the WG Refinement stage when the editor and
    the WG chair(s) believe that the document reflects the consensus of
    the WG and is ready for publication.  In other words, an I-D has
    been published that is:

         - Clear and technically sound.
         - Sufficiently useful to warrant publication at the proposed
           level.
         - Compliant with I-D nits and RFC editor requirements.
         - Compliant with any other requirements for publication at the
           proposed level, as defined in RFCs 2026 or 2418 [RFC2026,
           RFC 2418].

    At the exit from the WG Refinement stage, the WG chair(s) will
    issue a WG last call for publication of the document.

 2.6 Working Group Last Call

    The Working Group Last Call stage lasts for at least two weeks.
    During this period, WG members are encouraged to comment,
    positively or negatively, about whether they believe that the
    document is ready for IESG submission in its current form.

    If technical issues are found at this stage that will require
    substantive changes to the document, the document may be returned
    to the WG Refinement stage.

    EXIT:  To exit WG Last Call, a version of the document must exist
    in the I-D director that has been reviewed and actively supported
    by a significant number of people, including experts in all of the
    applicable areas.  There should be rough WG consensus that the
    document meets all of the quality criteria defined for exit from
    the WG Refinement stage.  At this stage, silence should not be
    interpreted as support for the document.

    It is up to the WG chair(s) to judge whether a document has
    sufficient support to be submitted to the IESG.  After this stage,
    if IESG or IETF feedback is received that requires substantive
    changes to the document, the document may return to the WG
    Refinement stage.

 3  Security Considerations

    This document defines terminology and concepts related to a process
    that IETF WGs may use to produce documents.  Although the quality
    of the WG processes may have an affect on the quality of the IETF's
    security-related work, there are no specific security-related
    issues raised in this document.




    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       6
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003

 4  Informative References

    [RFC2026]
         S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
         RFC 2026, BCP9, October 1996

    [RFC2418]
         S. Bradner, "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures",
         RFC 2418, BCP 25, September 1998


 5  Acknowledgements

    The contents of this document are largely based on information from
    WG chairs training.  The author would like to thank all of the
    people who have provided feedback on the training sessions -- your
    inputs also helped to improve this document.

    I'd also like to thank my "responsible ADs": Bert Wijnen, Randy
    Bush and Thomas Narten, who have all taught me a great deal.

 6  Editor's Contact Information

    Comments or questions regarding this document should be sent to:

    Margaret Wasserman
    Wind River
    10 Tara Blvd., Suite 330             Phone:  (603) 897-2067
    Nashua, NH  03062  USA               Email:  mrw@windriver.com


























    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       7
    Working Group Document Process                            June 2003

    Intellectual Property Statement

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
    has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
    IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
    standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
    claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances
    of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made
    to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
    proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification
    can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
    this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
    Director.

    Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain
    it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
    published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction
    of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this
    paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
    However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such
    as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
    Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the
    purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
    procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process
    must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages
    other than English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on
    an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
    ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
    THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

    Acknowledgement

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
    Internet Society.

    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       8





















































    M. Wasserman         Expires December 2003                       9