

Network Working Group                                        P. Stickler
Internet-Draft                                     Nokia Research Center
Expires: July 17, 2002                                  January 16, 2002


               The 'uri:' URI Scheme for URI Reification
                         draft-pstickler-uri-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 17, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the 'uri:' Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)
   scheme for the reification of arbitrary Uniform Resource Identifiers.













Stickler                  Expires July 17, 2002                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            The 'uri:' URI Scheme             January 2002


Table of Contents

   1. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. BNF for the 'uri:' URI Scheme  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6











































Stickler                  Expires July 17, 2002                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            The 'uri:' URI Scheme             January 2002


1. Overview

   The 'uri:' URI scheme is intended to provide a simple but consistent
   means by which URIs (including URI References) may be reified for the
   sake of communication between web applications about the URIs
   themselves rather than about the resources they may represent.

   The ability to differentiate between a particular URI and the web
   resource which that URI denotes or represents is important in cases
   where we need to make statements about the history, nature, or other
   characteristics of the URI itself which are not properties of the
   resource which it represents -- such as when the URI was minted, by
   whom, and the class of URI to which it belongs.

   Examples:

      uri:http://www.nokia.com
      uri:mailto:patrick.stickler@nokia.com
      uri:http://www.abc.com/employees#Bob
      uri:uuid:f81d4fae-7dec-11d0-a765-00a0c91e6bf6
      uri:voc://nokia.com/MARS-2.2/title
      uri:ftp://ftp.abc.com/pub/apps/free
      uri:uri:http://www.nokia.com

   These examples are provided for illustrative purposes only and do not
   necessarily constitute actual URIs.  See the BNF definition below for
   an explicit definition of 'uri:' URI syntax.

   Note that this mechanism of reification is infinitely recursive,
   allowing instances of this URI scheme to themselves be reified by
   additional encapsulation, as the final example above illustrates.
   Clearly, the utility of such recursion diminishes greatly with each
   level of encapsulation, but the absence of a finite boundary ensures
   that all possible URIs, including instances of this URI scheme, can
   be reified as needed.

   The 'uri:' URI scheme belongs to the class of URIs known as Uniform
   Resource Values (URV) which are themselves a subclass of Uniform
   Resource Primitives (URP), a class of URI which constitutes a
   "WYSIWYG" URI, one which is not dereferencible to and does not denote
   another web resource, but constitutes a self-contained resource where
   the full realization of that resource is expressed in the URI itself.
   For a full discussion of the properties of URPs and URVs, please see
   [1].  Familiarity with the concepts defined therein will facilitate
   the full understanding of this document.

   Because a URP is not dereferencible, and hence does not permit the
   suffixation of a fragment identifier (there is no such thing as a URP



Stickler                  Expires July 17, 2002                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            The 'uri:' URI Scheme             January 2002


   Reference), it is not necessary to escape any hash marks '#'
   occurring in a URI Reference reified by a 'uri:' URI.

2. BNF for the 'uri:' URI Scheme

   This is a BNF-like description of the 'uri:' Uniform Resource
   Identifier syntax, using the conventions of RFC 822[2], except that
   "|" is used to designate alternatives, and brackets [] are used
   around optional or repeated elements.  Briefly, literals are quoted
   with "", optional elements are enclosed in [brackets], and elements
   may be preceded with <n>* to designate n or more repetitions of the
   following element; n defaults to 0.

   This BNF description adopts sub-definitions defined in RFC 2396
   "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax" [3] which are
   not repeated here.


   uri-URI     = "uri:" absoluteURI [ "#" fragment ]
   absoluteURI = <as defined by RFC 2396>
   fragment    = <as defined by RFC 2396>


   Note that the URI scheme prefix "uri:" is considered to be a valid
   URI denoting this URI scheme, though it is not itself a valid URI
   according to this URI scheme.

3. Security Considerations

   This document raises no known security issues.

References

   [1]  Stickler, P., "An Extended Class Taxonomy of Uniform Resource
        Identifier Schemes", January 2002, <http://www-nrc.nokia.com/sw/
        draft-pstickler-uri-taxonomy-00.html>.

   [2]  Crocker, D., "STANDARD FOR THE FORMAT OF ARPA INTERNET TEXT
        MESSAGES", RFC 822, August 1982.

   [3]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August 1998.









Stickler                  Expires July 17, 2002                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            The 'uri:' URI Scheme             January 2002


Author's Address

   Patrick Stickler
   Nokia Research Center
   Visiokatu 1
   Tampere  33720
   FI

   EMail: patrick.stickler@nokia.com










































Stickler                  Expires July 17, 2002                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            The 'uri:' URI Scheme             January 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Stickler                  Expires July 17, 2002                 [Page 6]

