


Network Working Group                                            P. Koch
Internet-Draft                                                  DENIC eG
Intended status: Informational                         February 20, 2007
Expires: August 24, 2007


          Identifying and Reacting to Unsolicited DNS Queries
                 draft-koch-dns-unsolicited-queries-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 24, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document deals with unsolicited Domain Name System (DNS) queries
   directed towards authoritative name servers.  It identifies reasons
   for the existence of these queries and lists some observed or
   proposed reactions.







Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


1.  Introduction

   Authoritative name servers should see Domain Name System (DNS)
   queries only for domain names within or below zones they are
   authoritative for.  Responses are either positive responses
   (consisting of RRSets), negative responses (either NXDOMAIN
   [I-D.ietf-dnsext-2929bis] or NOERROR/NODATA) or referrals.  The
   latter point the querying entity towards another set of name servers
   for names in delegated zones, i.e., for names "below" those zones
   served authoritatively.

   Operational experience shows that many larger authoritative name
   servers receive a non-negligible amount of DNS queries that do not
   match the above description and will be called "unsolicited DNS
   queries" below.  This term is not intended to have any legal meaning
   or implication.  Instead it should express that the usual DNS
   delegation and resolution process either does not lead to those
   queries or the references are unknown to and unintended by the server
   operator.

   This document explores different causes and properties of unsolicited
   DNS queries and provides a list of reactions to those queries as seen
   on the Internet. {Discussion of trade-offs needs to be intensified.}

   This document primarily deals with unsolicited queries directed
   towards authoritative name servers.  Abusive DNS queries for
   amplification or reflection attacks are described in
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-reflectors-are-evil].  Where the term "authoritative
   server" is not useful per se without stating which zone(s) it refers
   to, it is meant to express that the server does not offer DNS
   recursion to any client.  Terminology may improve in future versions
   of this draft.

   Comments should be directed at the author.


2.  Types of Unsolicited Queries

   A DNS query is identified by the trinity of QNAME, QTYPE and QCLASS.
   Either of these or any combination might or might not be expected at
   an authoritative name server.

   QTYPE  might be unexpected, but if a server is authoritative for a
      certain zone in a particular class, a query for any QTYPE (except
      DS [RFC4034]) is rightfully directed towards this server.
      Sometimes QTYPEs do not match well known types, but a name server
      must still be able to authoritatively respond for zones it serves,
      as per [RFC3597].



Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


   QCLASS  is expected to be IN, the only class widely used on the
      Internet.  Although [RFC1123], section 6.1.2.2, restricts the use
      of QCLASS=*, queries with this parameter are sometimes seen.  They
      can usually be answered, since "*" (or ANY) matches IN, but the AA
      bit can never be set as per section 3.7.1 of [RFC1034].
      QCLASS=CHAOS is also used in identification queries
      [I-D.ietf-dnsop-serverid].

   QNAME  should fall into or below any of the zones served
      authoritatively.  If the QNAME is not matched by any of the zones,
      it may be for an ancestor of a served zone (e.g. a query for "ORG"
      to a name server serving "example.ORG"), in which case QNAME is at
      least known to exist, or it may be completely unrelated to any of
      the zones present.

   Message types other than QUERY (Opcode 0) may also appear but are
   only discussed in Appendix A.


3.  Causes of Unsolicited Queries

   There are various causes for unsolicited DNS queries and it might be
   impossible to find and list all of them.  Therefore the following
   list is most likely incomplete.

3.1.  Lame Delegations

   Lame delegations [RFC1912] are a common operational problem.  They
   direct DNS queries to name servers that are meant to be authoritative
   for a zone, but cannot serve it authoritatively for a variety of
   reasons beyond the scope of this discussion.  A lame delegation might
   be due to an NS RR in the delegating zone as well as an NS RR in the
   delegated zone itself.

3.2.  Taking a Server for a Resolver

   Enterprises and ISPs with end customers usually provide for DNS
   configuration information during session initiation, by DHCP or other
   protocols.  Amongst those parameters are "name servers" to use by the
   users' or customers' end systems.  The term "name servers" is kind of
   an unfortunate choice since what is really offered is the address (or
   are the addresses) of full (recursive) resolvers that are able and
   willing to accept and act upon the end systems' DNS queries.
   Sometimes end users feel the need to circumvent the default
   configuration provided as explained above and manually configure the
   resolver addresses into their stub resolvers.  Popular candidates are
   the "name servers responsible for the Example ISP", i.e., Example's
   authoritative name servers.  In similar scenarios, random ISPs' or



Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


   enterprises' authoritative name servers are selected just for being
   well known or traded as being "good name servers".  Following best
   practice, these authoritative name servers do not offer recursion,
   but will still see many unsolicited queries [RFC4697].

   These queries usually have the RD bit set.

3.3.  Probing

   Some load balancing systems or content delivery networks try to
   dynamically respond to DNS queries with A RRSets preferring the
   address(es) "closest" to the requestor.  Proximity tests sometimes
   involve DNS queries destined either to the requesting recursive name
   server or to one of the authoritative servers for the requestor's
   zone (determined by reverse mapping).  QNAMEs in these queries vary
   between random strings and the root (".").

3.4.  Configuration or Implementation Problems

   Sometimes it is as simple as that: mistyped addresses in resolver
   configurations or zone files misdirect traffic.

   Missing checksums may let corrupt DNS queries pass undetected, which
   may lead to unexpected QCLASS, QTYPE or QNAME values, amongst others.

   Implementation faults or configuration errors may lead to a QCLASS of
   ANY.

3.5.  Debugging

   Some queries will be due to debugging or research, i.e., they are
   either manually initiated or generated by a debugging or surveying
   script.  This includes queries that are meant to check the
   availability of a certain zone as well as host identification queries
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-serverid] and those used for DNS fingerprinting
   [FPDNS].

3.6.  Attack Traffic

   DNS traffic aimed at authoritative or recursive servers or anywhere
   else for the sole purpose of resource exhaustion or Denial of Service
   (DoS) is out of the scope of this document.


4.  Response Variants

   When constructing a response to an unsolicited query, care must be
   taken not to disturb the correct use of the responding server.



Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


   Especially any kind of response should not degrade the service for
   those zones the server is actively able and willing to serve.  This
   includes having the server marked as non-responsive or 'down'.  On
   the other hand it is not useful to invest too much effort into these
   responses, e.g. by trying to satisfy requests for recursion or by
   automatically making the server authoritative for zones that are
   delegated lame.

   No Response  might be sent at all.  This will lead to a timeout at
      the resolver and may make the responsible administrator aware of
      the configuration issue.  Silence is also used to throttle high
      volume query streams.  However, this reaction may indicate to the
      querying entity that the server is not available at all and thus
      may degrade service for the zones served authoritatively.

   DNS Error Responses  often carry a DNS RCODE for "Server Failure" (2)
      or "Refused" (5).  In the case of QLASS other than IN, sometimes
      "Not Implemented" (4) is seen as well.  These responses are short
      since they do not carry any RRSets [RFC2181] and may be rate
      limited.  However, only a stateful resolver will be able to skip
      the server based on this information and some resolvers even
      repeat the DNS query instantaneously.

   Best Effort Responses  may include "upward referrals", often
      referrals for the root domain.  These referrals serve no practical
      purpose in that they do not constitute progress in the resolution
      process.  "Upward referrals" point at a higher level in the DNS
      tree and can be rather huge.

   Defensive Negative Responses  authoritatively indicate either a name
      error (RCODE 3) for QNAME or the absence of any RRSet matching
      QTYPE to the querier.  The SOA RR in the response usually signals
      a short negative TTL [RFC2308].  The intent of these responses is
      to induce errors on the side of the requestors to make them aware
      of a configuration problem.  This may or may not work, since a
      query may be part of a chain of queries along a DNS search path,
      where negative responses will just be ignored.  Negative responses
      might be able to throttle high volume query streams better than
      other DNS error responses.

   Defensive Positive Responses  send back an A RR at least for QTYPE=A.
      They are meant to throttle high volume query streams and usually
      either point to a website that notifies of a configuration error
      or to the loopback address.  These responses are intrusive to a
      certain extent (as are the queries triggering them) and might have
      operational and legal implications.  The AA bit may or may not be
      set.  In an attempt to override an NS RRSet in a resolver's cache,
      these responses may have NS RRSets in their authority section



Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


      pointing to unreachable name servers (to increase resolution time)
      or the loopback interface (to keep traffic local to the
      requestor).

   All of the responses above may be sent with a delay to discourage the
   further use of the server, assuming the server selection follows
   section 7.2 of [RFC1034].  This may again have a negative side effect
   on the service to the remaining zones on the same server.

   A server might send different responses depending on whether or not
   the RD bit was set in the query.  However, even at an authoritative
   server not all queries with RD=1 will be unsolicited.  Most full
   (iterative) resolvers will clear the RD bit when sending queries, but
   today's DNS traffic shows that some don't.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document deals with unsolicited DNS queries that may lead to
   resource consumption on the server side.  Using wrong, unwilling or
   untrusted resolvers for DNS name resolution exposes the user to the
   risk of DNS spoofing.  Defensive responses as described above may
   lead to technical problems at the resolver side and may also have
   legal implications.  Defensive responses cannot be secured by Secure
   DNS [RFC4033] and will lead to validation failures.

   {This section needs more work.}


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not propose any new IANA registry nor does it ask
   for any allocation from an existing IANA registry.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Jaap Akkerhuis and Danny Thomas for
   their review and helpful input.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.




Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1123]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts - Application
              and Support", STD 3, RFC 1123, October 1989.

   [RFC2181]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS
              Specification", RFC 2181, July 1997.

   [RFC2308]  Andrews, M., "Negative Caching of DNS Queries (DNS
              NCACHE)", RFC 2308, March 1998.

   [RFC3597]  Gustafsson, A., "Handling of Unknown DNS Resource Record
              (RR) Types", RFC 3597, September 2003.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

8.2.  Informative References

   [FPDNS]    Schlyter, J. and R. Arends, "fpdns - Fingerprinting DNS
              Servers", <http://www.rfc.se/fpdns/>.

   [I-D.arends-dnsext-qr-clarification]
              Arends, R., "DNS Response clarification.",
              draft-arends-dnsext-qr-clarification-00 (work in
              progress), October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsext-2929bis]
              3rd, D., "Domain Name System (DNS) IANA Considerations",
              draft-ietf-dnsext-2929bis-04 (work in progress),
              December 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-reflectors-are-evil]
              Damas, J. and F. Neves, "Preventing Use of Recursive
              Nameservers in Reflector Attacks",
              draft-ietf-dnsop-reflectors-are-evil-03 (work in
              progress), February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-serverid]
              Conrad, D. and S. Woolf, "Requirements for a Mechanism
              Identifying a Name Server Instance",
              draft-ietf-dnsop-serverid-08 (work in progress),



Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


              February 2007.

   [RFC0862]  Postel, J., "Echo Protocol", STD 20, RFC 862, May 1983.

   [RFC0864]  Postel, J., "Character Generator Protocol", STD 22,
              RFC 864, May 1983.

   [RFC0867]  Postel, J., "Daytime Protocol", STD 25, RFC 867, May 1983.

   [RFC1912]  Barr, D., "Common DNS Operational and Configuration
              Errors", RFC 1912, February 1996.

   [RFC1996]  Vixie, P., "A Mechanism for Prompt Notification of Zone
              Changes (DNS NOTIFY)", RFC 1996, August 1996.

   [RFC2136]  Vixie, P., Thomson, S., Rekhter, Y., and J. Bound,
              "Dynamic Updates in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE)",
              RFC 2136, April 1997.

   [RFC3425]  Lawrence, D., "Obsoleting IQUERY", RFC 3425,
              November 2002.

   [RFC4697]  Larson, M. and P. Barber, "Observed DNS Resolution
              Misbehavior", BCP 123, RFC 4697, October 2006.


Appendix A.  Non-Query DNS Messages

   DNS messages are distinguished by Opcode and QR bit.  DNS queries
   have an Opcode of 0 and the QR bit cleared.

   Responses should not be sent for messages with the QR bit set
   [I-D.arends-dnsext-qr-clarification].

   FORMERR or NOTIMP responses should be sent for unknown or obsoleted
   Opcodes [RFC3425].

   Certain UDP based services can be exploited to provide a steady back
   and forth of unrecognized message and error response.  If the advise
   given above is followed, only services keeping the "QR bit" (MSB in
   the third octet of the payload [RFC1035]) unset can be abused.  This
   includes, e.g., daytime [RFC0867] and chargen [RFC0864], but not the
   echo protocol [RFC0862].  Some implementations rate limit error
   responses to mitigate this attack.

   Messages types NOTIFY and UPDATE are in wider use and will be
   addressed separately:




Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


A.1.  NOTIFY

   [RFC1996] only deals with the case of NOTIFY messages received from
   unknown masters.  Sometimes, a receiving name server might not be
   authoritative for the zone.  That means the NS RR (or an explicit
   configuration directive) that led to the NOTIFY message is misplaced.
   In these cases sending a REFUSED response may help identifying the
   problem at the source.

A.2.  Dynamic Updates

   Root and Toplevel Domain (TLD) name servers as well as those
   authoritative for zones high in the IN-ADDR.ARPA tree see a lot of
   UPDATE requests.  [RFC4697].

   Sections 4.5 and 4.6 of [RFC2136] describe how a conforming client is
   supposed to react to the DNS response codes.  SERVFAIL, NOTIMP,
   silence or ICMP error messages are interpreted as a per server
   failure, where REFUSED should prevent further UPDATE attempts.


Appendix B.  Document Revision History

   This section is to be removed should the draft be published.

B.1.  Changes from -00 to -01

   Expanded on Defensive Responses.

   Added Probing and Attack Traffic.

   Appendix A (non-query messages) added.

B.2.  Initial Document

   First draft















Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


Author's Address

   Peter Koch
   DENIC eG
   Wiesenhuettenplatz 26
   Frankfurt  60329
   DE

   Phone: +49 69 27235 0
   Email: pk@DENIC.DE









































Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Unsolicited DNS Queries           February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Koch                     Expires August 24, 2007               [Page 11]

