





Network Working Group                                    Toerless Eckert
Internet Draft                                    Eric C. Rosen (editor)
Expiration Date: August 2006                         Cisco Systems, Inc.
Updates RFCs 3032 and 4023
                                                          Rahul Aggarwal
                                                           Yakov Rekhter
                                                  Juniper Networks, Inc.

                                                           February 2006


                     MPLS Multicast Encapsulations


                draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   RFC 3032 established two data link layer codepoints for MPLS: one to
   indicate that the data link layer frame is carrying an MPLS unicast
   packet, and the other to indicate that the data link layer frame is
   carrying an MPLS multicast packet.  This specification updates
   RFC3032 by redefining the meaning of these two codepoints.  The
   former "multicast codepoint" is now to be used only on multiaccess
   media, and it is to mean "the top label of the following label stack
   is an upstream-assigned label".  The former "unicast codepoint" is to



Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 1]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


   be used in all other cases.  Whether the data link layer payload is a
   unicast MPLS packet or a multicast MPLS packet is now to be
   determined by looking up the top label, rather than by the codepoint.

   RFC3032 does not specify the destination address to be placed in the
   "MAC DA" field of an ethernet frame which carries an MPLS multicast
   packet.  This document provides that specification.

   This document updates RFC 3032 and RFC 4023.




Contents

    1        Introduction  .........................................   2
    2        Upstream-Assigned vs. Downstream-Assigned  ............   3
    3        Ethernet Codepoints  ..................................   5
    4        PPP Protocol Field  ...................................   6
    5        GRE Protocol Type  ....................................   6
    6        IP Protocol Number  ...................................   6
    7        Ethernet MAC DA for Multicast MPLS  ...................   7
    8        IANA Considerations  ..................................   7
    9        Security Considerations  ..............................   7
   10        Normative References  .................................   7
   11        Informative References  ...............................   8
   12        Authors' Addresses  ...................................   8
   13        Full Copyright Statement  .............................   8
   14        Intellectual Property  ................................   9





1. Introduction

   RFC 3031 defines the "Next Hop Label Forwarding Entry" (NHLFE).  The
   NHLFE for a particular label maps the label into a next hop (among
   other things).  When an MPLS packet is received, its top label is
   mapped to an NHLFE, and the packet is sent to the next hop specified
   by the NHLFE.

   We define a particular MPLS label to be a "multicast label" in a
   particular context if the NHLFE to which it is mapped in that context
   specifies a set of next hops, with the semantics that the packet is
   to be replicated, and a copy of the packet sent to each of the
   specified next hops.  Note that this definition accommodates the case
   where the set of next hops contains a single member.  What makes a



Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 2]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


   label a multicast label in a particular context is the semantics
   attached to the set, i.e., the intention to replicate the packet and
   transmit to all members of the set if the set has more than one
   member.

   RFC 3032 established two data link layer codepoints for MPLS: one to
   indicate that the data link layer frame is carrying an MPLS unicast
   packet, and the other to indicate that the data link layer frame is
   carrying an MPLS multicast packet.  The term "multicast packet" is
   not precisely defined in RFC 3032, though one may presume that the
   "multicast" codepoint is intended to identify the packet's top label
   as a multicast label.  However, the multicast codepoint has never
   been deployed, and further development of the procedures for MPLS
   multicast have shown that, while there is a need for two codepoints,
   the use of the two codepoints is not properly captured by RFC3032.

   In particular, there is no need for the codepoint to indicate whether
   the top MPLS label is a multicast label.  When the receiver of an
   MPLS packet looks up the top label, the NHLFE will specify whether
   the label is a multicast label or not.

   This document updates RFC 3032 and RFC 4023 by re-specifying the use
   of the codepoints.

   While RFC 3032 allows an MPLS packet to be carried in an ethernet
   multicast frame, it fails to specify how the Medium Access Layer
   Destination Address (MAC DA) field is to be set in that case.  This
   document provides that specification.


2. Upstream-Assigned vs. Downstream-Assigned

   According to RFC 3031, if two MPLS Label Switching Routers (LSRs) are
   adjacent in a label switched path (LSP), with respect to that LSP,
   one of them may be called the "upstream" LSR and the other the
   "downstream" LSR.  Call these Ru and Rd respectively.  Before Ru can
   send an MPLS packet to Rd with label L at the top of the label stack,
   Ru and Rd must agree on the Forwarding Equivalence Class (FEC) which
   is bound to L.  A particular binding of L to FEC F is called a
   "downstream-assigned" binding if the binding is first made by Rd and
   then advertised to Ru.  If the binding is first made by Ru and then
   advertised to Rd, it is called an "upstream-assigned" binding.

   If Ru and RD are LSP adjacencies, then they transmit a MPLS packet to
   each other through one of the following mechanisms:






Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 3]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


      1. by putting the MPLS packet in a data link layer frame and
         transmitting the frame

      2. by transmitting the MPLS packet through an MPLS tunnel, i.e.,
         by pushing an additional label (or labels) onto the label
         stack, and then invoking mechanism 1,

      3. by transmitting the MPLS packet through an IP-based tunnel
         (e.g., via RFC 4023), and then invoking mechanisms 1 and/or 2.

   In short, an MPLS packet is transmitted either through a data link or
   through an MPLS tunnel or through an IP tunnel.  In any of those
   cases, when the packet emerges through the tunnel, the downstream LSR
   must know whether the label that now appears at the top of the label
   stack has an upstream-assigned label binding or a downstream-assigned
   label binding.  For convenience, we will speak of a label with an
   upstream-assigned label binding as an "upstream-assigned label".

   Unicast labels MUST be downstream-assigned.

   Under certain conditions, specified below, multicast labels MAY be
   upstream-assigned.  The ability to use upstream-assigned labels is an
   OPTIONAL feature.  Upstream-assigned labels MUST NOT be used unless
   it is known that the downstream LSR supports them.  How this is known
   is outside the scope of this document.

   We discuss three different types of data link or tunnel:

     - Point-to-Point.  A point-to-point data link or tunnel associates
       two systems, such that transmissions on that link or tunnel made
       by the one are received by the other, and only by the other.

       When an MPLS packet is transmitted on a point-to-point data link
       or tunnel, its top label (before applying the data link or tunnel
       encapsulation) MUST be a downstream-assigned label.

     - Point-to-Multipoint.  A point-to-multipoint link or tunnel
       associates n systems, such that only one of them can transmit
       onto the link or tunnel, and the transmissions may be received by
       the other n-1 systems.

       The top labels (before applying the data link or tunnel
       encapsulation) of all MPLS packets which are transmitted on a
       particular point-to-multipoint data link or tunnel MUST be of the
       same type; either all upstream-assigned or all downstream-
       assigned.  This means that all the receivers on the MPLS or IP
       tunnel must know a priori whether upstream-assigned or
       downstream-assigned labels are being used in the tunnel.  How



Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 4]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


       this is known is outside the scope of this document.

     - Multipoint-to-Multipoint. A multipoint-to-multipoint link or
       tunnel associates n systems, such that any of them can transmit
       on the link or tunnel, and the transmissions may be received by
       the other n-1 systems.

       If a set of MPLS packets are transmitted on a multipoint-to-
       multipoint link, their top labels (before applying the data link
       or tunnel encapsulation) MAY be of different types, i.e., there
       may be a mixture of upstream-assigned and downstream-assigned top
       labels.

       However, if upstream-assigned labels are to be used, the data
       link or tunnel encapsulation MUST provide a codepoint which
       specifies whether the top label of the encapsulated MPLS packet
       is upstream-assigned or downstream-assigned.  If a particular
       type of data link or tunnel does not provide such a codepoint,
       then upstream-assigned labels MUST NOT be used.

   The remainder of this document specifies procedures for setting the
   data link layer codepoints and address fields.


3. Ethernet Codepoints

   Ethernet is an example of a multipoint-to-multipoint data link.

   Ethertype 0x8847 is used whenever a unicast ethernet frame carries an
   MPLS packet.

   Ethertype 0x8847 is also used whenever a multicast ethernet frame
   carries an MPLS packet, EXCEPT for the case where the top label of
   the MPLS packet has been upstream-assigned.

   Ethertype 0x8848, formerly known as the "MPLS multicast codepoint",
   is to be used only when an MPLS packet whose top label is upstream-
   assigned is carried in a multicast ethernet frame.













Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 5]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


4. PPP Protocol Field

   PPP is an example of a point-to-point data link.  When a PPP frame is
   carrying an MPLS packet, the PPP Protocol field is always set to
   0x0281.


5. GRE Protocol Type

   RFC 4023 is modified as described below.

   If the IP destination address of the GRE encapsulation is a unicast
   IP address, then the ethertype value 0x8847 MUST be used in all cases
   for the MPLS-in-GRE encapsulation.

   If the IP destination address of the GRE encapsulation is a multicast
   IP address, then:

     - if both upstream-assigned and downstream-assigned labels may
       appear as the top label of the encapsulated MPLS packets, then
       the ethertype value 0x8847 MUST be used when the aforesaid label
       is downstream-assigned, and the ethertype value 0x8848 MUST be
       used when the aforesaid label is upstream-assigned.

     - if all the encapsulated MPLS packets have an upstream-assigned
       top label, or if all the encapsulated MPLS packets have a
       downstream-assigned top label, then the ethertype value 0x8847
       MUST be used.

   Which of these two situations applies is determined by means outside
   the scope of this specification.


6. IP Protocol Number

   RFC 4023 is modified as follows: the IPv4 Protocol Number field or
   the IPv6 Next Header field is always set to 137, whether or not the
   encapsulated MPLS packet is an MPLS multicast packet.

   If the IP destination address of the IP encapsulation is an IP
   multicast address, the IP tunnel may be considered to be a point-to-
   multipoint tunnel or a multipoint-to-multipoint tunnel.  In either
   case, either all encapsulated MPLS packets in the particular tunnel
   have a downstream-assigned label at the top of the stack, or all
   encapsulated MPLS packets in that tunnel have an upstream-assigned
   label at the top of the stack.  The means by which this is determined
   for a particular tunnel is outside the scope of this specification.




Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 6]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


7. Ethernet MAC DA for Multicast MPLS

   When a multicast MPLS packet is carried in a multicast ethernet
   frame, the Destination MAC Address shall be set to the value 01-00-
   5e-8a-bc-de, where abcde is the twenty-bit (4-nibble) value of the
   topmost MPLS label of the MPLS packet.


8. IANA Considerations

   IANA already owns the set of ethernet multicast addresses in the
   range 01-00-5e-00-00-00 to 01-00-5e-ff-ff-ff.  Addresses in the range
   01-00-5e-00-00-00 to 01-00-5e-7f-ff-ff are reserved for use when an
   ethernet multicast frame carries an IP multicast packet.  IANA shall
   reserve ethernet addresses in the range 01-00-5e-80-00-00 to 01-00-
   5e-8f-ff-ff for use when an ethernet multicast frame carries an MPLS
   multicast packet.


9. Security Considerations

   The security considerations of RFC 3032 and RFC 4023 apply.

   Malicious changing of the codepoint may result in loss or misrouting
   of packets. However, altering the codepoint without also altering the
   label does not result in a predictable effect.

   Malicious alteration of the MAC DA on an ethernet can result in
   packets being received by a third party, rather than by the intended
   recipient.



10. Normative References

   [RFC3031] "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture", Rosen,
   Viswanathan, Callon, January 2001

   [RFC3032] "MPLS Label Stack Encoding", Rosen, et. al., January 2001

   [RFC4023] "Encapsulating MPLS in IP or GRE", Worster, Rekhter, Rosen,
   March 2005









Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 7]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


11. Informative References

12. Authors' Addresses


      Toerless Eckert
      Cisco Systems, Inc.
      170 Tasman Drive
      San Jose, CA, 95134
      Email: eckert@cisco.com



      Eric C. Rosen
      Cisco Systems, Inc.
      1414 Massachusetts Avenue
      Boxborough, MA 01719
      Email: erosen@cisco.com



      Rahul Aggarwal
      Juniper Networks
      1194 North Mathilda Ave.
      Sunnyvale, CA 94089
      Email: rahul@juniper.net



      Yakov Rekhter
      Juniper Networks
      1194 North Mathilda Ave.
      Sunnyvale, CA 94089
      Email: yakov@juniper.net



13. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET



Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 8]


Internet Draft  draft-ietf-mpls-multicast-encaps-00.txt    February 2006


   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


14. Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.






















Eckert, et al.                                                  [Page 9]

