


Network Working Group                                       B. Carpenter
Internet-Draft                                         Univ. of Auckland
Updates: 5378 (if approved)                                H. Alvestrand
Intended status: BCP                                              Google
Expires: August 17, 2009                               February 13, 2009


            Including text under former copyright conditions
                    draft-carpenter-5378-old-text-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.







Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


Abstract

   This document specifies a procedure for including text in an IETF
   document for which the current copyright conditions defined in RFC
   5378 cannot readily be met.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Appendix A.  Non-normative initial version of disclaimer  . . . . . 5
   Appendix B.  Non-normative explanation of background  . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9































Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


1.  Introduction

   RFC 5378 [RFC5378] failed to describe one case that has practical
   consequences.

   The case is this: a contribution submitted under RFC 5378 contains
   material derived from one or more contributions submitted prior to
   RFC 5378, and it has proved impossible, after reasonable efforts, to
   obtain the agreement of the original contributors to the specific
   additional rights required to be granted to the IETF under RFC 5378
   compared with those granted under previous IETF rules.  In this case
   the document cannot be published consistently with RFC 5378.

   This can arise when the original contributors, or their assigns, are
   unwilling, unresponsive, unfindable, deceased, or no longer in
   business.

   This document is intended to specify the simplest possible solution
   for such cases.  Additional background information is given in
   Appendix B below.


2.  Procedure

   Definition: In this document, the phrase "prior to RFC 5378" refers
   to IETF Contributions made before November 10, 2008, when [RFC5378]
   became effective.

   Contributors of Internet-Drafts that contain substantial text
   originally contributed to the IETF by other persons prior to RFC 5378
   have certain responsibilities.
   o  They must identify the source of the substantial text that their
      contribution includes.
   o  They, or people helping them, must make reasonable efforts to
      obtain or verify the agreement of the original contributors to
      their text being contributed under the terms of RFC 5378.
   o  If such agreement cannot be obtained within a reasonable time,
      they must instead include a special disclaimer in the Internet-
      Draft.  The current text of the disclaimer will be specified by
      the IETF Trust's "Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents",
      originally located at
      <http://trustee.ietf.org/policyandprocedures.html>.  The initial
      version of this text is in Appendix A below.
   o  In either case, the Internet-Draft must contain acknowledgement
      and precise citation of the contributions concerned.  If the
      disclaimer is included, the acknowledgement should also identify
      which previous contributors contributed which text, unless the
      text concerned is scattered throughout the document.



Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


   Before approving a document containing material originally
   contributed to the IETF prior to RFC 5378, for which permission to
   contribute it under RFC 5378 has not been obtained, the IESG must be
   satisfied that reasonable effort has been made to obtain the
   necessary rights.  If such is the case, the resulting document, and
   any IETF Last Call message concerning the document, must contain the
   special disclaimer and acknowledgement defined above.

   The IESG and the IETF Trust, in collaboration, must provide a public
   register of documents prior to RFC 5378 for which the rights required
   by RFC 5378 have been provided retroactively, and a public register
   of rights holders who have retroactively provided such rights for all
   their IETF contributions prior to RFC 5378.

   The IETF Trust is requested to ensure that its policies and licenses
   allow for documents including the disclaimer.


3.  Security Considerations

   This document does not affect the security of the Internet.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no action by the IANA.


5.  Acknowledgements

   Much mailing list discussion by the IETF community, and private email
   discussions with Jorge Contreras, Russ Housley, John Klensin, and
   others, have led to this document.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5378]  Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Rights Contributors Provide
              to the IETF Trust", BCP 78, RFC 5378, November 2008.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.



Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3667]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", RFC 3667,
              February 2004.

   [RFC3978]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", RFC 3978,
              March 2005.


Appendix A.  Non-normative initial version of disclaimer

   The current valid version should be taken from the IETF Trust's
   "Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents", originally located at
   <http://trustee.ietf.org/policyandprocedures.html>.  The initial
   version was:

   [[ Note to RFC Editor: please make sure this is the Trust's current
   disclaimer text at the time of publication. ]]

   [[ Note to the reader: the following text differs slightly from the
   Trust's disclaimer text current on the date of this draft. ]]

   "This document contains material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material are not known to have granted the IETF Trust the right to
   allow modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards
   Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s)
   controlling the copyright in such materials, this document may not be
   modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of
   it may not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to
   format it for publication as an RFC and to translate it into
   languages other than English."

   Next to the note, there should be a list of the contributions from
   which the material in question was taken.  If the material has been
   contributed multiple times (such as in multiple versions of an
   internet-draft), any version is a sufficient reference.


Appendix B.  Non-normative explanation of background

   This Appendix is not part of the formal rules of the IETF and does
   not purport to offer legal advice.

   Copyright provisions for IETF documents were first defined in
   [RFC2026] and were subsequently refined in [RFC3667] and [RFC3978].



Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


   Their effect has always been to allow free use of contributions to
   the IETF process in IETF discussions, IETF drafts and IETF
   publications.  Even prior to RFC 2026, such free use was considered
   the norm by all participants.  RFC 5378 makes no difference to the
   IETF's right to use contributions freely within the IETF process.
   However, use of contributions outside the IETF process has always
   been subject to some limitations.  The IETF does not require
   copyright transfers, and as a result contributors retain control
   except to the extent that the IETF rules applicable at the time of
   submission indicate otherwise.

   IETF and RFC Editor rules and practices have always allowed RFCs to
   be reproduced as complete documents, in English or in translation.
   This has not changed.

   The particular point at issue is the use of IETF contributions in
   works derived from IETF documents by third parties outside the IETF
   process.  The rules in RFC 2026, RFC 3667 and RFC 3978 do not allow
   this without the contributors' permission, except for limited
   exceptions.

   The exception defined in RFC 2026 is that "derivative works that
   comment on or otherwise explain it [the IETF document] or assist in
   its implmentation [sic] may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind..."
   This has been generally interpreted to allow extracts to be used in
   software implementations, user manuals, text books, and the like.

   RFC 3667 and RFC 3978 added explicit wording to further clarify that
   code extracts may be freely used by anybody: "(E) to extract, copy,
   publish, display, distribute, modify and incorporate into other
   works, for any purpose (and not limited to use within the IETF
   Standards Process) any executable code or code fragments that are
   included in any IETF Document...".  However, RFC 3667 and RFC 3978 do
   not mention the category of "derivative works that comment on or
   otherwise explain..."  For contributions made when they were in
   force, use of non-code extracts for commentary and explanation
   outside the IETF process appears formally to require explicit
   permission from the original contributors.  In many jurisdictions,
   this might fall under the "fair use" provisions of copyright law or
   their local equivalent, and in any case most RFC authors would be
   glad of such use.

   [RFC5378] extends the rights granted by contributors to the IETF (in
   practice, the IETF Trust) such that the IETF itself (via the Trust)
   can grant the right to make derivative works to third parties.  Short
   of a full copyright transfer to the IETF, this cleans up the
   situation for new documents.  It allows the IETF to grant rights to



Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


   third parties to make use of new IETF documents in any way the IETF
   is happy with, and it leaves the original contributors free to do
   what they want with their own work (even in ways the IETF is unhappy
   with).

   As noted in the Introduction, there is an issue if a current IETF
   contribution, submitted under the new rules of RFC 5378, includes
   material originally submitted by a different contributor under one of
   the previous rules (including prior to RFC 2026 when there was no
   rule).  Suppose Alice plans to submit a draft under RFC 5378
   containing a modified version of a section of an RFC originally
   submitted by Bob under one of the older rules.  This is a very common
   situation, for example when a protocol needs clarification or
   correction, or a new version is most conveniently documented by
   revising the old text.  There are several possible approaches, all of
   which appear to fully respect Bob's rights without delaying
   publication:
   1.  Alice looks at the IETF web site, and finds that the previous RFC
       is listed as already being OK for use under RFC 5378 conditions,
       or that Bob and his employer are listed as allowing any of their
       contributions to be so used.  Alice submits a draft using the
       normal RFC 5378 boilerplate, and includes an acknowledgement of
       Bob's contribution, such as: "Significant amounts of text have
       been adapted from RFCxxxx written by Bob, who has agreed to the
       text being submitted under the IETF's current copyright
       provisions".
   2.  Alice can easily find Bob's email address and he rapidly agrees
       that his old contribution may be used under current IETF rules.
       Alice submits a draft using the normal RFC 5378 boilerplate, and
       includes an acknowledgement of Bob's contribution, such as:
       "Significant amounts of text have been adapted from RFCxxxx
       written by Bob, who has agreed to the text being submitted under
       the IETF's current copyright provisions".
   3.  Similar, except that Bob prefers to be listed as a co-author.
       Again, the normal RFC 5378 boilerplate will be used.
   4.  Similar, except that this would increase the number of listed
       authors above the limit preferred by the RFC Editor.  In this
       case, a list of fully identified Contributors would be used, as
       defined in the RFC Editor's Editorial Guidelines.
   5.  Bob can't be found, or doesn't reply in a reasonable period of
       time, or says he doesn't agree, or says that his previous
       employer actually owns the rights, and it would take months of
       discussion with their lawyers to get agreement.  In such cases,
       Alice goes ahead, but includes the IETF Trust's recommended
       disclaimer in the draft.  This is drawn to the attention of the
       working group and the IETF at the time of Last Call.  Alice also
       includes a straightforward acknowledgement with more detail, such
       as: "Significant amounts of text in sections X, Y and Z have been



Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


       adapted from RFCxxxx written by Bob."

   The same possibilities would apply to text from an Internet-Draft
   submitted prior to RFC 5378, or to significant and substantial
   amounts of text posted as email as part of an IETF discussion prior
   to RFC 5378.

   There is scope for judgment and common sense when using small
   fragments of text, whether taken from speech, email, a draft, or an
   RFC.  This Appendix doesn't define rules or offer legal advice, but
   it is not suggested that any of the above alternatives is necessary
   for odd phrases and sentences culled from normal ongoing IETF
   discussion prior to RFC 5378.  However, when in doubt, it is
   presumably safer to include the disclaimer.

   A rule of thumb may be that if the contribution quoted is so small
   that its inclusion would not merit an acknowledgement according to
   RFC 3667 rules, it does not merit a permission search under the rules
   of this document.

   Note that for jointly written drafts, all direct and indirect
   contributors take responsibility for identifying text from other
   contributors contributed prior to RFC 5378.  If Alice submits a draft
   written by herself, Alicia and Alize, all three are responsible for
   verifying that any old text from other contributions that they have
   re-used is handled according to this document.

   What amounts to sufficient agreement from Bob?  The IETF process
   takes place mainly on-line, so a clear email agreeing to RFC 5378
   conditions should be enough.  However, it would be better if Bob also
   provides the hard-copy general non-exclusive license suggested by the
   IETF Trust.  If Bob writes that he is replying on behalf of his co-
   contributors, that should also be enough.  But if Bob states that he
   cannot speak for his previous employers, that is not enough on its
   own.  In many cases, employment laws or contracts do not leave Bob
   with copyright in his own writings, so the previous employer's
   agreement is needed.  The best way for that to happen is for the
   employer concerned to sign the Trust's general license.  In most
   cases, it probably isn't reasonable for Alice to pursue this option.

   It will be a matter of judgment how hard to work on getting agreement
   from Bob and possibly his previous employer.  If the issue is judged
   important, the WG Chair, the Area Director, or even the IETF Trust
   might be asked to assist.  However, it seems likely that in many
   cases, that much effort may seem excessive, and it will be sufficient
   to include the disclaimer.  It should be remembered that the IETF's
   ability to do its own work is absolutely unaffected by this result.




Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Including old text              February 2009


   It should be noted that when the last alternative applies and the
   disclaimer is included, the situation for a third party wishing to
   re-use the old text is exactly as it always has been: the third party
   has to identify the legitimate copyright holder(s) ("Bob") and get
   their permission.  The IETF, the IETF Trust, and the recent
   contributors ("Alice") are not concerned.

   The procedure defined in the main body of this document is intended
   to ensure that in the case of affected documents, the contributors,
   or people acting on their behalf, make a modest and reasonable effort
   to gain agreement from earlier contributors that RFC 5378 rules may
   be applied (basically, checking the IETF web site, and if necessary,
   sending "Bob" an email).  If this fails, they have a simple and
   straightforward alternative - the disclaimer - which leaves all
   parties no worse off than under the old rules.  And in all cases,
   normal good practice is followed by including an acknowledgment.


Authors' Addresses

   Brian Carpenter
   Department of Computer Science
   University of Auckland
   PB 92019
   Auckland  1142
   New Zealand

   Email: brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com


   Harald Alvestrand
   Beddingen 10
   Trondheim  7013
   Norway

   Email: harald@alvestrand.no















Carpenter & Alvestrand   Expires August 17, 2009                [Page 9]


