


IPFIX Working Group                                    A. Kobayashi, ED.
Internet-Draft                                               NTT PF Lab. 
Intended status: Informational                          February 5, 2009 
Expires: August 9, 2009                                        







                   IPFIX Mediation: Problem Statement
            draft-ietf-ipfix-mediators-problem-statement-02

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 9, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


Abstract

   Flow-based measurement is a popular method for various network
   monitoring usages.  The sharing of flow-based information for
   monitoring applications having different requirements raises some
   open issues in terms of scalability, reliability, and flexibility
   that IPFIX Mediation may help resolve.  IPFIX Mediation covers two
   classes of mediation: context mediation for traffic data and
   transport mediation for transport protocols.  This document describes
   the problems that network administrators have been facing and the
   applicability of IPFIX Mediation.








































Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology and Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  IPFIX/PSAMP Documents Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  IPFIX Documents Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  PSAMP Documents Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Approach for IP Traffic Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Approach to Multifaceted Traffic Measurement . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  Approach to Heterogeneous Environment  . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Applicable Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Adjusting Flow Granularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Hierarchical Collecting Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  Correlation of Data Records  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.4.  Time Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.5.  Spatial Composition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.6.  Data Retention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.7.  IPFIX Export from Branch Office  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.8.  Distributing Data Records  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.9.  IPFIX Export Across Domains  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.10. Flow-based Sampling and Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.11. Interoperability between Legacy Protocols and IPFIX  . . . 15
   6.  Problems with using IPFIX Mediators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     6.1.  Loss of Original Exporter Information  . . . . . . . . . . 16
     6.2.  Loss of Base Time Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     6.3.  Loss of Option Template Information  . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     6.4.  Observation Domain ID and Template ID Management . . . . . 17
     6.5.  Transport Sessions Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  Summary and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25














Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


1.  Introduction

   While the IPFIX requirements defined in [RFC3917] mention an
   intermediate function, such as an IPFIX Proxy or an Concentrator,
   there is no document to define the function called IPFIX Mediation.
   IPFIX Mediation is a generic function that covers context mediation
   for traffic data and transport mediation for IPFIX transport
   protocols that do not affect content.  We describes the general
   problems that network administrators have been facing and several
   applicable IPFIX Mediation categories along with specific terminology
   (IPFIX Proxy, Concentrator, etc.).  Furthermore, we describe the
   problems of IPFIX Mediation with regard to implementation.  These
   problems can be solved by making additional specifications that do
   not affect the present IPFIX protocol specifications defined in
   [RFC5101].

   This document is structured as follows.  Section 2 describes the
   terminology used in this document.  Section 3 gives an IPFIX/PSAMP
   document overview.  Section 4 introduces general problems related to
   flow-based measurement.  Section 5 describes some applicable examples
   where IPFIX Mediation would benefit from solutions to such problems.
   Finally, section 6 describes the problems an implementation of an
   IPFIX Mediation device might face.




























Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


2.  Terminology and Definition

   The terms in this section are in line with those in the IPFIX
   Protocol specifications [RFC5101] and the PSAMP specification
   document [I-D.ietf-psamp-protocol].  The terms Observation Point,
   Observation Domain, Flow Key, Flow Record, Exporting Process,
   Exporter, IPFIX Device, Collecting Process, Collector, IPFIX Message,
   Metering Process, and Information Element are defined in the IPFIX
   protocol specifications [RFC5101], while the term Packet Report is
   defined in the PSAMP specification document
   [I-D.ietf-psamp-protocol].  Additional terms required for the IPFIX
   Mediation are also defined here.  All these terms have an initial
   capital letter in this document.

   IPFIX Mediation

      IPFIX Mediation is a function that can be applied to individual
      Data Records and/or Template Records or to entire IPFIX Messages.
      IPFIX Mediation offers one or multiple capabilities.

      *  content mediation that changes Flow information

         +  aggregating Data Records based on a new set of Flow Key
            fields

         +  correlating a set of Data Records for creating new metrics

         +  filtering and selecting Data Records

         +  modifying Data Records and/or Template Records, which
            includes these functions:

            -  changing the value of specified Information Elements

            -  adding new Information Elements by deriving further Flow
               or packet properties from existing fields or calculating
               new metrics

            -  deleting specified Information Elements

      *  transport mediation that does not affect content

         +  changing the transport protocol that carries IPFIX Messages

         +  rerouting entire IPFIX Messages to an appropriate Collecting
            Process





Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


         +  replicating Data Records and Template Records or entire
            IPFIX Messages

      IPFIX Mediation can be included in any IPFIX Devices, such as
      routers, switches, and network management systems (NMS).

   IPFIX Mediator

      An IPFIX Mediator is an IPFIX Device that contains one or more
      IPFIX Mediation capabilities.

   Original Exporter

      An Original Exporter is an IPFIX Device that hosts Observation
      Points where the metered IP packets are observed.

   IPFIX Proxy

      An IPFIX Proxy is an IPFIX Mediation that relays incoming
      Transport Sessions to one or multiple Collectors.  The protocols
      used at the input and the output may be different, which implies
      that IPFIX Messages, Data Records, or Template Records need to be
      encoded, e.g., converting legacy protocol into IPFIX.

   IPFIX Concentrator

      An IPFIX Concentrator is an IPFIX Mediation that receives Flow
      Records/Packet Reports, aggregates them, then exports the
      aggregated Flow Records.

   IPFIX Distributor

      An IPFIX Distributor is an IPFIX Mediation that distributes
      incoming IPFIX Data Records to one or multiple IPFIX Collectors.
      The decision as to which IPFIX Collector a Data Record is exported
      can be determined by filtering certain field values or other
      properties derived from the Data Record.

   IPFIX Masquerading Proxy

      An IPFIX Masquerading Proxy is an IPFIX Mediation that screens out
      parts of input Data Records according to configured policies.  It
      can thus, for example, hide the network topology information or
      customers' IP addresses.







Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


3.  IPFIX/PSAMP Documents Overview

3.1.  IPFIX Documents Overview

   The IPFIX protocol [RFC5101] provides network administrators with
   access to IP flow information.  The architecture for the export of
   measured IP flow information out of an IPFIX Exporting Process to a
   Collecting Process is defined in [I-D.ietf-ipfix-architecture], per
   the requirements defined in [RFC3917].  The IPFIX protocol [RFC5101]
   specifies how IPFIX Data Records and Templates are carried via a
   number of transport protocols from IPFIX Exporting Processes to IPFIX
   Collecting Processes.  IPFIX has a formal description of IPFIX
   Information Elements, their names, types, and additional semantic
   information, as specified in [RFC5102].  [I-D.ietf-ipfix-mib]
   specifies the IPFIX Management Information Base.  Finally,
   [I-D.ietf-ipfix-as] describes what types of applications can use the
   IPFIX protocol and how they can use the information provided.  It
   furthermore shows how the IPFIX framework relates to other
   architectures and frameworks.  The storage of IPFIX Messages in a
   file is specified in [I-D.ietf-ipfix-file].

3.2.  PSAMP Documents Overview

   The framework for packet selection and reporting
   [I-D.ietf-psamp-framework] enables network elements to select subsets
   of packets by statistical and other methods and to export a stream of
   reports on the selected packets to a Collector.  The set of packet
   selection techniques (sampling, filtering, and hashing) standardized
   by PSAMP are described in [I-D.ietf-psamp-sample-tech].  The PSAMP
   protocol [I-D.ietf-psamp-protocol] specifies the export of packet
   information from a PSAMP Exporting Process to a Collector.  Like
   IPFIX, PSAMP has a formal description of its Information Elements,
   their names, types and additional semantic information.  The PSAMP
   information model is defined in [I-D.ietf-psamp-info].
   [I-D.ietf-psamp-mib] describes the PSAMP Management Information Base.
















Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


4.  Problem Statement

   Network administrators generally face the problems of flow-based
   measurement for scalability, reliability, and flexibility, and some
   techniques, such as sampling, aggregating and replicating, have
   already been developed.  The problems consist of optimizing the
   resources of the measurement system while pursuing appropriate
   conditions, such as data accuracy, flow granularity, and reliability.
   The conditions depend on two factors.

   o  capacity of measurement system
      This consists of the bandwidth of the management network, the
      storage capacity, and the performances of the collecting devices
      and exporting devices.

   o  requirement for given applications
      This depends on the purpose of the application, such as traffic
      engineering, detecting anomaly traffic, and accounting.

   The recent continued IP traffic growth has been overwhelming the
   capacity of measurement system, and multi-purposing applications and
   the heterogeneous environment have further contributed to a complex
   situation.  The following sub-sections explain problems related to
   these two factors.

4.1.  Approach for IP Traffic Growth

   Enterprise or service provider networks already have multiple 10 Gb/s
   links, their total traffic exceeding 100 Gb/s.  In the near future,
   broadband users' traffic will increase by approximately 40% every
   year according to [TRAFGRW].  When operators monitor traffic of 500
   Gb/s with a sampling rate of 1/1000, the amount of exported Flow
   Records from Exporters could exceed 50 kFlows/s.  This value is
   beyond the ability of a single Collector.

   To deal with this problem, traffic data reduction techniques, such as
   sampling or aggregating, have been generally implemented in exporting
   devices.  These techniques lead to coarse flow granularity or low
   data accuracy, resulting in Flows with small traffic volumes that
   could easily get lost.  Administrators would no longer be able to
   investigate traffic change and anomaly traffic, both of which can
   currently be detected, unless the collecting infrastructure is
   improved.

   This implies the necessity of a large-scale collecting infrastructure
   and other traffic data reduction techniques other than packet-based
   sampling and selection techniques.




Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


4.2.  Approach to Multifaceted Traffic Measurement

   A set of conditions (flow granularity and data accuracy) may meet the
   requirements of some applications, such as traffic engineering, but
   would not meet the requirements of other applications, such as
   accounting and QoS performance.  Therefore, with a single set of
   conditions, multifaceted traffic measurement cannot be accomplished.

   To cope with the issue, a exporting device needs to export traffic
   data with strictest condition (fine flow granularity and high data
   accuracy) required by one of applications.  However, it brings about
   increasing the load on a exporting device and a collecting device.

4.3.  Approach to Heterogeneous Environment

   Network administrators use exporting devices from various vendors and
   of various software versions or device type (router, switch, or
   probe) in a single network domain.  This heterogeneous environment
   leads to differences in capability, performance, and data format.
   For example, a probe and a switch cannot retrieve packet property
   information from a route table.

   To deal with this problem, a collecting device needs to absorb the
   differences.  However, equipping all collecting devices with this
   extra function is difficult.  A sophisticated solution that
   introduces individual modules separate from specific devices is
   necessary.

4.4.  Summary

   In optimizing the resources of a measurement system, it is important
   to use traffic data reduction techniques at the possible initial
   phase, e.g., exporting devices, of the whole system.  However, this
   implementation is made difficult by heterogeneous environment of
   exporting devices.

   It implies that the exporter-collector structure model has
   limitations, and a mediation function as another functional block is
   necessary.  The next section shows the limitation of the exporter-
   collector structure model and the benefit of IPFIX Mediation
   according in applicable examples.










Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


5.  Applicable Examples

5.1.  Adjusting Flow Granularity

   The simplest types of Flows are those comprised of packets all having
   a fixed IP-quintuple of protocol, source and destination IP
   addresses, and source and destination port numbers.  However, a
   shorter Flow Key, such as a triple, a double, or a single Flow Key,
   such as a network prefix, peering AS number, or BGP Next-Hop, creates
   more aggregated Flow Records.  This is especially useful for
   measuring traffic exchange in an entire network domain and for easily
   adjusting the performance of a Collector.

   Implementation analysis:

      Implementations for this case depend on where Flow granularity is
      adjusted.  More suitable implementations uses the configurable
      Metering Process in Original Exporters.  The cache in the Metering
      Process can specify its own set of Flow Keys and extra fields.
      The Original Exporter thus creates directly aggregated Flow
      Records.

      In the case where an unconfigurable Metering Process creating IP-
      quintuple Flow Records exists in a line interface module, IPFIX
      Mediation in another module can be applied between the Metering
      Process and an Exporting Process.

      In the case where an Original Exporter creating IP-quintuple Flow
      Records exists, an IPFIX Concentrator can be applied between the
      Original Exporter and an IPFIX Collector.

5.2.  Hierarchical Collecting Infrastructure

   As an approach to large-scale measurement systems, a hierarchical
   structure is useful for increasing the capacity.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX
      Concentrator.  An IPFIX Concentrator with storage capability also
      makes a most useful distributed-collection system.

5.3.  Correlation of Data Records

   The correlation of Data Records provides new metrics, including the
   following.





Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


   o  One way delay from the correlation of Packet Reports from
      different Exporters on the path.

   o  Rate-limiting ratio from the correlation of Data Records with the
      same Flow Key observed at incoming/outgoing interfaces.

   o  Average/maximum/minimum values from correlating multiple Data
      Records.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX Mediation
      located between the Metering Processes and Exporting Processes or
      between the Original Exporters and IPFIX Collectors.

5.4.  Time Composition

   Time composition is defined as the aggregation of consecutive Data
   Records with identical Flow Key values.  It leads to the same output
   as setting a longer active interval timer on Original Exporters.  An
   advantage is that creating new metrics (average, maximum and minimum
   values) from Flow Records with a shorter interval time enables
   administrators to keep track of changes that might have happened
   during the time interval.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX Mediation
      located between the Metering Processes and Exporting Processes or
      between the Original Exporters and IPFIX Collectors.

5.5.  Spatial Composition

   Spatial composition is defined as the aggregation of Data Records in
   a set of Observation Points with an Observation Domain, across
   multiple Observation Domains from a single Exporter, or even across
   multiple Exporters.  It is divided into three types.

   o  Spatial Composition within one Observation Domain

      For example, in the case where a link aggregation exists, Data
      Records observed at physical interfaces belonging to a same trunk
      can be merged.

   o  Spatial Composition across Observation Domains, but within a
      single Exporter

      For example, in the case where a link aggregation exists, Data



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


      Records observed at physical interfaces belonging to a same trunk
      grouping beyond the line interface module can be merged.

   o  Spatial Composition across Exporters

      Data Records observed at different domains, such as the west area
      and east area of an ISP network, can be merged.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX Mediation
      located between the Metering Processes and Exporting Processes or
      between the IPFIX Exporters and IPFIX Collectors.

5.6.  Data Retention

   Data retention refers to the storage of traffic data by service
   providers and commercial organizations.  In accordance with European
   Commission directives, operators are required to retain both IP and
   voice traffic data, in wired and wireless networks, generated by end
   users while using a service provider's services.  The goal of data
   retention is to ensure that call detail records and Flow Records are
   available for the detection, investigation, and prosecution of
   serious crimes, if necessary.  The European Commission directives
   define the following data retention services:

   o  Fixed telephony (includes fixed voice calls, voicemail, and
      conference and data calls)

   o  Mobile telephony (includes mobile voice calls, voicemail,
      conference and data calls, SMS, and MMS)

   o  Internet telephony (includes every multimedia session associated
      with IP multimedia services)

   o  Internet e-mail

   o  Internet access

   Data retention for Internet access services in particular requires
   a&#12288;measurement system with reliability and huge storage.

   Implementation analysis:

      Regarding reliability, the most suitable implementation uses the
      SCTP transport protocol between the Original Exporter and
      Collector.  Otherwise, an IPFIX Proxy next to a legacy exporting
      device exports traffic data to the final IPFIX Collector through



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


      SCTP.

      Regarding huge storage, one possible implemantation uses a
      decentralized collecting device.  If operators need to retrieve
      specific traffic data, these collecting devices would need to be
      equipped with IPFIX Mediation capabilities.

   [ Editor Note]

   The authors need to find the data retention reference.

5.7.  IPFIX Export from Branch Office

   Generally, in large enterprise networks, traffic data from branch
   offices are gathered in a central office.  However, in the long
   distance branch office case, the bandwidth for transport IPFIX is
   limited.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX
      Concentrator located in a branch office.  The IPFIX Concentrator
      then exports aggregated Flow Records to cope with the bandwidth
      limitation.

5.8.  Distributing Data Records

   Recently, several networks have shifted towards integrated networks,
   such as the pure IP and MPLS, which includes IPv4, IPv6, and VPN
   traffic.  Data Record types (IPv4, IPv6, MPLS, and VPN) need to be
   analyzed separately and from different perspectives.  However,
   handling them separately without improving the capability of the
   Collector is difficult.  Data Records distributed based on the type
   can be exported to an appropriate Collector with a specific
   application, and this results in the distribution of the load among
   multiple Collectors.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses the replications of
      the IPFIX Message in an IPFIX Exporter for multiple IPFIX
      Collectors.  Each Collector then extracts the Data Record required
      by its own applications.  However, this increases the load of the
      Exporting Process.

      A more sophisticated implementation uses an IPFIX Distributor
      located between the Metering Processes and Exporting Processes or
      between the Original Exporters and IPFIX Collectors.  For example,



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


      in the case of distributing a specific customer's Data Records, an
      IPFIX Distributor needs to identify the customer networks.  The
      Route Distinguisher (RD), ingress interface, peering AS number, or
      BGP Next-Hop, or simply the network prefix may be evaluated to
      distinguish different customer networks.  In the following figure,
      the IPFIX Distributor reroutes Data Records on the basis of the RD
      value.  This system enables each customer's traffic to be
      inspected independently.

                                               .---------.
                                               |Traffic  |
                                         .---->|Collector|<==>Customer#A
                                         |     |#1       |
                                         |     '---------'
                                      RD=100:1
                        .-----------.    |
    .----------.        |IPFIX      |----'     .---------.
    |IPFIX     |        |Distributor| RD=100:2 |Traffic  |
    |Exporter#1|------->|           |--------->|Collector|<==>Customer#B
    |          |        |           |          |#2       |
    '----------'        |           |----.     '---------'
                        '-----------'    |
                                      RD=100:3
                                         |     .---------.
                                         |     |Traffic  |
                                         '---->|Collector|<==>Customer#C
                                               |#3       |
                                               '---------'

      Figure A: Distributing Data Records to Collectors using IPFIX
      Distributor

5.9.  IPFIX Export Across Domains

   IPFIX exports across administrative domains can be used to measure
   traffic for wide-area traffic engineering or to analyze Internet
   traffic trends.  In such cases, administrators need to adhere to
   privacy protection policies and prevent access to confidential
   traffic measurements by other people.  Typically, anonymization
   techniques enables the provision of traffic data to other people
   without violating these policies.

   Generally, anonymization modifies a data set to protect the identity
   of the people or entities described by the data set from being
   disclosed.  It also attempts to preserve sets of network traffic
   properties useful for a given analysis while ensuring the data cannot
   be traced back to the specific networks, hosts, or users generating
   the traffic.  For example, IP address anonymization is particularly



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


   important for avoiding the identification of the users, hosts, and
   routers in a network domain.  The details of these anonymization
   techniques are out of the scope of this document.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an anonymization
      function at the Original Exporter.  However, this increases the
      load of the Metering Process at the Original Exporter.  A more
      flexible implementation uses an IPFIX Masquerading Proxy between
      the Original Exporter and Collector.

5.10.  Flow-based Sampling and Selection

   Generally, the distribution of the number of packets per Flow seems
   to be heavy-tailed.  Most types of Flow Records are likely to be
   small Flows consisting of a small number of packets.  The measurement
   system is overwhelmed with a huge amount of these small Flows.  If
   statistics information of small Flows is exported as merged data by
   applying a policy or threshold, the load on the measurement system is
   reduced.  Furthermore, if the flow distribution is known, exporting
   only a subset of the Data Records might be sufficient.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX Mediation
      located between the Metering Processes and Exporting Processes or
      between the Original Exporters and IPFIX Collectors.

5.11.  Interoperability between Legacy Protocols and IPFIX

   During the migration process from a legacy protocol such as NetFlow
   [RFC3954] to IPFIX, both NetFlow exporting devices and IPFIX
   Exporters are likely to coexist in the same network.  Operators need
   to continue measuring the traffic data from legacy exporting devices,
   even after introducing IPFIX Collectors.

   Implementation analysis:

      One possible implementation for this case uses an IPFIX Proxy that
      converts a legacy protocol to IPFIX.










Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


6.  Problems with using IPFIX Mediators

   In this section, we focus on the problems related to the use of IPFIX
   Mediators in consideration of implementation.

6.1.  Loss of Original Exporter Information

   Both the Exporter IP address indicated by the source IP address of
   the IPFIX session and the Observation Domain ID included in the IPFIX
   Message header are likely to be lost by an IPFIX Mediator such as
   IPFIX Concentrator.  In some cases, the IPFIX Masquerading Proxy
   might be made to drop the information.  However, in other cases, the
   information is necessary for indicating the Observation Point
   information from the viewpoint of the entire network domain.  Such
   information might be necessary for guaranteeing the continuity of the
   work of the top level Collector.  Even if an IPFIX Mediator could,
   with some new mechanism, notify Collectors of this Observation Point
   information, older Collectors might not accept it.  These Collectors
   would then wrongly assume that the IP address of the IPFIX Mediator
   is that of the Original Exporter.  The Collector, however, sometimes
   needs to recognize the Original Exporter (and potentially the
   Observation Domain and Observation Point as well) whether Data
   Records go through an IPFIX Mediator or not.

   In the following figure, a Collector can identify two IP addresses:
   10.1.1.3 (IPFIX Mediator) and 10.1.1.2 (Exporter#2). respectively.
   The Collector, however, needs to somehow recognize both Exporter#1
   and Exporter#2, which are the Original Exporters.  Defined
   notification methods that can be interpreted by Collectors and
   Mediators are thus necessary.

   .----------.          .--------.
   |IPFIX     |          |IPFIX   |
   |Exporter#1|--------->|Mediator|---+
   |          |          |        |   |
   '----------'          '--------'   |      .---------.
   IP:10.1.1.1         IP:10.1.1.3    '----->|IPFIX    |
   ODID:10             ODID:0                |Collector|
                                      +----->|         |
   .----------.                       |      '---------'
   |IPFIX     |                       |
   |Exporter#2|-----------------------'
   |          |
   '----------'
   IP:10.1.1.2
   ODID:20

   Figure B: Loss of Original Exporter Information.



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


6.2.  Loss of Base Time Information

   The Export Time field included in the IPFIX Message header indicates
   the base time for Data Records.  IPFIX Information Elements,
   described in [RFC5102], have delta time fields that indicate the time
   difference from the value of the Export Time field.  If the Data
   Records include any delta time fields and the IPFIX Mediator
   overwrites the Export Time field when sending IPFIX Messages, the
   delta time fields become meaningless and, because Collectors cannot
   recognize this situation, wrong time values are propagated.

6.3.  Loss of Option Template Information

   In some cases, depending on the implementation of the IPFIX
   Mediators, the information that is reported by the Option Templates
   could also be lost.  If, for example, the sampling rate is not
   communicated to the Collectors, a Collector would miscalculate the
   traffic volume.  This might lead to crucial problems.  Even if an
   IPFIX Mediator was to simply relay received Option Template
   Information, the values of its scope fields could become meaningless
   in the context of a different session.  The minimal information to be
   communicated by an IPFIX Mediator needs to be defined.

6.4.  Observation Domain ID and Template ID Management

   The Observation Domain ID is locally unique to an Exporting Process,
   just as the Template ID is unique on the basis of the Transport
   Session and Observation Domain ID.  If IPFIX Mediators were not able
   to manage the relations among these identifiers and the incoming
   Transport Session information, and if the Template ID was used in the
   scope field of Options, the Mediators would, for example, relay wrong
   values for the scope field and for "Template Withdraw Message".  The
   Collector would thus not be able to interpret the Template ID of
   "Template Withdraw Message" and of the scope fields of Options.  The
   Collector would then shut down the IPFIX Transport Session.

6.5.  Transport Sessions Management

   Maintaining relationships between the incoming Transport Sessions and
   the outgoing ones depends on the Mediator's implementation.  If
   multiple incoming Transport Sessions are relayed to a single outgoing
   Transport Session, and if the IPFIX Mediators shuts down its outgoing
   Transport Session, Data Records on other incoming Transport Sessions
   would not be relayed at all.  In the case of resetting of an incoming
   session, the behavior of the IPFIX Mediator needs to be defined.

   For example, an IPFIX Distributor must maintain the state of the
   incoming Transport Sessions in order to manage the Template ID on its



Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


   outgoing Transport Session correctly.  In the following figure, even
   if the Transport Session from Exporter#1 re-initializes, the IPFIX
   Distributor must maintain the validity of the Template IDs to avoid
   overlapping the existing ones on the outgoing Transport Session.


   .----------. OLD: Template ID 258
   |IPFIX     | NEW: Template ID 256
   |Exporter#1|----+
   |          |    |
   '----------'    X
   .----------.    |           .-----------.               .----------.
   |IPFIX     |    '---------->|           |               |          |
   |Exporter#2|--------------->|IPFIX      |-------X------>|IPFIX     |
   |          |Template ID 257 |Distributor|Template ID 256| Collector|
   '----------'    +---------->|           |               |          |
   .----------.    |           '-----------'               '----------'
   |IPFIX     |    |
   |Exporter#3|----'
   |          | Template ID 256
   '----------'

   Figure C: Relaying from Multiple Transport Sessions to Single
   Transport Session.



























Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


7.  Summary and Conclusion

   This document described the problems that network administrators have
   been facing, the applicability of IPFIX Mediation to these problems,
   and the problems related to the implementation of IPFIX Mediators.
   To assist the operations of the Exporters and Collectors, there are
   various IPFIX Mediation functions from which the administrators may
   select.  Examples of the applicability of IPFIX Mediation are as
   follows.

   o  Regarding large-scale measurement system, IPFIX Concentrators or
      IPFIX Distributors help to achieve traffic analysis with high data
      accuracy and fine flow granularity even as IP traffic grows.  As
      IPFIX Mediation capabilities, Flow selection sampling,
      aggregation, and composition are effective.

   o  Regarding data retention, IPFIX Mediators enhance the reliability,
      and the storage of the measurement system.

   o  Regarding the distribution of Data Records, this could be
      introduced in integrated networks, which mix MPLS VPN and IPv4/
      IPv6, more frequently.  More sophisticated implementation methods
      would enhance the distribution's effectiveness.

   o  Regarding IPFIX Exporting across domains, IPFIX Masquerading
      Proxies help administrators to anonymize or filter Flow Records/
      Packet Reports, preventing privacy violations.

   o  Regarding interoperability, IPFIX Proxies provide interoperability
      between legacy protocols and IPFIX, even during the migration
      period to IPFIX.

   As a result, the benefits of IPFIX Mediation become apparent.
   However, there are still some open issues with the use of IPFIX
   Mediators.

   o  Both Observation Point and IPFIX Message header information, such
      as the Exporter IP address, Observation Domain ID, and Export Time
      field, might be lost.  This data should therefore be communicated
      between the Original Exporter and Collector via the IPFIX
      Mediator.

   o  Data advertised by Option Templates from the Original Exporter,
      such as the sampling rate and sampling algorithm used, might be
      lost.  If a Collector is not informed of current sampling rates,
      traffic information might become worthless.





Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


   o  IPFIX Mediators are required to manage Transport Sessions,
      Template IDs, and Observation Domain IDs.  Otherwise, anomalous
      IPFIX messages could be created.

   These problems stem from the fact that no standards regarding IPFIX
   Mediation have been set.  In particular, the minimum set of
   information that should be communicated between Original Exporters
   and Collectors, the interworking between different IPFIX Transport
   Sessions, and the internal components of IPFIX Mediators should be
   standardized.









































Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


8.  Security Considerations

   A flow-based measurement system must prevent potential security
   threats: the disclosure of confidential traffic data, injection of
   incorrect data, and unauthorized access to traffic data.  These
   security threats of the IPFIX protocol are covered by the security
   considerations section in [RFC5101] and are true of IPFIX Mediation
   as well.

   And a measurement system must also prevent following security threats
   related to IPFIX Mediation.

   o  attacks against IPFIX Mediator

      IPFIX Mediators would be considered a prime target for attacks
      instead of IPFIX Exporters and Collectors.  IPFIX Proxies or
      Masquerading Proxies need to prevent unauthorized access or
      denial-of-service (DoS) attacks from untrusted public networks.

   o  man-in-the-middle attack by untrusted IPFIX Mediator

      The Collector-Mediator-Exporter structure model would increase the
      risk of the man-in-the-middle attack.

   o  configuration on IPFIX Mediation

      In the case of IPFIX Distributors and IPFIX Masquerading Proxies,
      an accidental misconfiguration and unauthorized access to
      configuration data could lead to the crucial problem of disclosure
      of confidential traffic data.





















Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-ipfix-architecture]
              Sadasivan, G., Brownlee, N., Claise, B., and J. Quittek,
              "Architecture for IP Flow Information Export",
              draft-ietf-ipfix-architecture-12 (work in progress) ,
              September 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-ipfix-as]
              Zseby, T., Boschi, E., Brownlee, N., and B. Claise, "IPFIX
              Applicability", draft-ietf-ipfix-as-12 (work in
              progress) , June 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-ipfix-file]
              Trammell, B., Boschi, E., Mark, L., Zseby, T., and A.
              Wagner, "Specification of the IPFIX File Format",
              draft-ietf-ipfix-file-03 (work in progress) ,
              October 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-ipfix-mib]
              Dietz, T., Claise, B., and A. Kobayashi, "Definitions of
              Managed Objects for IP Flow Information Export",
              draft-ietf-ipfix-mib-05 (work in progress) ,
              November 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-psamp-framework]
              Duffield, N., "A Framework for Packet Selection and
              Reporting", draft-ietf-psamp-framework-13 (work in
              progress) , June 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-psamp-info]
              Dietz, T., Claise, B., Aitken, P., Dressler, F., and G.
              Carle, "Information Model for Packet Sampling Exports",
              draft-ietf-psamp-info-11 (work in progress) ,
              October 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-psamp-mib]
              Dietz, T. and B. Claise, "Definitions of Managed Objects
              for Packet Sampling", draft-ietf-psamp-mib-06 (work in
              progress) , June 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-psamp-protocol]
              Claise, B., "Packet Sampling (PSAMP) Protocol
              Specifications", draft-ietf-psamp-protocol-09 (work in
              progress) , December 2007.




Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


   [I-D.ietf-psamp-sample-tech]
              Zseby, T., Molina, M., Duffield, N., Niccolini, S., and F.
              Raspall, "Sampling and Filtering Techniques for IP Packet
              Selection", draft-ietf-psamp-sample-tech-11 (work in
              progress) , July 2008.

   [RFC3917]  Quittek, J., Zseby, T., Claise, B., and S. Zander,
              "Requirements for IP Flow Information Export(IPFIX)",
              October 2004.

   [RFC3954]  Claise, B., "Cisco Systems NetFlow Services Export Version
              9", October 2004.

   [RFC5101]  Claise, B., "Specification of the IP Flow Information
              Export (IPFIX) Protocol for the Exchange of IP Traffic
              Flow Information", January 2008.

   [RFC5102]  Quittek, J., Bryant, S., Claise, B., Aitken, P., and J.
              Meyer, "Information Model for IP Flow Information Export",
              January 2008.

10.2.  Informative References

   [TRAFGRW]  Cho, K., Fukuda, K., Esaki, H., and A. Kato, "The Impact
              and Implications of the Growth in Residential User-to-User
              Traffic", SIGCOMM2006, pp. 207-218, Pisa, Italy, September
              2006. .
























Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Atsushi Kobayashi
   NTT Information Sharing Platform Laboratories
   3-9-11 Midori-cho
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo  180-8585
   Japan

   Phone: +81-422-59-3978
   Email: akoba@nttv6.net
   URI:   http://www3.plala.or.jp/akoba/


   Haruhiko Nishida
   NTT Information Sharing Platform Laboratories
   3-9-11 Midori-cho
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo  180-8585
   Japan

   Phone: +81-422-59-3978
   Email: nishida.haruhiko@lab.ntt.co.jp


   Christoph Sommer
   University of Erlangen-Nuremberg
   Department of Computer Science 7
   Martensstr. 3
   Erlangen  91058
   Germany

   Phone: +49 9131 85-27993
   Email: christoph.sommer@informatik.uni-erlangen.de
   URI:   http://www7.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/~sommer/


   Falko Dressler
   University of Erlangen-Nuremberg
   Department of Computer Science 7
   Martensstr. 3
   Erlangen  91058
   Germany

   Phone: +49 9131 85-27914
   Email: dressler@informatik.uni-erlangen.de
   URI:   http://www7.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/~dressler/






Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft         Mediation Problem Statement         February 2009


   Benoit Claise
   Cisco Systems
   De Kleetlaan 6a b1
   Diegem  1831
   Belgium

   Phone: +32 2 704 5622
   Email: bclaise@cisco.com


   Stephan Emile
   France Telecom
   2 avenue Pierre Marzin
   Lannion,   F-22307

   Fax:   +33 2 96 05 18 52
   Email: emile.stephan@orange-ftgroup.com


































Kobayashi, et al.        Expires August 9, 2009                [Page 26]

