Internet-Draft                                             Ben Golightly
Expires: May 23 2016                                    20 November 2015


           A Method for Verification of Domain Name Ownership
                     draft-bsag-domain-ownership-00

Abstract

   This document defines a method for website administrators to verify
   ownership of a domain name to third party service providers.

1. Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current
   Internet-Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the working
   group's mailing list and/or the author(s).

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 23, 2016.

2. Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

3. Introduction

   Website administrators are often required to verify ownership of
   a domain name to a third party service provider. This verification
   process may form a part of access control, privacy control, or
   security and fraud prevention more generally.

   Examples:

   * a webmaster may verify their ownership of a domain with a search
     engine in order to change how the website is displayed in search,
     diagnose issues, and access search analytics.

   * a digital Certificate Authority issuing an SSL certificate will
     verify domain name ownership to prevent a "man in the middle"
     attacker from being able to act as an imposter when intercepting
     HTTPS connections to the targeted domain name.

   To date, there is no standard way to do this. The service provider
   will normally specify a method such as:

   * Adding a vendor-specific meta tag to the home page of the website
     accessible at the given domain, or more generally add some specific
     HTML to the website.

   * Uploading a HTML file with a specific file name and content to
     the root directory of the website accessible at the given domain.

   * Modifying the DNS records for the domain.

   * Emails sent to a specific administrator e-mail address for a
     domain.

   Domain names expire or change ownership. Therefore, these methods of
   verification must be permanently maintained by the website
   administrator and regularly checked by the service provider.

   These vendor-specific HTML files are often cryptically named, and
   clutter the root directory of a website.
   
   The method specified in this memo allows website administrators to
   simplify webserver and domain name maintanence by centralising
   verification information, and allows service providers to streamline
   the verification process by avoiding vendor-specific verification
   methods.

4. Specification

   This memo specifies a format for encoding domain name verification
   information provided by a service provider, and a method for
   retrieving this information. Service providers may retrieve this
   information and treat it as current evidence of domain ownership.

4.1 Access method

   The verification information must be accessible via HTTP from the
   domain requiring verification, under a standard relative path on the
   server: "/verify.txt".

   For convenience this resource may be referred to as a "verify.txt
   file", though the resource need in fact not originate from a file-
   system.

   This file must be served with a MIME Type of "text/plain". The
   character encoding must be UTF-8.

4.2 File Format Description

   The format consists of a list of records, separated by blank lines
   and comment lines.

   A comment line takes the form:
   
     # <comment>

   Each record takes the form:

     <Domain> <ServiceProvider> [<value>]

   For example:

     # verify.txt example
     example.org          ExampleServiceProvider1  exampleAccountId-1234
     example.org          ExampleServiceProvider1  exampleAccountId-5678
     example.com          ExampleServiceProvider2  example-ABCDEF
     example.com          ExampleServiceProvider3
     testing.example.com  Example4                 v=1;u=123;d=20150102

4.2.1 The Domain field

   One webserver may be accessible from several different domain names.
   The Domain field identifies to which domain name the verification
   record applies.
   
   The content of the domain field must be any validly formatted domain
   name or IP address.

4.2.2 The ServiceProvider field

   This is a field identifying the service provider requiring the
   verification. There is no restriction on the format of this field,
   except that it may not contain whitespace. Service providers should
   pick descriptive names that uniquely identify an organisation or
   service. This could be the URL of the service.

   The length of this field should not exceed 256 bytes.

4.2.3 The value field

   This is an optional field containing a value assigned by the service
   provider. This may be used, for example, to associate a specific
   account with the service provider with the verified domain. There
   is no restriction on the format of this field, except that it may
   not contain whitespace.

   The length of this field should not exceed 4096 bytes.

4.3   Interoperability

   Service providers should be liberal in accepting files with different
   end-of-line conventions, specifically CR and LF in addition to CRLF.
   
   With the exception of line breaks, service providers should ignore
   whitespace except as a separator between fields in a record.

5. Security Considerations

   Website administrators should prevent unauthorised users from
   creating verify.txt files at the root of any domain (including
   subdomains).

   Website administrators should be cautious of the verify.txt file
   being maliciously modified, and used to verify unauthorised users
   to service providers. Website administrators should use appropriate
   best practice, such as audited source control, to detect and trace
   modifications.

   Service providers are encouraged to place limits on the resources
   spent on processing verify.txt files.

   Service providers should be aware that domain names expire or change
   ownership, and take steps to reverify as appropriate.

   Service providers should be aware that, as with any verification
   method, it may be possible for a user to impersonate a domain
   administrator. The required strength of verification should be
   balanced against the desired ease of verification.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

7. Author's Address

   Ben Golightly
   Tawesoft Ltd
   Email: ben@tawesoft.co.uk

