

Internet Draft                                              R. Stastny 
Document: draft-stastny-enum-scenarios-00.txt                    OeFEG 
Category: Informational                                                
Expires: December 2002                                       June 2002 
                                                                       
 
                 Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems 
                   <draft-stastny-enum-scenarios-00.txt> 
     
Status of this Memo  
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1}. 
        
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
        
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
        
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
        
Abstract  
    
   This document analyzes scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems, both 
   for ENUM used by End Users and also for ENUM-like Systems used by 
   operators for network-specific or infrastructure purposes. It also 
   gives some examples of ENUM Usage and proposes a new URI scheme to be 
   used with ENUM. This may allow a way forward for the definition of 
   ENUM Services and also for the definition of the required URIs and 
   their parameters. 
        
   This document therefore deals with information stored in the ENUM and 
   the look-up process and the usage of the information retived in this 
   look up process. 
        
   It does not deal with the administrative process related to the 
   population of the relevant zones. 
        
      
    
    
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 1] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Background.....................................................2 
   2. ENUM and ENUM-like Systems.....................................3 
   2.1 User-ENUM and User-ENUM-like Systems..........................3 
   2.2 ENUM-like Systems for Infrastructure Purposes.................3 
   3. Abbreviations..................................................4 
   4. Number ranges to be used in ENUM...............................5 
   4.1 Geographic, mobile and personal numbers.......................5 
   4.2 ENUM Tier 3 and extensions (DDI)..............................5 
   4.3 Service numbers in ENUM.......................................6 
   5. Scenarios for User ENUM and ENUM-like Systems..................7 
   5.1 IP-enabled terminal to IP-enabled terminal....................8 
   5.2 IP-enabled terminal to the GSTN...............................8 
   5.3 From the GSTN to IP-enabled terminals or to the GSTN..........9 
   6. Scenarios for Infrastructure ENUM.............................10 
   6.1 Support of NP services.......................................11 
   6.2 Support for number translation services......................12 
   6.3 Support for routing to IP-based PoIs.........................13 
   6.4 Requirements for Infrastructure ENUM.........................14 
   7. Examples of Usage and Additional Requirements.................14 
   7.1 ENUM Client Applications.....................................15 
   7.2 New URI Scheme enum:.........................................16 
   7.3 Resource Records to be used in ENUM..........................17 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................17 
   9. Acknowlegdements..............................................17 
   10. References...................................................18 
   11. Author's Address.............................................18 
    
    
1. Background 
        
   The ENUM System as defined in Draft RFC2916bis [2] discusses the use 
   of the DNS for identifying available services connected to an E.164 
   number. Through the transformation of E.164 numbers into DNS names 
   and the use of existing DNS services, especially the NAPTR records as 
   defined in [3], one can look up what services are available for the 
   related E.164 number. 
        
   The ENUM System as defined in Draft RFC2916bis deals only with the 
   domain "e164.arpa". This also implies that only full E.164 numbers 
   may be used. To clarify, only this system is called "ENUM", all other 
   systems are called ENUM-like Systems within this document. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 2] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
2. ENUM and ENUM-like Systems 
    
2.1 User-ENUM and User-ENUM-like Systems 
    
   In section 1.2 of Draft RFC2916bis it is suggested, that a similar 
   mechanism can be used for private dialing (and/or numbering) plans in 
   a different domain, well-known for all parties using the same plan 
   and the AUS is to be a number without the leading '+'. This is one 
   example of an "ENUM-like" System. 
    
   In addition, the following scenario may exist for a User-ENUM-like 
   System: 
    
   The usage of DNS in an alternate root in an Intranet is called in 
   this document "Private-DNS ENUM-like system". Private-DNS ENUM may be 
   used within a company for private dialing plans as mentioned above. 
   In this case the AUS is a number without the leading '+'. 
    
   In the case of ENUM and the above mentioned scenarios for ENUM-like 
   Systems the ENUM End User has the right to opt-in into the ENUM or 
   ENUM-like system and the ENUM End User is also responsible for 
   provisioning the NAPTR records (although within companies a different 
   policy may apply).  
    
   It is also the originating user (or a proxy -e.g. a gateway- on 
   behalf of the originating user, if the terminal of the calling user 
   is not capable of accessing the DNS) who is retrieving and evaluating 
   the NAPTR records prior or during establishing the communication. 
   These systems are therefore called "User ENUM" or "User ENUM-like" 
   Systems within this document. 
        
      
2.2 ENUM-like Systems for Infrastructure Purposes 
    
   All systems for infrastructure purposes are ENUM-like Systems. The 
   following scenarios may exist with for infrastructure purposes 
   (Infrastructure ENUM): 
    
   a) An operator may use a DNS in an Intranet for his own network-
   specific purposes e.g. for routing, number portability (NP), 
   freephone (+800) or other IN-like services. These are also variants 
   of "Private DNS ENUM-like Systems". 
    
   b) A (con)-federation of operators may decide to set up an ENUM-like 
   domain for network-specific purposes (federation infrastructure ENUM-
   like system) either in an extranet (which is also considered "private 
   DNS") or in a "public" DNS domain different from "e164.arpa", but 
   well-known to the (con)-federation. 
    
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 3] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   c) For global services and global usage, a second "golden tree" 
   different from "e164.arpa" (e.g. "e164infra.arpa"" may be set up for 
   network-specific purposes, holding only infrastructure information 
   not related to the user (global infrastructure ENUM-like System).  
    
   The domain name holder for the domain related to the E.164 Number is 
   in all? (most?) of these cases the operator hosting the E.164 number.  
    
   The reason for this is the opt-in principle adopted for User-ENUM. 
   Since not all users will opt-into ENUM, not all numbers required by 
   the operator for his service will be available in User-ENUM. The user 
   will also select his ENUM Tier 2 Name Servers, and the operator may 
   have no access-right to this Name Servers, so he has to provision the 
   infrastructure data in other Name Servers of his choice. This 
   requires different domains to be populated. 
    
   For the entire network-specific infrastructure purposes mentioned 
   above, ENUM-like systems may be used in three ways: 
    
   a) Independent of the related IN-services on the existing GSTN. In 
   this case the synchronization of the two databases may be 
   problematic. 
    
   b) ENUM-like systems as a replacement of existing IN-services, 
   providing also an INAP interface (mediation) to the GSTN. 
    
   c) Access to an existing IN-database, which is providing an ENUM-like 
   DNS interface to IP (mediation), creating the NAPTR records to be 
   returned on the fly. 
    
   In case b) and in case c) there is no synchronization problem, since 
   the same repository is used from the IP-side and from the GSTN-side. 
    
    
3. Abbreviations 
    
   ASP   Application Service Provider 
   AUS   Application Unique String 
   CC    Country Code 
   CIC   Carrier Identification Code 
   DDI   Direct dialing-in 
   DN    Dialed Number 
   DNS   Domain Name System 
   GSTN  Global Switched Telephone Network 
   IN    Intelligent Network 
   INAP  IN Application Part 
   IPTSP IP Telephony Service Provider 
   NAPTR Naming Authority Pointer 
   NP    Number Portability 
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 4] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   PoI   Point of Interconnection 
   PUA   Personal User Agent 
   RN    Routing Number 
   SCP   Service Control Point 
   SIP   Session Initiation Protocol 
   TDM   Time Division Multiplex 
   UCI   Universal Communication Identifier 
   UPT   Universal Personal Telecommunication 
   URI   Uniform Resource Identifier 
   URL   Uniform Resource Locator 
   VASP  Value Added Service Provider 
   VoIP  Voice over IP 
    
    
4. Number ranges to be used in ENUM 
    
   ENUM according to Draft RFC2916bis is defined to be used in principle 
   for any E.164 number. 
    
   ITU-T Recommendation E.164 [4] distinguishes between geographic 
   country codes (CC), CC for global services, CC for networks, shared 
   CC and CC for trials. 
    
   The usage of ENUM for geographic CC will be a national matter, the 
   usage for other types of CC is currently under investigation within 
   ITU-T SG2/Q1. 
    
   Nevertheless, especially the rationale for the usage for service 
   numbers will be similar for global and national numbers. 
    
    
4.1 Geographic, mobile and personal numbers 
    
   ENUM is defined for personal use; it therefore applies in any case in 
   addition to geographic numbers to mobile numbers and to personal 
   numbers (see also below). In all of these cases the ENUM End User is 
   the e164.arpa domain name holder for the related E.164 number and 
   provisioning directly or indirectly his/her NAPTR records in ENUM 
   Tier 2 Name Servers. 
    
    
4.2 ENUM Tier 3 and extensions (DDI) 
    
   User ENUM may also be used by companies either having a PBX with 
   direct dialing-in (DDI) and/or a switchboard or Centrex. In all cases 
   the company is the domain name holder of the corresponding pilot 
   number and wants to manage these entries in the ENUM Tier 2 Name 
   Server. On the other hand, the company may want to give the right to 

 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 5] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   provision the extension numbers to the individual user. In this case, 
   an additional Tier 3 is necessary. 
    
   In this case the following scenario applies and the company may 
   provision the Tier 2 Name Servers with the following information: 
    
   NAPTR Records to point to the switchboard, to e.g. 
   mailto:office@company.com, to the company webpage and NS records 
   pointing to the ENUM Tier 3 Name Servers holding the extensions 
   visible to the public. 
    
   The company may in addition operate a private ENUM-like system on its 
   intranet holding all extensions. If the company has access to the 
   Internet, clients may distinguish between the private ENUM-like 
   system by entering the extensions without æ+Æ and escape to ENUM with 
   æ+Æ. 
    
   It is up to the company to make the whole or part of the private 
   ENUM-like system visible to ENUM (e.g. with Split DNS) by linking the 
   private ENUM System to Tier 2 of e164.arpa. 
    
    
4.3 Service numbers in ENUM 
    
   UPT Numbers 
    
   UPT Numbers are personal numbers and may either be implemented 
   nationally or internationally. National UPT numbers may be used like 
   geographic and mobile numbers.  
    
   International UPT based on +878 is currently not deployed in the GSTN 
   with IN-based systems. The only application of international UPT 
   (+87810) is based on IP. This is one example of a proper GSTN-
   termination on IP. Providing +87810 in ENUM is therefore not 
   necessarily an alternate-line service, since the same termination 
   (Personal User Agent - PUA) can be reached. If the user is registered 
   on an IP-based terminal or on GSTN-based terminal, an incoming call 
   is forwarded to this terminal. The user may also have the different 
   types of call forwarding active. If +87810 is implemented in ENUM, it 
   will allow incoming calls to the PUA from any IP-based terminal. 
    
   National IN-based implementations of UPT exist. For these UPT numbers 
   the same requirements on enumservices apply as for geographic and 
   mobile numbers. 
    
   Freephone Numbers: +800, +1-800, +43-800, ...: 
    
   Freephone numbers on the GSTN require normally two IN-dips, one NP-
   dip for the CIC to select the Value Added Service Provider 
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 6] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   (VASP)providing the service and one IN-dip within the network of the 
   VASP for the translation of the number to the DN (depending on 
   origination, time, day, weather). 
    
   If the assignee decides to enter his number in ENUM, this is a bypass 
   of the operator providing the 800 service (VASP). 
    
   Question 1: will this be allowed by national regulators or ITU (in 
   case of +800) policy?  
    
   Question 2: If yes, what are the requirements on the tel URI to 
   provide similar services (origination context, time and day, ...) 
   (see also section 4. Infrastructure ENUM). 
    
   Even if freephone numbers are not allowed in User-ENUM, the 
   requirements still apply for infrastructure ENUM, either for private-
   ENUM (the operator replacing his IN-Service by ENUM, or the operator 
   is providing freephone service on an IP-based network (selected by 
   CIC).  
    
   For freephone numbers additional requirements may be necessary on 
   enumservices and context information (e.g. phone-context, time-of-
   day). 
    
   Premium Rate and Shared Cost Numbers: 
    
   With freephone numbers the loser is the VASP and the winner is the 
   ENUM End User, because he has to pay no charges to the VASP. With 
   premium-rate and shared cost numbers, the loser is the ENUM End User, 
   because he gets no money. But on the other hand, even if ENUM is not 
   used for voice calls, it may be used for e-mail and web-pages with 
   these types of numbers. For the usage in network-specific-ENUM the 
   same applies as for freephone numbers. 
    
    
5. Scenarios for User ENUM and ENUM-like Systems 
    
   User-ENUM and User ENUM-like systems provide an end-to-end service. 
   The database is populated by the recipient of a communication (the 
   called user, ENUM End User) and the database is queried by the 
   originator ("calling" user) before establishing the communication. 
   Only if the origination terminal is not able (or willing) to access 
   the DNS (e.g. from a phone on the GSTN), the user may use the service 
   of an agent or proxy (e.g. a VoIP-gateway) to query the DNS on his 
   behalf. It is depending on the service offered by the agent, if the 
   communication is established without any further interaction by the 
   originator, or if the originator may choose between different 
   options. 
    
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 7] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   Related to voice (or phone) services, User-ENUM is always an 
   alternate line service (this may not be true for infrastructure ENUM-
   like services). This is because it will be required (e.g. by the 
   ENUM-Forum [5]and also by ETSI TS 102 051 "ENUM Administration in 
   Europe" 6 that the ENUM End User is the assignee of an E.164 Number, 
   and that the related E.164 Number has a termination on the GSTN (a 
   working line or at least an announcement).  
    
   To clarify, since the GSTN is technology-independent, this does not 
   prevent, that the termination is on an IP-network, as we have seen 
   with UPT. In this case the same terminal or User Agent may be used 
   with ENUM (but not necessarily). 
    
   The only exception of the above mentioned requirement may be, that 
   special national or international numbering resources are made 
   available for ENUM only usage. But also in this case an announcement 
   may be required on the GSTN. 
    
   Being an alternate line service implies, that the supplementary 
   services connected to the line terminating on the GSTN (e.g. call 
   forwarding) are not synchronized with the voice services provided by 
   the Application Service Provider (ASP) pointed to with ENUM. This may 
   cause user confusion and should especially be considered in using 
   ENUM for call forwarding purposes. 
    
    
5.1 IP-enabled terminal to IP-enabled terminal 
    
   As already mentioned above, one of the most popular usages of User 
   ENUM may be providing an alternate line service to the ENUM End User. 
   There are benefits for both sides: the ENUM End User, if connected to 
   the Internet, may be reached on his IP-enabled terminal, which is 
   either a PC, a laptop or an IP-Phone, from any calling user on the 
   Internet 
    
   The ENUM End User needs to subscribe to either a SIP or H323 VoIP 
   Service and is provided with a proper sip: or h323 address. He then 
   chooses a domain related to one of his existing E.164 numbers to be 
   entered into the ENUM System and adds a NAPTR record with the above 
   URI into this domain. The calling user on the Internet only needs a 
   proper client SW to query the ENUM System and a compatible VoIP 
   Client or IP-Phone. If this is not available, the calling user may 
   still establish a call via the GSTN. 
    
    
5.2 IP-enabled terminal to the GSTN 
    
   This scenario may be valid, if the calling user may not be able to 
   use the information given in ENUM, or the ENUM End User may decide to 
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 8] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   enter an URI pointing to another E.164 Number (e.g. using a tel: URI 
   pointing to his mobile phone). 
    
   No additional provisions are necessary for the ENUM End User, but the 
   calling user on the Internet needs to have a subscription to a VoIP 
   Service Provider providing a gateway to the GSTN and the proper IP 
   Phone client. 
    
    
5.3 From the GSTN to IP-enabled terminals or to the GSTN 
    
   Since calling users on the GSTN (e.g. from a steam phone) may not be 
   able to access ENUM directly, they need a proxy to access ENUM. These 
   proxies may be VoIP gateways provided by IP Telephony Service 
   Providers (IPTSP). 
    
   The gateway or the device controlling the gateway (e.g. the 
   softswitch) accesses the ENUM System during call setup. It is up to 
   the IPTSP, how this service is provided in detail.  
    
    
   Some examples: 
    
   ENUM Access Numbers: 
    
   An IPTSP may provide a gateway from the GSTN to the IP network, which 
   can be reached via an access number. 
    
   The customer dials an access number to reach an IP Telephony Gateway 
   and dials the E.164 number of the B-Subscriber. The gateway queries 
   the ENUM database, if an entry for the E.164 number exists. If yes, 
   the call is completed according the ENUM entry. If not, the call is 
   placed on the IP network as usual, terminating finally on the GSTN. 
    
   The service could either be open to the public, or requiring a 
   subscription and identification (similar to a phone or credit card 
   service). In the first case the billing would be the same for any 
   type of call, regardless of destination, in the second case the 
   access number would be a freephone number and the billing to the 
   customer account may be dependant on destination. 
    
   ENUM Portals: 
    
   The above mentioned access to the gateway could be enhanced by 
   providing a voice portal, allowing the calling customer to select 
   between different choices, if provided by ENUM. So could the customer 
   leave a voice message in a voice-box or send a voice-mail, if none of 
   the voice services can be reached. 
    
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002               [Page 9] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   IN trigger for ENUM (similar to "call-by-call" or "preselection"): 
    
   A customer with a GSTN phone could subscribe to a supplementary 
   service, that all outgoing calls are checked first with ENUM. If 
   there is no entry in ENUM, the call will be completed normally on the 
   GSTN. If the call may be completed via ENUM on IP, the tariff may be 
   lower than a call completion on the GSTN. The subscriber may pay a 
   fixed amount per month for this supplementary service. 
    
   A simple way to implement this supplementary service is to trigger an 
   IN-query for this subscriber and query ENUM via the SCP. If an entry 
   is found, the call is routed to the next IP telephony gateway. If 
   not, the call is treated by the SCP like a normal call and completed 
   on the GSTN. 
    
    
6. Scenarios for Infrastructure ENUM 
    
   All infrastructure ENUM-like scenarios do not provide an end-to-end 
   service. The ENUM-like DNS database is not provisioned by the End 
   User, even if the number used is an E.164 Number, it is provisioned 
   by the operator hosting the number or another entity. Therefore the 
   opt-in principle does not apply and all required numbers may be 
   entered. This implies that no information violating any End User 
   privacy shall be contained in the database, if it is available on the 
   Internet. 
    
   The infrastructure ENUM-like DNS database is also not queried by the 
   originating user establishing the communication, even if the database 
   is available on the internet. One reason is that the information is 
   of no direct use for the End User. The database is queried by network 
   operators and service providers only during call setup or within the 
   service provided. In some cases an existing IN database may be used 
   as a repository. 
    
   The ENUM-like database may be internal to an operator, used by a 
   (con)-federation of operators either in an extranet or in a public 
   domain on the Internet or in a second global tree within .arpa.  
    
   The ENUM-like database may be used for only one specific service or 
   for more than one service. In the latter case it is necessary to 
   define enumservices to distinguish between the services (ala Service 
   ID in IN?) 
    
   During one call setup, a number of ENUM queries (dips) may be 
   necessary. 
    


 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 10] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   The following scenarios are not exhaustive, but may serve as basis 
   for the necessary requirements for enumservice, tel:URI and 
   parameters. 
    
    
6.1 Support of NP services 
    
   Number portability allows the telephone subscribers to keep their 
   telephone numbers when they change service providers, move to a new 
   location or change the the subscribed service (see draft-ietf-enum-
   e164-gstn-np-03) 7. If services providers use an IP-based 
   infrastructure to provide telephone services, they need to support 
   number portability as well. This can be achieved by either accessing 
   the existing IN-infrastructure via the existing IN protocols, or by 
   providing equivalent services via an ENUM-like DNS database. 
    
   As already mentioned in 1.2.2, the ENUM-like DNS database may either 
   be separate from the IN-based database, or may use the same 
   repository. 
    
   The support of ENUM may therefore apply for the following scenarios: 
    
   Geographic number portability û an E.164 number is ported between to 
   switching systems of the same operator within an geographic area, if 
   the subscriber is changing location. The porting area is dependant on 
   the national numbering plan used. 
    
   Provider portability for geographic numbers û an E.164 number is 
   ported from one operator to another operator, but staying on the same 
   location. 
    
   Provider portability for mobile numbers û an E.164 number is ported 
   from one mobile operators to another within the same country. 
    
   National service portability (freephone, personal numbers, ...) û an 
   E.164 number is ported from one VASP to another within the same 
   country. 
    
   Global service portability (freephone, UPT, ...) û an E.164 number is 
   ported from one global service provider to another. A quite 
   challenging example for an infrastructure ENUM implementation may be 
   the number portability in UPT. The current UPT implementation 
   provides service provider portability, but only within the 
   confederation using +87810 (VISIONng). If other confederation 
   implement different numbering ranges either on IP or on the GSTN, 
   infrastructure ENUM may be used for portability between 
   confederations. 
    

 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 11] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   Although many different implementations of NP exist in different 
   networks and countries, most require the identification of a PoI of 
   the terminating (hosting) network, either by a CIC or a routing 
   number. For IP-based, the identification of the PoI and the protocol 
   used may be sufficient. 
    
   For service provider portability it is necessary, to find the service 
   provider (carrier, operator) currently hosting the E.164 number and 
   the Point of Interconnect. This is necessary e.g. for number 
   portability of geographic, mobile and service numbers. For geographic 
   number portability the RN may be necessary. 
    
   For a given number, the following information needs to be retrieved: 
    
   Service Provider: (CIC, RN, PoI) 
   Protocol used at PoI: (also IP or TDM) 
   Additional Parameters (e.g. context) 
   What else? 
    
   What are the requirements for enumservices, URIs and parameters? 
    
   Note that the information retrieved (e.g. PoI) may be dependent on 
   origination information (context). 
    
   Remark: In this case the dialed number (DN) does not change. 
    
    
6.2 Support for number translation services 
    
   In case of service portability, if the network hosting the service 
   has been reached, it is necessary to translate the dialed service 
   number into another number  - the final destination number. This 
   translation may be dependant of origination information (context), 
   date and time of day and other parameters. Also some billing 
   information may be required. 
    
   The support of ENUM may therefore apply for the following scenarios: 
    
   Freephone service û the dialed freephone number (e.g. +800) is 
   translated to the final destination number, depending on additional 
   parameters. 
    
   The same applies for premium rate, shared cost and other service 
   numbers, like emergency numbers, etc. 
    
   For a given number, the following information needs to be retrieved: 
    
   Translated Number: New dialed number (DN) 
   Additional Parameters: (e.g. context, date and time of day, etc.) 
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 12] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   What else? 
    
   What are the requirements for enumservices, URIs and parameters? 
    
    
6.3 Support for routing to IP-based PoIs 
    
   Most phone calls currently are traversing at least three networks, 
   the originating network, the transit network and the destination 
   network, even in national calls. With international calls, even more 
   transit networks may be involved. The PoIs between these networks are 
   in all cases TDM-based, since no IP-based PoIs are defined yet. 
    
   Currently a number of network operators are migrating from TDM-based 
   networks to NGN IP-based networks by replacing parts of their 
   networks with IP-based infrastructure (e.g. IP trunking). If all 
   three of the above mentioned networks are using IP-based 
   infrastructure within their networks, and the PoIs between the 
   networks are TDM-based, a call may cross TDM-IP gateways six times, 
   causing unacceptable delay and QoS. 
    
   It is therefore necessary to introduce IP-based PoIs as soon as 
   possible, to allow for the reduction of the number of TDM-IP gateways 
   within a call to one or two. 
    
   If a certain ingress network offers two types of PoI, it is necessary 
   for the egress network to have some means to select between the two 
   types of PoI offered and also to select the appropriate one. 
    
   It is proposed to use infrastructure ENUM-like services for this 
   purpose. 
    
   Since the information about the network infrastructure and the 
   optimal PoI to be used for a certain destination number is only known 
   by the ingress (terminating) network, the appropriate information has 
   to be provisioned in the infrastructure ENUM-like system by the 
   terminating network. The information may be similar to the 
   information used for number portability. 
    
   The information related to the destination number in the 
   infrastructure ENUM-like service is queried by the originating or 
   transit network. If an IP-based PoI is found, the call is routed on 
   the IP-network directly to the given PoI, if an TDM-based PoI or no 
   information is found, the call is routed via the GSTN. 
    
   The support of ENUM may therefore apply for the following scenarios: 
    
   Usage of infrastructure ENUM within a network û if an operator has 
   IP- and TDM-based technology within his network, and certain numbers 
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 13] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   may only be reached via IP-based technology (e.g. an GSTN access node
   connected to an IP-gateway), infrastructure ENUM may support a proper 
   routing to his gateway. 
    
   Usage of infrastructure ENUM on a global scale between networks - if 
   an operator has IP- and TDM-based technology within his network, and 
   certain numbers may only be reached via IP-based technology, he may 
   provide IP- and TDM-based ingress PoIs to his network. It is now up 
   to this operator to provide information related to the E.164 numbers 
   he his hosting within his network in a global infrastructure ENUM 
   database (e.g. e164infra.arpa). The information will be similar to 
   the information provided for NP. 
    
   It should be mentioned, that this global infrastructure ENUM database 
   may also serve as basis for a global number protability database. 
    
    
6.4 Requirements for Infrastructure ENUM 
    
   It can be assumed, that within infrastructure ENUM mainly NAPTRs with 
   tel: URIs will be used [8] 
    
   It is therefore necessary to update the definition of the tel: URI 
   accordingly and also define an enumservice to be used in the NAPTR 
   records. 
    
   For the ongoing discussion see <Extensions to the "tel" and "fax" 
   URLs> 9 and "The ENUM 'tel' enumservice" 10 
    
    
7. Examples of Usage and Additional Requirements 
    
   ENUM was created to allow the mapping E.164 numbers to Internet names 
   (e.g. sip:user@foo) to enable the reachability of VoIP clients (e.g. 
   h323, sip) by E.164 numbers, either from the Internet or from the 
   conventional phone network. 
    
   In parallel the idea came up to use ENUM as an always up-to-date, 
   public available business card, allowing to point to any URI, but 
   especially to e-mail addresses (at least all ENUM tutorials use a 
   VoIP URI and an e-mail address as an example). 
    
   If one looks at any business card, one sees normally a name, a street 
   address and/or a postal address, a phone number, a fax number (which 
   is also a phone number), and an e-mail address, and some people now 
   also point to their home-page and eventually to an IM address. Many 
   people also list their mobile phone numbers, indicating intrinsically 
   at least in Europe an sms-enabled number. 
    
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 14] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
   If one wants to send a text document and both a fax and an e-mail 
   address is provided at the business card, it is the choice of the 
   originator (e.g. depending on the currently available device), 
   whether the document is sent by fax or e-mail. 
    
   Considering ENUM as an electronic business card service, this 
   information is exactly what an ENUM End User wants to provide and 
   what the originator expects to get, if he queries ENUM. 
    
   Another way to use ENUM may be to provide URLs in documents or on web 
   pages triggering an ENUM query, e.g. mailto:+12345 or fax:+12345 . In 
   this case it is obvious, that either an e-mail or a Fax should be 
   sent.  
    
   Note: This requires an update to the relevant URI definitions. 
    
    
7.1 ENUM Client Applications 
    
   Stand-alone ENUM Client Application 
    
   The simplest way to trigger an ENUM query from an IP-enabled terminal 
   is to use a stand-alone application. In this case either an E.164 
   Number +12345 or a non-E.164 Number 12345 is entered. In case of the 
   E.164 Numbers, the client is querying e164.arpa, in the other case a 
   previously defined alternate domain may be used (e.g. a private 
   dialing plan). 
    
   The application queries ENUM or the ENUM-like System and displays the 
   results (all the NAPTR records) in a human readable format similar to 
   the information displayed on a business card or an e-mail signature, 
   i.e containing the URI and additional information of the type of 
   service. 
    
   The user may now select a suitable URI and cut and paste or drag and 
   drop the URI in the appropriate application (e.g. MS Outlook or a SIP 
   Phone). The application may also be launched via mouse click, if the 
   results are displayed as URLs. 
    
   It is therefore necessary to define the enumservices in such a way, 
   that a proper grouping if the information displayed may be possible. 
    
    
   From a specific application 
    
   If the user has already launched a specific application (e.g. an e-
   mail client or a SIP or H323 phone), the application may have an add-
   on, that in case of the input of an E.164 Number in the format +12345 
   an ENUM query is launched. 
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 15] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
    
   In this case only ONE NAPTR record shall be selected, to replace the 
   entered E.164 Number with the appropriate URI. 
    
   It is therefore necessary to define the enumservices, which allow the 
   application SW to identify in combination with the URI the proper 
   NAPTR record to be used. 
    
    
   From an URL containing an E.164 number 
    
   It will also be useful to extend the definitions of existing URIs or 
   define new URIs, which may be imbedded in documents or web pages to 
   launch an ENUM query and the appropriate application: 
    
   This will be easy for mailto. If mailto is used in the format 
   mailto:+12345, this should imply, that an ENUM query is launched and 
   the proper client application is provided with the result, namely an 
   mailto:user@host (or the proper client is launched and then the ENUM 
   query is done, if the application is ENUM enabled). 
    
    
7.2 New URI Scheme enum: 
    
   An enumservice (e.g. "enum") may be required to indicate that all 
   services for a given E.164 number can be found within the ENUM entry 
   of another E.164 number (instead of using CNAME, which may case 
   problems in general and also within the DDDS algorithm). 
    
   For example, a user owns three numbers, but wants to administrate his 
   NAPTR records only in one place by pointing all his numbers to one 
   set of services. 
    
   Since the single NAPTR record requires an URI, which is not linked to 
   a specific service, a new URI scheme "enum:" is required, which 
   points to this E.164 number. 
    
   It should be noted, that this new URI may also be convenient for 
   usage to trigger an ENUM query from a link in a web-page or document 
   (e.g. in an e-mail signature). 
    
   The new URI has the format enum:+number and shall trigger the launch 
   e.g. the lauch of the above mentioned ENUM stand-alone application, 
   showing all information stored under this number. 
    
    
    
    

 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 16] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
7.3 Resource Records to be used in ENUM 
    
   Within the domain e164.arpa NS, NAPTR, CNAME and TXT records may be 
   used. 
    
   NS Records are used for delegation, the combined usage of NS records 
   and NAPTR records shall be possible (e.g. for announcements, tones or 
   a pointer to a switchboard). 
    
   CNAME may be used e.g. for avoiding duplication of data, if parallel 
   NDCs are used to reach the same destination during numbering plan 
   modifications (e.g. pointing from 2.2.2.3.4.e164.arpa to 
   1.3.4.e164.arpa). The usage of CNAME for ENUM End Users is ffs). 
    
   TXT records may be used within the delegation tree to add information 
   and ALSO to the ENUM End User. Therefore at least the stand-alone 
   clients shall be able to display the information contained in the TXT 
   records. 
    
   Note: It is one target of the trials to investigate the best way to 
   inform users of invalid or incomplete numbers. This may either be 
   done with NAPTR records pointing to tones or announcements, TXT 
   records or the file (info) enumservice. Also the usage of the 
   possibility to add additional information by the user with TXT 
   records should be investigated. TXT records may also be useful during 
   the trial for maintenance information. 
    
    
8. Security Considerations  
     
   This document does not not introduce new security implications other 
   than those associated with the ENUm Service as defined in Draft 
   RFC2916bis. 
      
        
9. Acknowlegdements  
     
   The author would like to thank Lawrence Conroy and Rudi Brandner for 
   their comments and invaluable help. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 17] 
               Scenarios for ENUM and ENUM-like Systems      June 2002 
 
 
10. References  
                     
   1  Scott Bradner, RFC2026, "The Internet Standards Process û Revision 
      3, "October 1996. 
    
   2  P. Faltstrom, "The E.164 to URI DDDS Application",  
      draft-ietf-enum-rfc2916bis-01.txt,  
      Work in Progress, March 2002 
    
   3  M.Mealling, "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System  (DDDS) Part 
      Three: The DNS Database"  
      draft-ietf-urn-dns-ddds-database-08.txt,  
      Work in Progress, February 2002 
    
   4  ITU-T Rec E.164 "The International Public Telecommunication Number 
      Plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997. 
    
   5 US ENUM Forum, www.enum-forum.org  
    
   6 ETSI Technical Specification TS 102 051 "ENUM Administration in 
      Europe" Work in Progress, April 2002 
    
   7  M. Foster, T. McGarry and J. Yu "Number Portability in the GSTN: 
      An Overview", draft-ietf-enum-e164-np-03.txt,  
      Work in Progress, March 2002. 
    
   8  Vaha-Sipila, A., "URLs for Telephone Calls",  
      RFC2806, April 2000. 
    
   9  J. Yu, "Extensions to the 'tel' and 'fax' URLs to Support Number 
      Portability and Freephone Service", draft-yu-tel-urlù04.txt, Work 
      in Progress, March 2002. 
    
   10 R. Brandner and L. Conroy, "The ENUM 'tel' enumservice", draft-
      brandner-enum-tel-00.txt, Work in Progress, February 2002. 
             
        
 11. Author's Address  
         
    Richard Stastny 
    OeFEG 
    Postbox 147                     Phone:  +43-664-420-4100  
    1103 Vienna, Austria            Email:  richard.stastny@oefeg.at  
         
     
     
      


 
 
Stastny                Expires - December 2002              [Page 18] 
