INTERNET Draft                                      Yoshihiro Ohba
Expires: December 2001                              James Kempf
                                                    Phil Roberts
						    Barani Subbiah
                                                    Basavaraj Patil
                                                    Henry Haverinen
						    Hesham Soliman

						    
            Usage Scenarios of a User Registration Protocol (URP)
  	             <draft-ohba-urp-usage-scenarios-00.txt>

Status of this memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


1.0 Abstract

    Many different kinds of commercial networks require users to
    perform registration before being allowed usage to
    resources. Resources could include basic access to the network to
    resources that are more specific such as services in the network
    or a certain grade of service, etc. The registration process is
    normally specific to the type of network that a user is attaching
    to and the registration process itself occurs in the protocol
    layers that are specific to an access technology. With a network
    layer (IP) or above solution, a common protocol for performing
    registration could be defined. 

2.0 Introduction

    Many different kinds of commercial networks require users to
    perform registration before being allowed usage to
    resources. Resources could include basic access to the network to
    resources that are more specific such as services in the network
    or a certain grade of service, etc. The registration process is
    normally specific to the type of network that a user is attaching
    to and the registration process itself occurs in the protocol
    layers that are specific to an access technology. With a network
    layer (IP) or above solution, a common protocol for performing
    registration could be defined. 

    This draft captures various scenarios that a common registration
    protocol can be applied to. The scenarios describe the current
    process that is defined for a specific technology and also show
    how a common protocol could benefit the same. Requirements can be
    derived from these scenarios. 

    The intent of the draft is to clarify the technical requirements
    for an edge, user-network, registration protocol as well as to
    bring focus to the problem domain itself. 

2. Terms

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [Keywords].


3.0 Current Mechanisms

    Today's  technologies  mostly rely on access  specific
    mechanisms.  For example, dial-up networks have relied on PPP's
    [2] capability to do user authentication  in  conjunction  with
    AAA (RADIUS) [3] as a means to the process of user  registration.
    However, PPP may not be appropriate  for most new type of
    networks.  Moreover, node configuration  through PPP is not
    always  necessary.  Today's  wireless  networks  also  have
    relied on specific layer 2  identifiers  and  layer  3  messaging
    (NOT  IP) to accomplish   user   registration.  Access   control
    in  most   current technologies  is  performed  on layer 2 based
    on  device  identification combined with layer 2 security.  As new
    type of networks  (including  wireless  LANs)  are  deployed  in
    hotspot  areas the legacy  mechanisms may not be appropriate in
    such  scenarios.  Different kinds of service  models are also
    emerging  in  today's  Internet.  For example,  while  basic
    connectivity  may  be a  user-pervasive  service, enhanced services
    will be available only to  authorized/registerd  users (since
    charging is invovled for such services). 
     
4.0 Scenarios where an edge registration protocol such as URP is
  applicable 

    The following scenarios are described in this section:
    - NAS
    - WLAN
    - GPRS
    - Edge Protocol as a key distribution method for other protocols
    (MIPv6, SIP, IP Paging, etc) 
    - Use of an edge protocol in assisting handoffs
    - Intra-domain movement between different access technologies
    - Others <Feel free to add anything else or correct the ones that
    I mentioned above>

4.1 NAS 

    Basic NAS functionality includes authentication of users with an
    authentication server.  It has also hooks for access
    control. Although PPP offers these functionalities, it assumes few
    network characteristics:  
    i) PPP always assumes a link layer disconnect indication.   
      
      -- This feature is not available in networks such as Wireless
         LANs and others. So there has to be some mechanism to detect
         when the client disconnects. This might mean that there is
         also a need to re-authenticate client X to appear just after
         client A left and basically continue to use client A's
         authenticated access.  
   
    ii) Since PPP works in scenarios where dedicated links exist, it
        normally assumes a single access router in that link.

       -- However, this is not true in multi-access links, such as
          Wireless LANs. 
          Multiple access routers are required for efficient control and
          robustness.    

    iii) PPP does address configuration to the client.  

        -- Address configuration should be decoupled from AAA
           functionalities since in some cases it is necessary to be
           able to assign address prefixes to the client. 


In view of the above, we need a flexible NAS type of
functionality. There are  definitely architectural tradeoffs relating
to the location of the authenticating  entity (the BURP server when
there is a separate BURP protocol) and the access control enforcement
point, both in terms of their relative location (same box, or one or
the other closer to the client) as well as how far away from the
client they are located. 
Also there may be a need for a strategy on how this will interwork or
use L2 authentication and access control mechanisms such as 802.1X and
what is currently used in cellular systems.

4.1.1 NAS in an enterprise environment

     It is expected that network ports both wireless and wireline will
     be controled by some type of NAS. Even though, enterprise
     intranet is some what secured, it is very useful to control the
     network access by BURP or 802.1x to thwart any mallicious attempt
     by intruders. WLAN prolifiartion within enterprises is an impetus
     to deploy NAS in addition to other security mechansisms.

     While L2 based NAS can be useful, it can not meet different
     needs. For example, L2 based NAS can just disable or enable a
     port. However, it does not allow mutliple level of access with in
     a single port such as different access level for coroporate
     servers and net surfing. BURP is useful when a user connects
     multiple devices in a single port using a HUB, where a L2 NAS
     would require multiple access control. BURP like access control
     can also enable a enterprise to control access to vistors,
     employees and partners at different level. 


4.1.1 Layer Two Agnostic Network Access Mechanisms

      Wireless ISPs (WISPs) are the current trend and they are
      starting Internet access services in public area such as airports
      and hotel lobbies.  The access control technologies they are
      currently considering would be (i) web-based access control or
      (ii) L2 access control such as 802.1X.  The web-based access
      control is similar to BURP in that they are performed at a
      higher layer after obtaining an IP address, whereas the L2
      access control is performed before obtaining IP address.  There
      are pros and cons as to which layer access control is performed.
      However, a higher layer access control would be suitable for
      realizing user-agnostic network access services in which a user
      can access local information such as local-area map and flight
      schedule in free of charge, while access to external web-sites
      is subject to charge.  The web-based access control could
      provide such a service, but there is no standardized method
      which would be required to support roaming among different
      WISPs. While Web based access control can support devices with
      web browsers, there are number of other applications such as
      FTP, VoIP require a standard client application or protocol at
      the client. The client will use this protocol to initiate the
      network access for any non browser based applications. In
      addition to charge a user for external access, a local WISP can
      also provide charge based services such as music download,
      VoIP. These services are provided by the local domain and
      external connectivity supported by Gateways. It is also
      envisioned that NAS can be triggered either by the client or
      network,  based on provider business model. BURP will provide a
      standardized way of user-agnostic network access with roaming
      enabled.  

4.1.2 Multiple Access Routers

      In multi-access environments such as Ethernet (not switched
      Ethernet) and 802.11a/b, it is possible for multiple Access
      Routers (ARs)to  exist on the same subnet. This is a fundamental
      difference from PPP in which a  single access router is always
      associated with a PPP tunnel and the association never changes
      throughout the lifetime of the PPP connection. 

      It would be desirable to use multiple ARs in such a way that
      traffic coming from and going to a specific user terminal always
      goes through a single AR for the ease of access control, but
      traffic among different user terminals diverges for the purpose
      of load balancing and redundancy. This is possible if the
      following conditions 
      are met. 

      o  The user terminal randomly selects one of the ARs as the
         default router and always uses the selected AR as the next hop for
	 the outgoing traffic.  The network should be configured so that
	 ICMP Redirect would not occur in the edge subnet to avoid
	 divergence of traffic coming from the user terminal.

      o  Each AR has at least two interfaces, one (Ie) is attached to the
	 edge subnet and the other (Ic) is attached to the core network.
	 The subnet prefix assigned to Interface Ic covers that is
	 assigned to Interface Ie.  The AR that is selected by the
	 user terminal performs proxy ARP (in the case of IPv4) on
	 behalf of the user terminal when it receives an ARP REQUEST
	 on Interface Ic  searching for the IP address assigned to the
	 user terminal, which guarantees that all incoming traffic
	 going to the user terminal passes through the AR. 



                <-----BURP----><--Diameter/RADIUS-->

              [UT1] ----+           
                        | Ie1    Ic1
              [UT2] ----+---[AR1]---+----------[AAA server]
                        | Ie2    Ic2|
              [UT3] ----+---[AR2]---+
                        |           |
              [UT4] ----+           |
                                    +---[R]----
              [UT5] ----+           |
                        | Ie3    Ic3|
              [UT6] ----+---[AR3]---+
                        | Ie4    Ic4|
              [UT7] ----+---[AR4]---+
                        |           
              [UT8] ----+           

              UT1..8: User Terminal
              AR1..4: Access Router co-located with Registration Agent
              R: Core Router
              
              Ie1 = x.y.1.1/24, Ic1 = x.y.0.1/16
              Ie2 = x.y.1.2/24, Ic2 = x.y.0.2/16
              Ie3 = x.y.2.1/24, Ic2 = x.y.0.3/16
              Ie4 = x.y.2.2/24, Ic2 = x.y.0.4/16

          Fig.1:  A possible multi-AR configuration


	 In the above case, since both the incoming and outgoing
	 traffic regarding the user terminal are controlled to pass
	 though a single AR, it would be reasonable to put RA and AR
	 within the same box.  This usage is very similar to the
	 current PPP-based NAS. 

	 If the above conditions are not met, traffic coming from and
	 going to a specific user terminal may diverge among different
	 ARs.  This would happen as a result of ICMP Redirect or the
	 use of "Default Router Preferences and More-Specific Routes"
	 [Draves] in IPv6.  In such cases, one RA would take care of
	 multiple ARs so that it can update the access control list on
	 each AR by using other protocol such as COPS, SNMP or Seamoby
	 Context Transfer. 

	 Similar to the multiple ARs, it is possible that a RA can be
	 implemented in  an AP or a single RA can control multiple
	 APs. COPS or SNMP can be used to update the control list at
	 the APs if a RA controls mutiple APs. 

4.1.3.  Multiple Interfaces on a Single User Terminal

	BURP would be useful when a host has multiple interfaces of
	homogeneous or heterogeneous technologies.  A typical example
	is a user terminal with a Bluetooth interface and and an
	802.11 interface or with multiple Bluetooth interfaces.  There
	are three possible scenarios: interface switching,
	multi-homing, and interface sharing. 

4.1.3.1.  Interface Switching

	  If multiple interfaces are connectable to the ISP network,
	  only one of those interfaces may be activated at a time for
	  the purpose of battery saving, and perform interface
	  switching when other interface is to be activated, with or
	  without changing IP address. 
	  In such an environment, if all we haveis L2 authentication,
	  the user terminal would have to perform AAA with the home
	  AAA server each time interface switching occurs.  Since BURP
	  is independent of L2 technology, the BURP LSA established at
	  the time of initial access time via AAA with the home AAA
	  server can be applied for future interface switching.


4.3.1.2.  Multi-homing 

	  If multiple interfaces are connectable to the ISP network,
	  those interfaces may be activated at the same time for the
	  purpose of bandwidth increase and/or load balancing.

	  In such an environment, if all we have is L2 authentication,
	  the user terminal would have to perform multiple sets of AAA
	  with the home AAA server, one for each interface.  Since
	  BURP is independent of L2 technology, the LSA established at
	  the time of initial access time via AAA with the home AAA
	  can be shared among multiple interfaces. 

4.3.1.3.  Interface Sharing

	  There may be a case in which a user terminal (a gateway user
	  terminal) has one provider interface and multiple private
	  interfaces, where only the provider interface is connected
	  to the ISP and other interfaces are connected to other user
	  terminals under administration of the user.  Traffic coming
	  from the private interfaces would be bridged or routed to
	  the provider interface and vice versa.  Such a scenario
	  would be more realistic in IPv6 where a /64 prefix could be
	  allocated to the user, enabling a distinct IP address within
	  the allocated prefix to be assigned to each of the user
	  terminals of the same user. In terms of both access control
	  overhead and AAA signaling overhead, it would be desirable
	  to perform access control per prefix rather than per child
	  device.  BURP is very suitable for such a prefix-based
	  access control, especially in the following DSL scenario
	  (see Fig.2). 


	  o  The RA is co-located with the AR.

	  o  Before BURP registration is successful, only the
   link-local address is available on the provider interface of the
   gateway user terminal. The gateway user terminal performs BURP
   registration by using the  link-local address.

          o  If BURP registration is successful, a /64 prefix is
   assigned to the registered user, and the AR starts to advertise, by
   using ICMPv6 Router Advertisement, the /64 prefix on the link to
   which the gateway user terminal is connected.  It is possible for
   either the AR or AAA server to be the entity that assigns the /64
   prefix to the user (the latter case is shown in Fig.2).  In order
   to prevent other users from listening to the advertised prefix and
   using it, it would be desirable for the AR to have physically
   separated interface for each user as shown in Fig.2.
   

                                 BURP         Diameter/RADIUS
                           <-------------->  <------------->
         [UT1a] ----+                  +--------+
                    |                  |        |
         [UT1b] ----+---[GUT1]--(DSL)--|        +------[AAA server]
                    |            <--   |        |    <-- 
         [UT1c] ----+        /64 prefix|        | /64 prefix
                                       |   AR   | 
         [UT2a] ----+                  |        |
                    |                  |        |
         [UT2b] ----+---[GUT2]--(DSL)--+        +------[R]----
                    |                  |        |
         [UT2c] ----+                  +--------+
                                      
 
         GUT1: Gateway User Terminal of User 1
         GUT2: Gateway User Terminal of User 2
         UT1a,UT1b,UT1c: Other User Terminals of User 1
         UT2a,UT2b,UT2c: Other User Terminals of User 2
         AR: Access Router co-located with Registration Agent
         R: Core Router
              
    Fig.2:  BURP usage in DSL (IPv6 /64 prefix assignment by AAA Server)


4.2 WLAN 

    WLAN is a one of the many scenarios where BURP could be
    useful. While 802.1x specification is being deployed by
    WLISPs today, it does not meet the future needs such as
    intertechnology hand off, differentiation bewteen free and
    charge accesss and others. 

    While interworking with 802.1x needs to be taken into
    consideration, a solution at the highrlayer is clearly another
    option. An alternative is that L2 authentication could be
    used with the actual user credentials to get free local access,
    and BURP could then later be used to access any chargeable
    services or global Internet. 

    It's also possible that BURP and L2 authentication will not be used
    together for network access authentication but rather they are
    useful in different places -- L2 authentication is great in public
    operator networks where there are no free local services (or if
    all the services are charged at a flat rate), and BURP is good in
    hotels and other places with free intranets. 

    Mobile IPv6 will be an important protocol in WLANs and
    WLAN/cellular multi access networks. In IPv4, MN-AR AAA is handled
    by Mobile IP itself, but there is some amount of agreement within
    the Mobile IP working group that this solution was adopted out of
    necessity and a better solution would be to have AAA handled by a
    lightweight protocol designed specifically for host/edge network
    element AAA communication, as Diameter is designed for
    communication between AAA elements within the network. BURP could
    serve such a function. 

4.3 GPRS

    In GPRS there are only two methods of authenticating / acquiring
    an address from networks other than the GPRS access network
    (corporate or ISP).  In one mode PPP is terminated by the GGSN
    which then authenticates the user (using the RADIUS client) to the
    "other" network, being  the ISP the user connects to or the "home"
    coporate network depending on the requested APN.   
    In the second mode, PPP is terminated in the MT, ONLY the
    Challenge Response is piggybacked on PDP context requests. The
    RADIUS client in the GGSN then relays this info to the RADIUS
    server wherever that maybe (Based on the APN).

    As yet another example, there is no  mechanism for exchanging a
    second level of authentication and addressing information, only
    the interaction with the cellular systems' authentication and
    address assignment mechanism is possible (although Mobile IP could
    be used). 

    A protocol that decouples the authentication and addressing from
    PPP (and MIP) could allow an operator to provide remote
    authentication and authorization  of home network services and
    address assignment within such a domain using one of the available
    IP layer tunneling mechanisms to deliver packets. 

4.4. Edge Protocol as a key distribution method for other protocols


     There are a number of protocols that locate an "agent" in the
     network in order to deliver data packets to, or exchange
     protocol-specific signaling messages with, the user terminal.
     Mobile IP, IP Paging and SIP are examples of such protocols.  Any
     of those agent-based protocols have a requirement or a
     recommendation to have a Security Association (SA) between a user
     terminal and an agent, which is used by the agent and the user
     terminal to authenticate and/or encrypt signaling messages
     exchanged between them.  The important point is that in wireless
     roaming environment, it is usual that the user terminal may not
     have a pre-established SA with the agent of each protocol in the
     visiting domain, and hence it is required to authenticate the
     "previously-unknown" peer when establishing an SA with it. 

     There are basically two approaches to authenticate a
     previously-unknown peer.  One approach is using PKI together with
     an SA establishment protocol.  IKE [RFC2409] with the use of PKI
     certificate is one example.  However, the PKI-based approach
     would be heavyweight because of the complexity on iterative
     calculation of public-key cryptography and the process needed for
     checking the certificate revocation status.  
     The other approach is utilizing some other pre-established SA,
     directly or indirectly, to derive a new SA.  Since BURP assumes
     the existence of a pre-established SA between the user and home
     AAA server, it is possible to use the pre-established SA for that
     purpose. 

4.4.1.  Generic BURP-based key distribution scenario

	A generic BURP-based key distribution scenario is described in
	the following way:

	1) The user terminal performs BURP registration.  If the
	   registration is successful, an LSA is established between
	   the user terminal and RA.  The shared secret for LSA is
	   derived from the pre-established SA between the user and
	   home AAA server. 

	2) When the user terminal needs to have a new SA with an agent
	   of a protocol, it sends a BURP message containing a key
	   request specifying at least the address of the agent.

	3) If the RA receives the key request, it generates a new key
           and returns a BURP message to the user terminal with a copy
           of the generated key encrypted by using the shared secret
           for the LSA. The RA also creates another copy of the key
           and deliver it securely to the agent address specified in
           the key request via other protocol such as SNMP and COPS,
           with the use of either built-in security mechanism or a
           secure transport. 

	4) When the BURP LSA is deleted due to disconnection of the
           user terminal, the RA executes a procedure to invalidate
           the distributed keys.

	To realize this, any BURP message exchanged after establishing
	the LSA is expected to be encrypted between the user terminal
	and RA by using the LSA.  In addition, a pre-established SA
	would be necessary between the RA and each agent of each
	protocol. 

	Note that it is also possible to use the delivered key as a
	pre-shared key used by an out-of-band key management protocol
	such as the IKE [RFC2409] to authenticate the key exchange sequence.

4.4.2.  Protocol-specific issues

4.4.2.1.  Mobile IPv4

	  In Mobile IPv4 [RFC2002] there are two kinds of agents: Home
	  Agent and Foreign Agent.  Since Mobile IPv4 has a built-in
	  key distribution mechanism coupled with AAA
	  [Regkey,Diameter-MIPv4], BURP-based key distribution would
	  not be necessary for Mobile IPv4.  Such a built-in key
	  distribution mechanism would also apply to MIPv4 extensions
	  used for enhancement of handoff performance
	  [Regreg,Low-latency]. 

4.4.2.2.  Mobile IPv6

	  In the base protocol of Mobile IPv6 [MIPv6] there is only
	  one kind of agent: Home Agent.  MIPv6 Binding Update is
	  authenticated by using BSA (Binding Security Association).
	  A MIPv6 extension [HMIPv6] used for supporting hierarchical
	  mobility management defines an additional mobility agent
	  called MAP (Mobility Anchor Point), and it is also necessary
	  to authenticate Binding Update exchanged between Mobile Node
	  and MAP.  Another MIPv6 extension [Fast-MIPv6] defines a new
	  destination option called Fast Binding Update which also
	  required to be authenticated in the same way as the standard
	  Binding Update. Unlike MIPv4, all these protocols do not
	  have build-in key distribution mechanism.  Thus, it is
	  possible to utilize BURP as a tool to establish a BSA
	  between a Mobile Node and a MIPv6 mobility agent, as the SA
	  is expected to be coupled with AAA. 

	  Note that regarding a BSA between a Mobile Node and
	  Correspondent Node, it might not be necessary for key
	  distribution to be couple with either AAA or PKI.  Instead,
	  a different key distribution mechanisms as described in PBK
	  [PBK] and HIP [HIP] have been considered for such SAs.

4.4.2.3.  IP Paging

	  IP paging [RFC3132,Paging-req] defines four types of
	  functional elements: Paging Agent (PA), Tracking Agent (TA),
	  Dormant Monitoring Agent(DMA) and Host.  There is a
	  requirement that signaling messages exchanged among those
	  elements are authenticated in order to avoid a couple of
	  security attacks such as bogus paging registration, bogus
	  paging area advertisement and bogus paging messages. 

	  It is possible to utilize BURP for establishing SAs between
	  Host and PA, Host and TA, and Host and DMA, to the Host, if
	  those SAs are expected to be coupled with AAA.

4.4.2.4.  SIP

	  SIP [RFC2543] defines SIP proxy server, SIP redirect server
	  and SIP registrar that act as agents communicating with SIP
	  Usage Agents, and such communication would be authenticated.
	  Several scenarios regarding SIP interaction with AAA are
	  described in [SIP-AAA,SIP-reg]. If BURP is used for SIP
	  session key distribution, it is possible to simplify the
	  SIP-AAA interaction since SIP can operate as if there is a
	  pre-shared key between the User Agent and SIP
	  proxy/redirect/registrar. 

4.5 Use of an edge protocol in assisting handoffs

    There are a couple issues involved in mobility that a lighweight,
    MN to network admission control protocol such as BURP could
    accomplish. Here are some suggestions.

    1) One major issue with handover is that setting up network
    parameters in the new subnet can be extremely time consuming.
    QoS is an example. The COPS signaling involved in moving
    an RSVP reservation from one access router to another is
    almost as large if not larger than the actual RSVP signalling
    itself. At the level of the Access Router, this problem can
    be simply solved with context transfer. Context such as
    QoS, authentication, etc. is transfered from one 
    Access Router to another, allowing the MN to quickly
    start with exactly the same basic network service context
    as in the old subnet. 

    But some of this context is not confined to the
    edge network. Authentication and header compression are,
    QoS clearly isn't. 

    One way BURP could help is if the initial BURP transaction
    resulted in the MN getting a kind of encrypted capabilities
    token which did two things:

    a) Identified the MN to the network independently of
    the IP address,

    b) Identified what rights the MN has to basic network 
    services such as QoS.

    This token could be used in a number of ways. One way, as mentioned,
    is to allow the MN to propagate basic network context beyond
    the edge subnet. The MN includes the token in a header extension
    to allow QoS reservations to happen back in the network (note:
    this will require some co-ordination with the NSS /// NSIS ? working group).
    With the token, the same router that is the PDP also acts as
    a PEP. 

    The alternative here is that the Seamoby context information
    is propagated into the network by the Access Router. Unless
    flooding is used, this will not notify routers on the path of new
    packet streams what the MN's rights to basic network services
    are. In addition, it may also not be possible to propagate this
    context outside of the local domain. A capabilities token in the
    MN's header could be used end to end, though it would require some
    cross-domain agreement on the capabilities. 

    The token could also be used to anonymously identify the
    MN. Because the token uniquely identifies the MN without reference
    to the IP address, it could be used as an anynonmiser. The MN IP
    address (probably CoA for MIP) could be randomly  assigned and if
    the packet contents are encrypted, the MN can't be traced any
    further than the edge subnet where the IP address/CoA is, but the
    network can still identify that the MN has rights to use it via
    the token. The tokin in this case functions very much like a
    Purpose Built Key (PBK, please see the PBK draft by Bradner and
    Mankin). 

    This token could also be used for periodic lightweight
    reauthentiction. The BURP RA issues a lightweight
    challenge and the MN responds with the token.

    2) Another issue that has come up in the Seamoby working group is
    Access Router selection. Seamoby is working on a target Access
    Router selection protocol. In order to allow for good handover
    performance, it is probably better to have the MN negotiate its
    preferences for Access Routers having particular characteristics
    (like cost, bandwidth, etc.) upon admission to the network rather
    than at the actual time of handover.  These preferences would then
    be propagated by context transfer as the MN moved, avoiding the
    need for any radio traffic during handover. The details of what
    actually gets negotiated are probably outside of BURP's charter,
    but the framework for negotiating it and also perhaps for defining
    what gets negotiated may be part of it.

    3) RA-RA to NAS profile transfer. During the hand off, MN will try
    to associate itself with the new RA for NAS in the new network or
    in the same network (if it is not controlled by the same RA). In
    order to avoid delays, NAS profile of the user should be
    transferred to new RA during the hand off. This will allow the new
    RA, to admit traffic from the MN with out a new NAS challenge. 
    It is possible that the RA profile could contain the new CoA (fast
    hand off) so that the new RA can admit MN traffic with out any
    delay. 
    If RA is in the same AR where seamoby context transfer takes
    place, then BURP profile can be part of seamoby context
    transfer. If RA and AR are different then RAs should use contaxt
    transfer protocol to transfer NAS profiles. 
    

4.6 Intra-domain movement between different access technologies

    Different radio technologies will have different characteristics
    in terms of BW, cost, resilence and speed. Different applications 
    may prefer to use access technologies that are most suited to their
    needs. It is foreseen that nework operators will overlay different
    access technologies on top of their existing IP backbones to satisfy
    users' needs, hot spot coverages..etc. 
    For an operator to have control over the access to their networks
    some mechanism for user authentication and access control is required. 
    Currently these mechanisms are access dependant (eg. HLR in GPRS and 
    802.1X specific mechanisms). Such access dependance requires an 
    access dependant identity for the user. Hence while connected to 
    a Celluar network, a user is identified by an IMSI, on a WLAN 
    or BlueTooth network a user will have a different identity.

    For users to be able to roam seamlessly within an operator's domain
    between different access technologies they need to avoid re-authentication 
    each time the move. CT may help, however if the identity of a user 
    is different in each access technology, CT will not help and
    re-authentication will become necessary. 
    Hence an access independant mechanism that uses a standard access 
    independent identity is need to identify the user regardless of which
    access technology he/she are connected to. CT and MIP can solve the 
    rest of the problem for seamless mobility. 


5.0 Conclusion
    
    The scenarios above show a need for a common edge protocol that
    would enable the consolidation of various types of approaches in
    one. It would also make network access uniform irrespective of the
    access technology. There are many issues that need to be
    considered in the design of a common edge protocol but this draft
    profiles scenarios that warrant the development of such a protocol.

6.0 Acronyms
    
    GPRS	General Packet Radio Service
    DSL		Digital Subscriber Line
    CT		Context Transfer
    NAS		Network Access Server
    

7.0 References

[Draves] "Default Router Preferences and More-Specific Routes",
	 draft-ipngwg-router-selection-00.txt, Work in Progress, May 2001.

[Keywords] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

[RFC2409]  D. Harkins, et al., "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)", RFC
	   2409, November 1998.

[RFC2002]  C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support", RFC 2002, Octover 1996.

[Regkey]   C. Perkins, et al., "AAA Registration Keys for Mobile IP",  
	   draft-ietf-mobileip-aaa-key-07.txt, Work in progress, July 2001.

[Regreg]   E. Gustafsson, et al., "Mobile IP Regional Registration", 
	   draft-ietf-mobileip-reg-tunnel-04.txt, Work in progress, March 2001.

[Low-latency] K. El Malki, et al., "Low Latency Handoff in Mobile
	      IPv4",
	      draft-ietf-mobileip-lowlatency-handoffs-v4-01.txt, Work
	      in progress, May 2001.

[Diameter-MIPv4]  P. Calhoun, et al., " Diameter Mobile IPv4
		  Application",
		  draft-ietf-aaa-diameter-mobileip-06.txt, Work in
		  progress, June 2001. 

[MIPv6]    D. Johnson, et al., "Mobility Support in IPv6", 
	   draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-14.txt, Work in progress, July 2001.

[HMIPv6]   H. Soliman, et al., "Hierarchical MIPv6 mobility
	   management", draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-03.txt, Work in
	   progress, February 2001. 

[Fast-MIPv6] G. Tsirtsis, et al., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", 
	     draft-ietf-mobileip-fast-mipv6-01.txt, Work in progress,
	     April 2001. 

[PBK]     S. Bradner, et el., "A Framework for Purpose Built Keys
	  (PBK)",  draft-bradner-pbk-frame-00.txt, February 2001. 

[HIP]     R. Moskowitz, "Host Identity Payload And Protocol", 
	  draft-moskowitz-hip-03.txt, Work in progress, February 2001.

[RFC3132] J. Kempf, "Dormant Mode Host Alerting ("IP Paging") Problem 
	  Statement", RFC 3132, June 2001.

[Paging-req] J. Kempf, et al., "Requirements and Functional
	     Architecture for an IP Host Alerting Protocol",
	     draft-ietf-seamoby-paging-requirements-01.txt,  
	     Work in progress, May 2001.				     

[RFC2543]  M. Handley, et al., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC
	   2543, March 1999.

[SIP-AAA]  H. Basilier, et al., "AAA Requirements for IP
	   Telephony/Multimedia",  draft-calhoun-sip-aaa-reqs-02.txt,
	   Work in progress, May 2001. 

[SIP-reg]  H. Schulzrinne, "SIP Registration",
	   draft-schulzrinne-sip-register-01.txt, Work in progress,
	   April 2001  

8.0 Author Contact Information


   Yoshihiro Ohba
   Toshiba America Research, Inc.
   P.O. Box 136
   Convent Station, NJ 07961-0136 
   USA

   Phone: +1 973 829 5174
   Fax:   +1 973 829 5601
   Email: yohba@tari.toshiba.com 

   James Kempf
   Sun Microsystems 
   901 San Antonio Rd., MTV29-235
   Palo Alto, CA
   94303
   USA
   Phone: +1 650 336 1684
   Fax: +1 650 691 0893
   Email: james.kempf@sun.com


   Barani Subbiah
   3Com Corporation
   5400 Bayfront Plaza
   Santa Clara CA 95052
   Email: barani_subbiah@3com.com

   Phil Roberts
   Megisto Corp.
   Suite 120
   20251 Century Blvd
   Germantown MD 20874
   USA
   Phone:  +1 847-202-9314
   Email:  PRoberts@MEGISTO.com

   Basavaraj Patil   
   Nokia             
   6000 Connection Dr.
   Irving, TX. 75039 
   USA              
   Phone:  +1 972-894-6709 
   Email:  Basavaraj.Patil@nokia.com    

   Hesham Soliman
   Ericsson Radio Systems AB
   Torshamnsgatan 29,
   Kista, Stockholm 16480
   Sweden
   Phone:  +46 8 7578162
   Fax:    +46 8 4043630
   E-mail: Hesham.Soliman@era.ericsson.se

   Henry Haverinen
   Nokia Mobile Phones
   P.O. Box 88
   FIN-33721 Tampere
   Finland
   E-mail: henry.haverinen@nokia.com
   Phone: +358 50 594 4899
   Fax:   +358 3 318 3690
