



PANRG                                                              Y. Fu
Internet-Draft                                                    P. Liu
Intended status: Informational                              China Mobile
Expires: January 13, 2022                                  July 12, 2021


    Requirements of applying path-aware networking for dynamic path
                               selection
                  draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00

Abstract

   Emerging new services have new business characteristics, different
   from traditional C/S business model, whose most traffic is downstream
   traffic, more and more new business with gradually increasing
   upstream traffic have appeared, such as short videos, live sales etc,
   . Due to the new traffic characteristics of these services, more
   requirements have been put forward for the choice of network paths.
   In addition, emerging services also put forward new requirements for
   computing.  Only selecting the network path or the service node
   cannot meet the stringent requirements.  The perception of network
   paths and path selection also need to consider the characteristics of
   the service, and further need to coordinate the state of the network
   side and the service node side.  The application of path-aware
   networking can assist the terminal to better perceive the network
   status, and also combine the status of the service node to achieve
   on-demand, more fine-grained path selection.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00         July 2021


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 13, 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  On-demand awareness on paths and path properties  . . . . . .   3
   3.  Definition and application of path property weight  . . . . .   4
   4.  Service endpoint consideration in path-aware networking . . .   5
   5.  Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   In path-aware networking architecture, endpoints have the ability to
   select or influence the path through the network used by any given
   packet or flow.  The network and transport layers explicitly expose
   information about the path or paths available from one endpoint to
   another, and to those endpoints and the applications running on them,
   so that they can make this selection [draft-irtf-panrg-questions-09].
   This draft targets at the third question in [draft-irtf-panrg-
   questions-09]: how can endpoints select paths to use for traffic in a
   way that can be trusted by the network, the endpoints, and the
   applications using them?

   And this draft targets at the path selection use case of path-aware
   networking, and we both consider the scenario that a set of paths to
   the same destination and also the scenario that several destinations
   with several paths.  According to [draft-irtf-panrg-path-properties-
   02], entities may select their paths to fulfill a specific goal,



Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00         July 2021


   e.g., related to security or performance, as an example of
   performance related path selection, an entity may prefer paths with
   performance properties that best match its traffic requirements.  In
   this draft, we target at the services with various traffic
   requirements for upstream and downstream traffic and also with
   requirements to service endpoint Different types of services have
   different requirements to network&#65306;

   1.  For transmission-intensive services, the amount of data
   transmitted is large, so the choice of network path affects the
   entire service larger.

   2.  For computing-intensive services, the computing tasks of service
   endpoint are complex and the choice of endpoint affect the entire
   service is large

   3.  And traditional transmission-intensive services tend to have a
   lot of downstream traffic, so they usually specify the downstream
   path.

   4.  For transmission-intensive services with large upstream traffic,
   such as short video and live broadcast, the upstream path matters a
   lot so the perception and specification of upstream path is necessary
   to meet service requirements.

   So the terminal needs to be aware of both the status of the uplink
   path and the downlink path, and specify the uplink path and the
   downlink path based on service characteristics.  What's more, for
   computing-intensive services, the terminal still needs to be aware of
   the status of service endpoint, and the path-aware networking also
   need to consider the status of endpoint when select network path.

2.  On-demand awareness on paths and path properties

   For services with different requirements, when path-aware networking
   is applied to realize path perception, it is necessary to dynamically
   determine the perceived target paths and target path attributes, such
   as perceiving the given upstream path or the given downstream path,
   and perceiving path latency or path bandwidth [draft-irtf-panrg-path-
   properties-02].  When user initiates a service request, path-aware
   networking needs to analyses service requirements related to path-
   awareness, including time sensitivity, traffic amount, and traffic
   characteristics etc, and decide to be aware of which set of paths and
   which path properties of them.  So path-aware networking needs to
   specify the following information:

   1.  Service requirements towards path-awareness




Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00         July 2021


   2.  Target paths to be perceived

   3.  Target path properties to be perceived

   For example, when a service with large amount of uplink traffic and
   strict requirements on service latency is requested, path-aware
   networking assign a set of uplink paths which are to be perceived,
   and determine the target path property is path latency, and then
   specify the above mentioned upstream paths to user, and then user
   initiate uplink path detection packet towards given paths carrying
   target path properties , and then the network nodes along the path
   writes the required path properties information.  With path-aware
   networking, the given paths and corresponding properties are
   obtained, and user can select optimal uplink path which meet service
   requirements.

3.  Definition and application of path property weight

   In path-aware network, instead of using single MED value, other
   properties such as Link Capacity or Link Usage could additionally be
   used to improve load balancing or performance [I-D.ietf-idr-
   performance-routing].  And more properties are required to be
   considered for new emerging services [draft-irtf-panrg-path-
   properties-02].

   The transmission of upstream traffic and downstream traffic, and also
   data processing by the service endpoint form a complete service
   process (face recognition, CLOUD A/VR, etc.).  So the completion of
   the service needs to consider multi-dimensional factors.

   For path-aware networking, facing diverse service requirements and
   multi-dimensional path properties, to solve the problem of how to
   comprehensive select path considering service requirements, a new
   parameter needs to be introduced: path property weight values, which
   represent the weight of each path properties and are used to
   comprehensively define the perceived multi-dimensional path
   properties.  And then the path-aware networking needs to specify the
   following information:

   1.  Service requirements towards path-awareness

   2.  Target paths to be perceived

   3.  Target path properties to be perceived

   4.  Path property weight values of target path properties





Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00         July 2021


   For example, for requested services that require large uplink
   bandwidth, path-aware networking need to define larger uplink path
   bandwidth weight, and calculates the target "uplink path + downlink
   path" pair based on the given weight value.

4.  Service endpoint consideration in path-aware networking

   Many emerging services not only put forward new requirements for the
   network, but also put forward requirements for computing.  For
   services such as AR/VR, the budgets for computing delay and network
   delay are almost equivalent [draft-liu-dyncast-ps-usecases-01] ,
   therefore, when path-aware network perceives paths, designates path
   and selects paths, it also needs to consider the status of the
   service endpoint.  And then the path-aware networking needs to
   specify the following information:

   1.  Service requirements towards path-awareness, including service
   endpoint

   2.  Target service endpoints and properties

   3.  Target paths to be perceived corresponding to target service
   endpoints

   4.  Target path properties to be perceived

   5.  Path property weight values of target path properties including
   service endpoint

   And when the requested service is a computationally intensive
   service, the status of the service endpoint will have a greater
   impact in the entire process.  Therefore, it is also necessary to
   select an optimal service endpoint to provide services.  Path-aware
   networking needs to generate multiple target paths for multiple
   candidate service endpoints, and specify new path parameter weight
   values towards target path properties and target service endpoint
   status.

5.  Summary

   The dynamic path selection considering service requirements and
   service characteristics has become one of the current technical
   development directions.  This draft analyzes the application of path-
   aware networking to achieve the on-demand path awareness and service
   endpoint awareness, and provides optimal path selection.






Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00         July 2021


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.

7.  Security Considerations

   TBD

8.  Acknowledgements

   TBD

9.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-idr-performance-routing]
              Xu, X., Hegde, S., Talaulikar, K., Boucadair, M., and C.
              Jacquenet, "Performance-based BGP Routing Mechanism",
              draft-ietf-idr-performance-routing-03 (work in progress),
              December 2020.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-path-properties]
              Enghardt, T. and C. Kraehenbuehl, "A Vocabulary of Path
              Properties", draft-irtf-panrg-path-properties-02 (work in
              progress), February 2021.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-questions]
              Trammell, B., "Current Open Questions in Path Aware
              Networking", draft-irtf-panrg-questions-09 (work in
              progress), April 2021.

   [I-D.liu-dyncast-ps-usecases]
              Liu, P., Willis, P., and D. Trossen, "Dynamic-Anycast
              (Dyncast) Use Cases & Problem Statement", draft-liu-
              dyncast-ps-usecases-01 (work in progress), February 2021.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

Authors' Addresses







Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-fu-panrg-path-selection-req-00         July 2021


   Yuexia Fu
   China Mobile
   Beijing
   100053
   China

   Email: fuyuexia@chinamobile.com


   Peng Liu
   China Mobile
   Beijing
   100053
   China

   Email: liupengyjy@chinamobile.com



































Fu & Liu                Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 7]
