
                                                          Rob Freilich
Internet Draft                                                WorldCom 
Document: <draft-freilich-overview-enum-forum-00.txt>       Bob Bownes 
                                                              UltraDNS 
                                                       Gary Richenaker
                                                             Telcordia

Category: Informational                                January 4, 2002 
Expires:  June 4, 2002 
 
                       Overview of the ENUM Forum
 

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,and its working groups.  
Note that other groups may also distribute working documents as 
Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use 
Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other 
than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

This document describes the current status and work plans for the
ENUM Forum and its Task Groups as an informational document to 
detail additional resources available and avoid overlap and 
duplication of efforts in the area of ENUM. The primary mission 
of the ENUM Forum is to develop the implementation framework for 
deploying RFC 2916 in a two-tiered DNS structure rooted under 
'e164.arpa' for E.164 numbers within the United States and a 
potential common implementation with other countries served by the 
North American Numbering Plan (NANP).             

The ENUM Forum has 5 task groups, Architecture and Infrastructure, 
Provisioning, Security & Privacy, Applications, Interoperability, 
each addressing the respective issues.

This draft is informational in nature only.


<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    1 

Overview of the ENUM Forum       Informational - Expires June 4, 2002 


Table of Contents

Status of this Memo................................................1
Abstract...........................................................1
1. Overview........................................................2
2. History of the ENUM Forum.......................................2
3. ENUM Forum Mission..............................................3
4. ENUM Forum Scope................................................3
5. Structure & Work Plan of the ENUM Forum.........................3
   5.1 Architecture & Infrastructure Task Group....................3
   5.2 Provisioning Task Group.....................................4
   5.3 Security & Privacy Task Group...............................5
   5.4 Applications Task Group.....................................6
   5.5 Interoperability Task Group.................................6
6. Security Considerations.........................................6
7. References......................................................6
8. Author's Addresses .............................................7


1. Overview

This document provides an overview of the ENUM Forum[1], an open 
industry forum dedicated to the creation of ENUM under e164.arpa,
and the Work Plan for each of its associated Task Groups. This 
overview is being provided for the consideration of the IETF ENUM 
Working Group in order to mitigate and potentially avoid any 
overlap or duplication of work that both entities are addressing 
relative to ENUM[2].


2. History of the ENUM Forum

The ENUM Forum is an open industry dedicated to the creation of 
ENUM under e164.arpa.  This open industry forum had its direct 
lineage to RFC 3026, more commonly referred to as 'The Berlin 
Liaison Statement'.  In RFC 3026 [3] it was agreed that the ITU-T 
would act as a Gatekeeper for countries to 'opt-in' or 'opt-out' 
of the Global ENUM Tree envisioned in RFC 2916.  That action 
triggered the US State Department under the International 
Telecommunications Advisory Committee (ITAC-T) Advisory Committee 
Study Group A to create an Ad Hoc committee to address ENUM.  
Their primary goal was to generate a report[4] on recommending 
whether the US should 'opt-in' or 'opt-out' of the global ENUM tree.  
The report[4] did recommend that the United States should 'opt-in' 
to the global ENUM Tree as envisioned in RFC 2916

As the Ad Hoc committee completed its work US industry recognized 
the need for some sort of industry forum to address many open 
issues with ENUM.  There was a decision July 30th, 2001 to create 
an open industry Forum, termed the ENUM Forum.  In the following 
month the ENUM Forum∆s principles/procedures and their work plan 
were developed.  Officially, US industry created the ENUM Forum on
August 27, 2001.   

<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    2 


Overview of the ENUM Forum       Informational - Expires June 4, 2002 

3. ENUM Forum Mission

The primary mission of the ENUM Forum is to develop the 
implementation framework for deploying RFC 2916 in a two-tiered 
DNS structure rooted under 'e164.arpa' for E.164 numbers within 
the United States and a potential common implementation with other 
countries served by the North American Numbering Plan (NANP).             


4. ENUM Forum Scope

Develop Tier 1 and Tier 2 requirements documents that will include
the architecture for the Tier 1 and Tier 2 name servers with 
detailed functional descriptions and message flows between the 
entities including Tier 1 providers, Tier 2 providers, registrars, 
telephone & application service providers, and end users.  The 
work will also include discussing and exploring methodologies for 
interworking with other ENUM instantiations. Other work items may
be incorporated into the scope of the ENUM Forum based on written
proposals that are accepted by the Forum Members.


5. Structure & Work Plan of the ENUM Forum

To complete the objective of defining a deployment of RFC 2916 in 
the US, and potentially other countries within the North American 
Numbering Plan (NANP), in the e164.arpa domain while taking into 
account possible deployments under different domains the work
effort of the ENUM Forum will be organized into five key Task 
Groups.  Each task group will have a limited and defined scope, 
list of objectives, and deliverables.  Each task group can further 
partition its defined work effort if it determines it is necessary.  
All work items are assumed to build from the 'Report of the 
Department of State ITAC-T Study Group A Ad Hoc on ENUM' 
('The Report')[4].  

The ENUM Forum has created five key Task groups to complete the 
ENUM Forums mission:

  1. Architecture & Infrastructure Task Group
  2. Provisioning Task Group
  3. Security and Privacy Task Group
  4. Applications Task Group
  5. Interoperability Task Group

5.1 Architecture & Infrastructure Task Group

The primary role of the Architectural & Infrastructure Task Group 
is to determine key requirements for deployment of ENUM in the US 
and potentially other countries within the NANP and to develop an 
architecture and infrastructureto support those requirements.  The 
following are a list of key objectives for the Architectural & 
Infrastructure Task Group:


<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    3 


Overview of the ENUM Forum       Informational - Expires June 4, 2002 
 
   o Determine the architecture for deploying ENUM Tier 1 for the 
     US and potentially other countries within the NANP where ENUM 
     Tier 1 is described in the SGA Report[3].

     - The focus of this objective is to determine the 
       architectural issues surrounding only the US Tier 1. 
       Three options were identified in 'The Report'. This work 
       item includes deciding if there will be a single tier 1 
       entity or multiple tier 1 entities for the US and, if 
       there are multiple entities, how the US ENUM DNS name 
       space should be allocated among them. Assume some Tier-0 
       points to US Tier-1; don't work problems of Tier-0 such 
       as its domain name. 

     - Also, this group will make a recommendation on how 
       1.e164.arpa will accommodate multiple countries within the
       NANP. There is a need to engage NANP countries during this 
       work.


   o Determine & develop operational requirements for a ENUM Tier 1 
     registry(ies).
     - Take into account RFC 2870. "Root Name Server Operational 
       Requirements" 
     - Identify other leverageable work
     - Functions
     - Interfaces. Identify them and what information transacted
     - Service level, e.g., performance, reliability, security

   o Determine & develop operational requirements for ENUM Tier 2 
     Providers.
     - Functions
     - Interfaces
     - Service level

   o Determine the need for ENUM standards, as appropriate and
     liaise with standards developing organizations or other 
     appropriate organizations.


5.2 Provisioning Task Group

The primary role of the Provisioning Task Group is to determine 
key requirements and procedures related to entering resource 
records into ENUM DNS for the domain name(s) derived from a 
particular E.164 number(s).  The following is a list of key 
objectives for the Provisioning Task Group:

   o Identify ENUM DNS provisioning scenarios to populate the 
     appropriate e164.arpa sub-zone involving individual consumers, 
     business entities, third party registration service entities 
     and/or block entries of E.164 numbers. This item includes 
     requirement definition and development for all entities that 
     are involved in the provisioning functionality. 

<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    4 


Overview of the ENUM Forum       Informational - Expires June 4, 2002 

   0 Determine & develop standard provisioning flows and processes 
     for each identified provisioning scenario to populate the ENUM 
     Tier 1 and Tier 2 name servers for any type of NANP numbers, 
     e.g, geographic and non-geographic numbers.

   o Determine & develop, in-conjunction with the Security and 
     Privacy Task Group, requirements for the opt-in process, 
     authentication and authorization of E.164 number assignment to 
     the consumer, the consumer∆s information, where/when these 
     verifications should occur in the provisioning process as well 
     as additional appropriate uses of security & other consumer 
     privacy enhancements within the provisioning process.

   o Determine & develop ENUM domain name and record removal 
     scenarios and provisioning information flows as in the case 
     where the service associated with the E.164 number, from which 
     the domain name is derived, is discontinued. 

   o Determine & develop operational processes to address consumer 
     protection issues, such as disputed tier 2 registrations.

   o Determine the need for ENUM standards, as appropriate and 
     liaise with standards developing organizations or other 
     appropriate organizations.


5.3 Security & Privacy Task Group

The primary role of the Security & Privacy Task Group is to 
develop security and privacy requirements and mechanisms related 
to the provisioning and operation of ENUM.  The following is a 
list of key objectives for the Security & Privacy Task Group:

   o Determine & develop requirements for a verification process
     that supports the ENUM provisioning requirements developed in 
     the Provisioning Task Group.

   o Determine & develop appropriate uses of security and privacy 
     requirements and mechanisms across all provisioning scenarios, 
     to be worked in conjunction with the Provisioning Task Group.

   o Identify potential enhancements that can help ensure consumer
     privacy. 

   o Develop a threat model and security model for the ENUM System; 
     Work with the Architecture Task Group to identify security 
     requirements for Tier 1 and Tier 2; and identify mechanisms to 
     meet those requirements.

   o Determine the need for ENUM standards, as appropriate and 
     liaise with standards developing organizations or other 
     appropriate organizations.



<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    5 


Overview of the ENUM Forum       Informational - Expires June 4, 2002

5.4 Applications Task Group

The primary role of the ENUM Applications Task Group is to
determine key scenarios related to the application of ENUM.  The 
following is a list of key objectives for the ENUM Applications 
Task Group:

   o Identify illustrative applications of ENUM including uses of 
     NAPTR RRs by potential Application Service Providers and 
     registrants.

   o Document issues relating to representative call or data flows 
     that make use of ENUM.

   o Outline mechanisms by which ENUM can be incorporated into 
     relevant applications.

   o Determine the need for ENUM standards, as appropriate and 
     liaise with standards developing organizations or other 
     appropriate organizations.


5.5 Interoperability Task Group

The primary role of the Interoperability Task Group is to 
determine key requirements related to the interworking of other 
ENUM trees with the ENUM tree rooted in e164.arpa.  The following 
is the key objective for the Interoperability Task Group:

   o Explore, determine & develop interoperability requirements and 
     methodologies of other ENUM instantiations to the e164.arpa 
     ENUM tree.

   o Determine the need for ENUM standards, as appropriate and 
     liaise with standards developing organizations or other 
     appropriate organizations.


6. Security Considerations

There are no security considerations with this draft. It is for 
informational purposes only.

 
7. References
    
1. ENUM Forum - www.enum-forum.org <http://www.enum-forum.org>

2. Falstrom, P., "E.164 number and DNS", RFC 2916, September, 2000

3. Blane, R, 'Liaison to IETF/ISOC on ENUM', RFC 3026, January, 2001


<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    6 


Overview of the ENUM Forum       Informational - Expires June 4, 2002 

4. Whittle, Bryan (Editor), 'Report of the Department of State 
   ITAC-T Advisory Committee Study Group A Ad Hoc on ENUM', 
   July 6, 2001

  
8. Author's Addresses 

Rob Freilich
WorldCom, Inc.
2400 N. Glenville Rd         Phone:  1-972-729-5139
Richardson, TX USA           Email:  robert.freilich@wcom.com

Bob Bownes
UltraDNS
800 N San Mateo Dr.          Phone:  1-650-227-2636
San Mateo, Ca, USA           Email:  bbownes@ultradns.com

Gary Richenaker
Telecordia
445 South St.                Phone:  1-973-829-4305
Morristown, NJ USA           Email:  grichena@telcordia.com


Full Copyright Statement 

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restiction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into. 
    
 































  
<Freilich, Bownes, Richenaker>   January 4, 2002                    7 


