





Internet Engineering Task Force        Audio-Video Transport WG & Others
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 D. Singer
draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-00                             Apple Computer


                                                             Aug 14 2003
                                                    Expires: Feb 14 2004

           MIME Type Registrations for 3GPP Multimedia files

Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Distribution of this document is unlimited.


Abstract

   This document serves to register and document the standard MIME types
   associated with the 3GPP multimedia file format [1], which is part of
   the family of known as the ISO file formats.


1 Introduction

   The third-generation partnership project (3GPP) for third-generation
   cellular telephony has defined a standard file to contain



D. Singer                                                       [Page 1]





Internet Draft        draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-00          Aug 14 2003


   audio/visual sequences which may be downloaded to cellular phones.
   At the time of writing, this file format can contain H.263 or MPEG-4
   video;  and AMR Narrow-band or AMR wide-band speech, or AAC audio;
   and 3GPP timed text.

   Within the file, as with all files in the 'ISO' family, there is an
   intrinsic file-type atom, which identifies those specifications to
   which the file complies, and which players (possibly compliant with
   only one specification) are permitted by the content author to play
   the file.  This identification is through four-letter 'brands'.
   Files identified by the MIME type defined here MUST contain a brand
   defined in a standard issued by 3GPP that can apply to 3GPP files, in
   their compatible brands list.

   The MIME types defined here are needed correctly to identify such
   files when they are served over HTTP, included in multi-part
   documents, or used in other places where MIME types are used.

3 Security Considerations

   The 3GPP file format may contain audio, video, and displayable text
   data.  There is currently no provision for 'active' elements (such as
   scripts) of any kind.

   Clearly it is possible to author malicious files which attempt to
   call for an excessively large picture size, high sampling-rate audio
   etc.  However, clients can and usually do protect themselves against
   this kind of attack.

   It should be noted that selected metadata fields may encompass
   information partly intended to protect the media against unauthorized
   use or distribution. In this case the intention is that alteration or
   removal of the data in the field would be treated as an offence under
   national agreements based World Intellection Property Organization
   (WIPO) treaties.

   3GPP files have an extensible structure, so that it is theoretically
   possible that metadata fields or media formats could be defined in
   the future which could be used to induce particular actions on the
   part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks, but
   this type of capability is currently not supported in the referenced
   specification.

   There is no current provision in the standards for encryption,
   signing, or authentication of these file formats.

4 MIME Types




D. Singer                                                       [Page 2]





Internet Draft        draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-00          Aug 14 2003


   This registration applies to all files defined as using the '3GP'
   file format and identified with a suitable brand in a 3GPP
   specification.  The usual file suffix for all these files is ".3gp".
   The type "video/3gpp" is valid for all files.  The type "audio/3gpp"
   MAY only be used for files containing audio but no visual
   presentation.  It is valid to server an audio-only file as
   "video/3gpp", however.

   To: ietf-types@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of Standard MIME media type video/3gpp,
   audio/3gpp

MIME media type name:              video or audio
MIME subtype name:                 3gpp
Required parameters:               none
Optional parameters:               none
Encoding considerations:           files are binary and should be
                                   transmitted in a suitable encoding
                                   without CR/LF conversion, 7-bit
                                   stripping etc.; base64 is a suitable
                                   encoding;
Security considerations:           see above
Interoperability considerations:   The 3GPP organization and
                                   specifications has defined
                                   interoperability and conformance, and
                                   conducts regular interoperability
                                   testing.
Published specification:           3GPP 26.234, release 5 or later.
                                   3GPP specifications are publicly
                                   accessible at the 3GPP web site,
                                   www.3gpp.org.
Applications which use this media type: Multi-media
Additional information:
Magic number(s):                   None.  However, the file-type atom
                                   must occur first in the file, and
                                   MUST contain a 3GPP brand in its
                                   compatible brands list.
File extension(s):                 3gp and 3gpp are both declared at
                                   http://www.nist.gov/nics/; 3gp is
                                   preferred
Macintosh File Type Code(s):       '3gpp'
Person & email address to contact for further information:
                                   Nokia MIME manager, mime@nokia.com
Intended usage:                    COMMON
Change controller:                 3GPP


5 IANA Considerations



D. Singer                                                       [Page 3]





Internet Draft        draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-00          Aug 14 2003


   This document registers the MIME types audio/3gpp and video/3gpp,
   defined above.

Acknowledgments

   The review of the 3GPP SA4 committee is gratefully acknowledged.













































D. Singer                                                       [Page 4]





Internet Draft        draft-singer-avt-3gpp-mime-00          Aug 14 2003


Authors' Contact Information
   David Singer
   Apple Computer, Inc.
   One Infinite Loop, MS:302-3MT
   Cupertino  CA 95014
   USA
   Email: singer@apple.com
   Tel: +1 408 974 3162


   Roberto Castagno
   Nokia Mobile Phones
   PO Box 83, FIN-33721 Tampere
   (Sinitaival 5, FIN-33720 Tampere)
   Finland
   Email: roberto.castagno@nokia.com
   Tel: +358 3 272 5796


6. References
   [3gpp]
   3GPP TS 26.234: Transparent end-to-end packet switched streaming
   service (PSS); Protocols and codecs.


   [MIME1] Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
   Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC
   2045, November 1996.























D. Singer                                                       [Page 5]


