

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


Network Working Group                                     Robert G. Cole
INTERNET DRAFT                                    AT&T Bell Laboratories
Expires July 10, 1994                                  January 11, 1994
<draft-ietf-atm-framework-doc-00.txt>





                   IP over ATM: A Framework Document


Status of this Memo

   This memo is an internet draft. Internet Drafts are working documents
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its
   Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time. It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress".  Please check the lid-abstracts.txt
   listing contained in the internet-drafts shadow directories on
   nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net, nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.src.com, or
   munnari.oz.au to learn the current status of any Internet Draft.

1.  Abstract

   This memo summarizes some of the discussions of the IP over ATM
   working group over the last year. This summary is provided in the
   form of a framework which categorizes the various ATM subnet models
   and End- to-End models identified by the working group. The intent of
   this framework is to help partition the efforts of the working group
   to focus on smaller, more manageable aspects of IP over ATM. This is
   deemed necessary due to the number of ATM subnet types being
   discussed.  The subnet models identified in this memo are:

   o    an SVC-based LAN ATM (LATM) subnet,

   o    a PVC-based WAN ATM (WATM) subnet, and

   o    an SVC-based WATM subnet.

   The End-to-End models identified in this memo are:

   o    End-to-End Subnet Models, including



Cole                                                            [Page 1]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       -    the Classical IP model,
       -    an SVC-based WATM subnet model, and
       -    lightweight subnet models, i.e. TUNIC and TULIP, and

   o    Peer Models.

2.  Introduction


       The IP over ATM Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task
       Force (IETF) is chartered to develop stan dards for routing and
       forwarding IP packets over ATM subnets. There are several
       difficulties with this charter, as witnessed in the discussions
       of this group over the last several years. First, asynchronous
       transfer mode (ATM) technology is still in its development state.
       Second, the flexibility of the technology, allows and in fact
       encourages, viewing ATM as different subnet technologies, e.g., a
       LAN, a WAN, an Internet, etc. Therefore, much of the discussions
       of the IP over ATM WG have centered around not only how to carry
       IP traffic over ATM but what is ATM. This memorandum attempts to
       highlight some of these discussions and tries to cate gorize the
       various ATM subnet architectures and End-to-End architectures
       that have been proposed.

       It is felt that to promote progress in the IP over ATM working
       group, it is first necessary to come to some consensus on the
       types of ATM subnets to be addressed. Then it will be possible to
       focus attention of several subgroups to work the issues of
       routing IP packets over these different ATM subnets. As this work
       is proceed ing, parallel efforts in identifying issues to work in
       the eventual end-to-end ATM models can be performed. It is
       expected that defining IP routing over some ATM subnet types and
       simpler end-to-end models can pro ceed at a quicker pace, while
       there exist many fundamental architectural issues in defining
       peer end-to-end models. Therefore, it is hoped that this
       document, in classifying the subnet and end-to-end models, will
       help in focusing the IP over ATM working group's direction over
       the next several IETF meetings.

       The remainder of this memorandum is organized as follows:

   o    Section4 presents several definitions of use in the later
       sections,

   o    Section 5 discusses/identifies the various subnet models
       proposed to date by the IP over ATM working group,

   o    Section 6 identifies several promising end-to-end networking



Cole                                                            [Page 2]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       configurations, and

   o    Section 7 contains conclusions.


3. PARAMETERS DEFINING SUBNET TECHNOLOGIES

       Following ISO we define several terms [ISO 8473]:

   o    A Subnet is a connected communication network consisting of a
       single networking technology. Subnets are further categorized
       into broadcast and general topology subnetworks.

   o    A Broadcast Subnet `supports an arbitrary number of end systems
       and intermediate systems and additionally is capable of
       transmitting a single Subnetwork NPDU (SNPDU) to a subset of
       these systems in response to a single send_unitdata request'.

   o    A General Topology Subnet `supports an arbitrary number of end
       systems and intermediate systems but does not support a
       convenient multi-destination connectionless transmission
       facility, as does a broadcast subnetwork'. We will hereafter
       interchangeably use the terms general topology subnet and Non-
       Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) subnet.

   o    An End System `delivers Network Level Protocol Data Units
       (NPDUs) to other systems and receives NPDUs from other systems,
       but do not relay NPDUs.'

   o    An Intermediate System `delivers and receives NPDUs from other
       systems, and relays NPDUs from other systems to other destination
       systems.' They route to end systems within their own area and to
       other intermediate systems when the destination is within another
       area.


   o    An End-to-End path consists of two end systems which can
       communicate with one another over an arbitrary number of
       intermediate systems and subnets connecting the end and
       intermediate systems.

       From the perspective of the subnet, it sees no difference between
       the end systems and intermediate systems. Therefore, we will
       define a Subnet End Systems (Sub-ES) as a network level routing
       entity connected to the subnet, whether it is actually an end or
       intermediate system. Figure 1 shows two subnet end systems
       connect ed over a single subnet. An IP-level (or L3 level) end-
       to-end path can be considered as a concatenation of multiple IP-



Cole                                                            [Page 3]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       level (or L3) single hop paths.

       Each subnet technology is characterized in terms of several
       parameters. We have defined two subnet types, i.e. a broadcast
       and a general topology, or NBMA, subnet. However, it is possible
       to further specify subnet types within these broad categories.
       Towards this end, we list here a few of the more relevant
       parameters for the discussions to follow; this list is by no
       means exhaustive.

       They are:

   o    Routing and Addressing Capabilities,

   o    Topology and Geographic Support, e.g.,
       -    LAN versus WAN, and
       -    the number of stations supported,

   o    Transport Services, e.g.,
       -    Connection-Oriented Network Service (CONS) versus
       Connectionless Network Service (CLNS), and
       -    Variable Bit Rate (VBR) versus Constant Bit Rate (CBR)
       Services,

   o    Connection Functions, e.g.,
       -    Permanent Virtual Connection (PVC) or Switched Virtual
       Connection (SVC), and
       -    point-to-point, multicast, or broadcast,

   o    Transmission Characteristics, e.g.,
       -    reliable versus unreliable (e.g., guaranteed delivery as in
       X.25 or best effort as in Frame Relay),
       -    priorities, and
       -    qualities of service,

   o    Security Features, and

   o    Packet Parameters (e.g., max MTU size, etc.).

4.  CLASSIFICATION OF ATM SUBNETS

   Several ATM subnets have been discussed by the IP over ATM working
   group. These range from the Broad band-Integrated Services Digital
   Network (B-ISDN) subnet originally proposed and being defined by
   inter- exchange carriers to Local ATM (LATM) subnets, currently being
   defined by computer and LAN networking vendors. Further, other
   subnets are defined on ATM as overlay subnets, e.g. Frame Relay on
   ATM.



Cole                                                            [Page 4]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


   We identify and discuss here three possible ATM subnets; a LAN-ATM
   (LATM) subnet, a PVC-based WAN- ATM (WATM) subnet, and a SVC-based
   WATM subnet.

4.1  The LATM Subnet Model

   The LAN-ATM (LATM) subnet is characterized as having a small number
   of end systems, e.g., up to at most a few thousand, which:

   o    are directly connected,

   o    share a common IP-level (or L3) network prefix,

   o    support switched virtual connections (SVCs) as well as permanent
       virtual connections (PVCs),

   o    support an efficient broadcast/multicast/connectionless server
       for address resolution, and

   o    are part of a single working group, e.g. security is not an
       issue. (Note: An assumption for the LATM is that all end systems
       attached to the LATM are part of the same administrative domain
       and that the ATM network will setup up connections between any
       pair of end systems. Connectivity to the `outside' world is
       achieved only through a router which will provide the firewall if
       so desired.)

   For end systems to forward packets over this subnet, many of the
   mechanisms for forwarding IP packets over ethernet subnets apply and
   are presented in [LAU 93]. Issues to be worked in defining IP over
   the LATM sub net are:

   o    Defining the VPI/VCIs for address resolution, (Many internal
       architectures are possible ranging from, possibly, a broadcast
       capability to the existence of an ARP server reachable on the
       identified VPI/VCI. It is the belief of the IP over ATM group
       that the architecture of address resolution needs to be specified
       and that the ARP server architecture is the desired option. The
       APR server is specified in [LAU 93].)

   o    Defining the maximum MTU size, (This has been the subject of
       considerable debate over the Internet this spring. This issue is
       addressed in [ATK 93].)

   o    Methods of encapsulation and multiplexing, (This issue is
       addressed in [HEI 93a].)

   o    Reliability of the ARP server mechanism defined in [LAU 93],



Cole                                                            [Page 5]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


   o    Support for IP multicasting,

   o    Defining SVC optimization techniques, e.g., timeout mechanisms,

   o    Negotiations of, e.g., MTU size, method of encapsulation, and

   o    Special purpose SVC for control/routing and high bandwidth data
       transfers.

   The majority of the work here is in defining the interface between
   the Sub-ESs and the LATM, e.g., what VPI/ VCIs to be used to access
   the ARP server [LAU 93], the method of encapsulation, the maximum MTU
   sizes, signalling capabilities, etc. However, other work items
   involve more internal architectural issues such as the architectures
   for ARP services.

4.2  The PVC WATM Subnet Model

   The PVC-based WATM is a general topology, or NBMA, subnet which is
   further characterized as having a large number of end systems, e.g.,
   up to at most a few tens of thousands, which:

   o    are not all directly connected,

   o    do not share a common IP-level (or L3) network prefix,

   o    support permanent virtual connections (PVCs),

   o    do not have to support an efficient
       broadcast/multicast/connectionless server for address resolution,
       and

   o    are not part of a single working group, however security is not
       an issue due to the permanent nature of the virtual connections.

   For end systems to forward packets over this subnet, many of the
   mechanisms defined for forwarding IP pack ets over Frame Relay
   subnets apply, see [RFC 1490]. Issues to be worked in defining IP
   over the LATM sub net are:
   o    Defining the details for an Inv-ARP like address resolution,
       (Strictly, Inv-ARP is defined for general PVC-based NBMA subnets,
       see [RFC 1293] and [LAU 93].)

   o    Methods of encapsulation and multiplexing, (This issue is
       addressed in [HEI 93a].)

   o    Defining the maximum MTU size, (This issue is addressed in [ATK
       93].) and



Cole                                                            [Page 6]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


   o    Support for IP multicasting.

   The majority of the work here is in specifying the Inv-ARP details
   and in defining the MTU sizes supported.


4.3  The SVC WATM Subnet Model

   The SVC-based WATM is a general topology, or NBMA, subnet which is
   further characterized as having a large number of end systems, e.g.,
   up to at most a few hundreds of thousands, which:

   o    Support switched virtual connections (SVCs) as well as permanent
       virtual connections (PVCs),

   o    Maybe directly connected, due to the existence of SVCs,

   o    Do not share a common IP-level (or L3) network prefix,

   o    Support for multiple subnetwork point of attachment (SNPA)
       address formats (four possible formats are allowed in [ATM
       1993]),

   o    Support negotiations for, e.g., MTU size, methods of
       encapsulation,

   o    Do not have to support an efficient broadcast/multicast
       mechanism for address resolution,

   o    Are not part of a single working group and hence security is an
       issue, and

   o    Are potentially billed for holding circuit holding time.

   For end systems to forward packets over this subnet, many of the
   problems which were being addressed in the IETF's IPLPDN working
   group, the IP over ATM working group, and are now to be addressed in
   the Rout ing over Large Clouds [HAL 93], are applicable. Examples of
   work performed in the IPLPDN working group include short-cut routing
   [TSU 93] and directed ARP [GAR 93] over SMDS subnets, and in the IP
   over ATM working group include distributed ARP server architectures
   in [HEI 93b]. Issues to be worked for the SVC WATM subnet include:

   o    Defining the details for an efficient address resolution
       architecture, (Work in this area has been started, see [GAR 93],
       and [HEI 93b].)

   o    Methods of encapsulation and multiplexing, (This issue is



Cole                                                            [Page 7]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       addressed in [HEI 93a].)

   o    Defining the default MTU size, (This issue is addressed in [ATK
       93].)

   o    Defining security procedures,

   o    Routing between end systems not sharing a common IP-level (or
       L3) network prefix, but attached to the same subnet,

   o    Support for IP multicasting,

   o    Defining SVC optimization techniques, e.g., timeout mechanisms,

   o    Negotiations of, e.g., MTU size, method of encapsulation, and

   o    Special purpose SVC for control/routing and high bandwidth data
       transfers.

   Whereas the first two subnets presented above, i.e. the LATM and
   PVC-Based WATM, are more straight for ward in defining routing of IP
   packets over these subnets, the SVC-Based WATM presents several hard
   prob lems to be resolved prior to specifying IP routing over it.
   Several of these issues are the focus of the new Routing over Large
   Clouds working group formed in July 1993.

5.  END-TO-END NETWORKING CONFIGURATIONS

   Several end-to-end ATM configurations have been proposed; most
   constructed by cascading gateways and different ATM subnet models.
   Other, more radical models have been proposed which cast out the
   traditional subnet architectures in favor of ATM Internet models. We
   categorize these different models in terms of wheth er the ATM
   network and IP-level (or L3) routers are considered as peers, i.e.
   they exchange routing informa tion, or not, i.e. the IP-level (or L3)
   routers treat the ATM network as a lower-level subnet. We will refer
   to these as Peer Models and Subnet Models, respectively, and discuss
   each separately below.

   Clearly the Subnet Models follow the traditional IP networking
   architectures, where as the Peer Models pro pose a new way of IP
   networking. Due to this, the consensus of the group was that the
   problems with the end- to-end peer models were much harder than any
   of the other models, and had more unresolved technical issues. While
   encouraging interested individuals/companies to research this area,
   it was not the priority of the IP over ATM working group to address
   these difficulties.




Cole                                                            [Page 8]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


5.1  Subnet Models

   Three end-to-end subnet models were identified at the Columbus
   (March/Spring 1993) and Amsterdam (July/ Summer) IETF meetings of the
   IP over ATM working group. These three models are

   o    The Classical IP Model,

   o    The SVC-based WATM subnet model, and

   o    Lightweight subnet models.

5.1.1 The Classical IP Model

   The Classical IP Model was suggested at the Spring 1993 IETF meeting
   [LAU 93]. This model simply con sists of cascading subnet models
   discussed above with IP-level (or L3) routers. A example realization
   of this model consists of a concatenation of two (simplified) LATMs
   and a PVC-based WATM subnet. This is shown in Figure 2 below. Once
   the details of specifying routing and forwarding IP packets over the
   compo nent subnets are complete, routing IP packets over this
   Classical IP model is straight forward. The LATMs are simplified in
   that they:

   o    support a single subnetwork point of attachment (SNPA) address
       format (four allowed address formats are specified in [ATM 1993],

   o    support a single default MTU size, and

   o    support a default LLC/SNAP encapsulation as specified in [HEI
       93a].

   For more information see [LAU 93].

5.1.2 The SVC-based WATM subnet

   The SVC-based WATM subnet was discussed in Section 5.3. Here the
   subnet supports a huge number of ESs in a dynamic SVC environment.
   There are several problems to address to bring this end-to-end subnet
   model to fruition. These include, but are not limited to, the
   following:

   o    What are the appropriate architectures for address resolution,
       and

   o    How can routing be optimized across multiple logical IP subnets
       on a common ATM infrastructure, e.g. the short-cut routing
       problem.



Cole                                                            [Page 9]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


   The work on these problems may be worked separately from the near
   term work on bringing the Classical IP model to fruition. Figure 3
   shows an example of an SVC-based WATM subnet consisting of three
   compo nents, two SVC LATM networks connected by a single PVC or SVC
   WATM network. More complex ATM internets are envisioned and solutions
   to networking over SVC-based WATM subnets must be able to support
   these complex internets and their attending problems. Many of the
   routing and other internetworking issues associated with this model
   are now to be addressed in the newly formed Routing over Large Clouds
   working group.

   An additional complexity in supporting IP routing over these ATM
   internets lies in the multiplicity of subnet work points of
   attachment address formats in [ATM 93]. NSAP modeled address formats
   only are supported on `private ATM' networks, while either 1) E.164
   only, 2) NSAP modeled formats only, or 3) both are sup ported on
   `public ATM' networks. Further, while both the E.164 and NSAP modeled
   address formats are to be considered as subnetwork points of
   attachment, it seems that E.164 only networks are to be considered as
   subordinate to `private networks', in some sense. This leads to some
   confusion in defining an ARP mecha nism in supporting all
   combinations of end-to-end scenarios (refer to the discussion in
   Appendix A on the possible scenarios to be supported by ARP).

5.1.3 Lightweight subnet models

   Two further models can be identified which have the characteristic of
   largely or totally eliminating IP header overheads. These models were
   discussed in the July IETF meeting in Amsterdam. Given a single hop
   config uration between Sub-ES as shown in Figure 1, they both assume
   that following name resolution, address res olution, and SVC
   signaling, an implicit binding is established between entities in the
   two subnet ESs. In this case full IP headers (and in particular
   source and destination addresses) are not required in each data
   packet.

   o    The first model is `TCP and UDP over Lightweight IP' (TULIP) in
       which only the IP protocol field is carried in each packet,
       everything else being bound at call set-up time. In this case the
       implicit binding is between the IP entities in each subnet ES.
       Since there is no further routing problem once the binding is
       established, since AAL5 can indicate packet size, since
       fragmentation cannot occur, and since ATM signaling will handle
       exception conditions, the absence of all other IP header fields
       and of ICMP should not be an issue.

   TULIP changes nothing in the abstract architecture of the IP model,
       since each subnet ES still has an IP address which is resolved to



Cole                                                           [Page 10]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       an ATM address. It simply uses the point-to- point property of
       VCs to allow the elimination of some per-packet overhead. The use
       of TULIP could in principle be negotiated on a per-SVC basis or
       configured on a per-PVC basis.

   The second model is `TCP and UDP over a Nonexistent IP Connection'
       (TUNIC). In this case no network-layer information is carried in
       each packet, everything being bound at virtual circuit set-up
       time. The implicit binding is between two applications using
       either TCP or UDP directly over AAL5 on a dedicated VC. If this
       can be achieved, the IP protocol field has no useful dynamic
       function. However, in order to achieve binding between two
       applications, the use of a well-known port number in classical IP
       or in TULIP mode may be necessary during call set-up. This is a
       subject for further study.

5.2 Peer Models

   Peer Models are fundamentally characterized in that they place
   routers/gateways and the ATM network on a peer basis. That is, the
   ATM network and the attached ESs or ISs exchange routing information
   on a peer ba sis, network level addressing is used across the ES or
   IS and ATM interface. Discussions on peer models can be found in [LYO
   92], [HEI 1992] and [LIA 93].

   A rationale for this model is that due to the envisioned complexity
   of future ATM networks, the routing com plexities will be similar to
   routing over complex internets. Rather than building in redundancy in
   routing com plexities at the network and subnetwork levels, perhaps
   it is possible to imbed within the ATM network fabric IS
   functionality. This is illustrated in Figure 4 below. Here the term
   `Single ATM Domain' refers to a collec tion of ATM switches from a
   single ATM switch vendor or a collection of ATM switches administered
   by a single authority. The routing function of the IS is only
   required during the connection set-up phase and is not in the path of
   the data flow following the connection establishment.

   There are issues to be worked for this Peer Model (see, e.g., [HEI
   1992] and [LIA 93]), including:

   o    Defining a routing architecture which
       -    scales to the large size expected of the eventual ATM
       network, and
       -    supports TOS routing, and

   o    Defining a functional architecture which
       -    scales to the large size expected of the eventual ATM
       network,



Cole                                                           [Page 11]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       -    supports the current status of the ATM Forum's standards in
       signalling, routing, etc., and
       -    allows a transition from subnet models to peer models.

   During the discussions of the IP over ATM working group, it was felt
   that the problems with the end-to-end peer model were much harder
   than any other model, and had more unresolved technical issues. While
   encour aging interested individuals/companies to research this area,
   it was not a priority of the working group to ad dress these issues.


5.3  Transition Models

   Finally, it is useful to consider transition models, lying somewhere
   between the Classical IP Models and the Peer Models. Some possible
   architectures for transition models are presented in [LIA 93]. Others
   are possi ble, for example Figure 5 showing a Classical IP transition
   model which assumes the presence of gateways between ATM subnets and
   ATM Peer networks. Other transition options are discussed in [LIA
   93].

6.  Range of Application of the Working Group's Documents

   The IP Over ATM Working Group has generated several Internet-Drafts
   or RFCs. This section identifies the relationship of these documents
   to the various IP Over ATM Models identified in this document. The
   Draft and RFCs produced to date are the following references, [HEI
   1993b], [LAU 1993], and [ATK 1993]. The following table cross
   references these application of these document to the various IP Over
   ATM Models. An `x' in the column under a particular reference
   indicates that the specifications in the reference applies to the
   particular IP Over ATM Model.



















Cole                                                           [Page 12]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


Table 1: Cross Reference of WG Documents and IP Over ATM Models

==================================================================
Models/References       [HEI 1993b]     [LAU 1993]      [ATK 1993]
------------------------------------------------------------------

Subnet Models:
   SVC-based LATM       X               X               X
   PVC-based LATM       X               X               X
   SVC-based WATM       X                               X

End-to-End Models:
   Classical IP         X               X               X
   SVC-based WATM       X               X               X
   TULIP                X                               X
   TUNIC
   Peer                 X                               X

------------------------------------------------------------------



7.  CONCLUSIONS

   This document identifies several of the possible ATM subnet
   technologies that have been bantered about at the meetings of the IP
   over ATM working group at the IETF. In particular, an LAN-ATM (LATM),
   a PVC- based WAN ATM (PVC-based WATM), and an SVC-based WAN ATM
   (SVC-based WATM) are presented. Further, this document lists several
   of the end-to-end IP over ATM architectures which have been discussed
   and the distinguishing characteristics of each. End-to-end models
   discussed include SVC-based WATM, light weight IP models, e.g., TULIP
   and TUNIC models, and Peer models.  It is proposed that the issues of
   routing IP over ATM be broken out into issues relating separately to
   the subnet and end-to-end models discussed in this document. Due to
   the complexity of ATM technologies, in that they present multiple
   faces, it is felt that the best way to make progress is to simplify
   the work into more manage able steps.



7.  Acknowledgments:

   This draft is the direct result of the numerous discussions of the IP
   over ATM Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force. The
   author also had the benefit of several private discussions with H.
   Nguyen of AT&T Bell Laboratories. Brian Carpenter of CERN was kind
   enough to contribute the TULIP and TUNIC sections to this draft. The



Cole                                                           [Page 13]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


   text of Appendix A was pirated liberally from Anthony Alles' of HLS
   posting on the IP over ATM discussion list (and modified at the
   author's discretion). This draft also has benefitted from numerous
   suggestions from John T. Amenyo of ANS.



8.  Appendix A: Potential Interworking Scenarios to be Supported by ARP

   The architectural model of the VC routing protocol, being defined by
   the Private Network-to-Network Inter face (P-NNI) working group of
   the ATM Forum, categorizes ATM networks into two types:

   o    Those that participate in the VC routing protocols and use NSAP
       modeled addresses [ATM 93] (referred to as private networks, for
       short), and

   o    Those that do not participate in the VC routing protocol.
       Typically, but possibly not in all cases, public ATM networks
       that use native mode E.164 addresses [ATM 93] will fall into this
       later category.

   The issue for ARP, then is to know what information must be returned
   to allow such connectivity. Consider the following scenarios:

   o   Private host to Private Host, no intervening public transit
       network(s): Clearly requires that ARP return only the NSAP
       modeled address format of the end host.

   o    Private host to Private host, through intervening public
       networks: In this case, the connection setup from host A to host
       B must transit the public network(s). This requires that at each
       ingress point to the public network that a routing decision be
       made as to which is the correct egress point from that public
       network to the next hop private ATM switch, and that the native
       E.164 address of that egress point be found (finding this is a VC
       routing problem, probably requiring configuration of the public
       network links and connectivity information). ARP should return,
       at least, the NSAP address of the endpoint in which case the
       mapping of the NSAP addresses to the E.164 address, as specified
       in [ATM 93], is the responsibility of ingress switch to the
       public network.

   o    Private Network Host to Public Network Host: To get connectivity
       between the public node and the private nodes requires the same
       kind of routing information discussed above - namely, the
       directly attached public network needs to know the (NSAP format)
       ATM address of the private station, and the native E.164 address



Cole                                                           [Page 14]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


       of the egress point from the public network to that private
       network (or to that of an intervening transit private network
       etc.). There is some argument, that the ARP mechanism could
       return this egress point native E.164 address, but this may be
       considered inconsistent for ARP to return what to some is clearly
       routing information, and to others is required signaling
       information.

   In the opposite direction, the private network node can use, and
       should only get, the E.164 address of the directly attached
       public node. What format should this information be carried in?
       This question is clearly answered, by Note 9 of Annex A of [ATM
       93], Version 2.4 (passed by ballot recently to become Version
       3.0), vis:

   `A call originated on a Private UNI destined for an end system which
       only has a native (non-NSAP) E.164 address (i.e. a system
       directly attached to a public network supporting the native E.164
       format) will code the Called Party number information element in
       the (NSAP) E.164 private ATM Address Format, with the RD, AREA,
       and ESI fields set to zero. The Called Party Subaddress
       information element is not used.'

   Hence, in this case, ARP should return the E.164 address of the
       public ATM station in NSAP format. This is essentially implying
       an algorithmic resolution between the native E.164 and NSAP
       addresses of _directly_ attached public stations.

   o    Public network host to Public network host, no intervening
       private network: In this case, clearly the Q.93b requests would
       use native E.164 address formats.

   immediately above, since getting to and through the private network
       is a VC routing, not an addressing issue.

   So several issues arise for ARP in supporting arbitrary connections
   between hosts on private and public net work. One is how to
   distinguish between E.164 address and E.164 encoded NSAP modeled
   address. Another is what is the information to be supplied by ARP,
   e.g., in the public to private scenario should ARP return only the
   private NSAP modeled address or both an E.164 address, for a point of
   attachment between the public and private networks, along with the
   private NSAP modeled address.








Cole                                                           [Page 15]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


REFERENCES

   [ATM 1993] ATM Forum, `ATM User-to-Network Interface (UNI)
       Specification: Version 3.0', Sept. 1993.

   [ATK 1993] R. Atkinson, `Default IP MTU for use over ATM Adaptation
       Layer 5 (AAL 5)', IETF Network Working Group INTERNET DRAFT, 16
       November 1993.

   [GAR 1993] J. Garrett, `Directed ARP', IETF Network Working Group RFC
       1433, March 1993.

   [HAL 1993] J. Halpern, postings to the IP over ATM and Routing over
       Large Clouds discussion lists.

   [HEI 1993a] J. Heinanen and R. Govindan, `Next Hop Resolution
       Protocol (NHRP)',IETF Routing over Large Clouds Working Group
       INTERNET DRAFT, 15 October 1993.

   [HEI 1993b] J. Heinanen, `Multiprotocol over Adaptation Type 5 on
       ATM', IETF Network Working Group RFC 1483, July 1993.

   [HEI 1992] J. Heinanen, `Routing and Addressing in ATM Networks',
       private memorandum posted to the P over ATM Working Group, 27
       November, 1992.

   [ISO 8473] `Information technology - Telecommunications and
       Information exchange between systems - In termediate system to
       Intermediate system Intra-Domain routing information exchange
       protocol for use in conjunction with the Protocol for providing
       the Connectionless-mode Network Service (ISO 8473),' Inter
       national Organization for Standardization, 1992.

   [LAU 1993] M. Laubach, `Classical IP and ARP over ATM', IETF Network
       Working Group INTERNET DRAFT, 14 October 1993.

   [LIA 1993] F. Liaw, `IP over ATM: architecture, address translation,
       and call control', IP over ATM Working Group INTERNET DRAFT, 21
       March, 1993.

   [LYO 1992] T. Lyon, F. Liaw, and A. Romanow, `Network Layer
       Architecture for ATM Networks', private memorandum, 1992.

   [RFC 1293] T. Bradley and C. Brown, `Inverse Address Resolution
       Protocol', IETF Networking Working Group RFC 1293, January 1992.






Cole                                                           [Page 16]

DRAFT              IP over ATM: A Framework Document        January 1994


   [RFC 1293] T. Bradley, C. Brown, and A. Malis, `Multiprotocol
       Interconnect over Frame Relay', IETF Net working Working Group
       RFC 1490, July 1993.

   [TSU 1993] P. Tsuchiya, `Shortcut Routing: Discovery and Routing over
       Large Public Data Networks', IETF Network Working Group INTERNET-
       DRAFT, January 1993.


Author's Address

   Robert G. Cole
   AT&T Bell Laboratories
   101 Crawfords Corner Road, Rm 1F-408
   Holmdel, NJ 07733

   Phone: 1-908-949-1950
   FAX:   1-908-949-1726
   EMail: rgc@qsun.att.com
































Cole                                                           [Page 17]
