Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Apr, 5, 2015                                		Oct 5, 2014
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Email client should show information if email send using telnet by strangers
                         draft-emailsmtp-02


Abstract

    This document describes the need for information in the email client
    whether the recieved email was send by telnet to a mail server by strangers
    and a way to configure the email clients to not to show such emails.Emails
    of financial importance should not be send using this method.SPAMMING is 
    a distraction.If i get 10 SPAM for one authentic email, then i would not
    be able to pay attention to the authentic email.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Apr 5, 2015.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Apr 5, 2014              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Email ciient should show information if email using telnet by strangers     Oct 5, 2014

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    To enforce standards for email clients WWW or other to distinguish
    between emails send using Telnetting to a mail server or send by
    an authenticated email user.

2. Background
	CUrrently i might be recieving an email send from a stranger
        by telnetting to a mail server. Then the email client should 
	have some way of letting the user of the email client know
        that it could be a stranger. I am not Uptodate on current
        email clients if this is fixed or not.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Apr 5, 2015               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Email client should show information if email send using telnet by strangers          Oct 5, 2014


	
3. General Information of the service
	I should be able to configure my email client to disallow 
	showing emails send by telnetting into mailservers or send
        them to a separate folder. Emails send by using Telnet to
	SMTP port could show an IP address in the subject field of
	the recieved email.

	(I have tested this and it seemed to be fixed.Most public internet
	servers does not allow spoofing. However i want this owned and
	closed by a network engineer who has implemented smtp ..

	Again i am suffering from severe human rights abuse , a group of shameless
	criminals has raised cash using my site and expending my wealth as theirs.
	They expend my wealth and prevent money being transferred to me and
	propagates that the emails to my domain are SPAM. I am unable to lead
	my life.
	



4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
	 http://www.dhyanayoga.info
	 http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com



5.Acknowledgement

    I have been a publisher of http://www.dhyanayoga.info since 2004/2005 
    and http://www.explodingmoon.org since 2008. I am send money by many
    groups but a group of shamless cybercriminals are logging into my emails
    and handling those. They are working with criminal authorities to prove
    that i am a disabled and that i am not that much worthy and the emails
    i recieve are SPAM. So these criminals might be exploiting the telnet
    and send email to send 10 SPAM for one authentic/true email.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Apr 5, 2015                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Email client should show information if email send using telnet by strangers            Oct 5, 2014




