



intarea                                                      L. Giuliano
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Best Current Practice                        M. Aelmans
Expires: 8 September 2022                                               
                                                                   T. Li
                                                            7 March 2022


               Regional Internet Blocking Considerations
               draft-giuliano-blocking-considerations-00

Abstract

   Geopolitical conflicts can cause policy makers to question whether or
   not blocking the Internet connectivity for an opposing region is a
   constructive tactic.  This document provides an overview of the
   various technologies that can be used to implement regional blocking
   of Internet connectivity and discusses the implications of these
   options.  This document does not advocate any policy or given
   blocking mechanism, but does attempt to articulate the implications
   of these blocking technologies for policy makers.  The document also
   intends to help inform policy makers from countries who could be
   exposed to such blocking techniques on the implications of these
   methods.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 September 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Disconnection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Physical layer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Routing layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.2.1.  Autonomous System Number Filtering  . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.2.  De-peering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       3.2.3.  Countering De-peering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       3.2.4.  Prefix Filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  Packet Filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.3.1.  GeoIP ACLs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  DNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Gaps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1.  Information Dissemination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.1.1.  Information Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Information Concealment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.3.  Misinformation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.4.  Target Inaccuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       4.4.1.  Accuracy of Registry Information  . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.5.  Spoofing ASNs and Hijacking Prefixes  . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.6.  Porous Borders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13











Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


1.  Introduction

   Geopolitical conflicts can cause policy makers to question whether or
   not blocking the Internet connectivity for an opposing region is a
   constructive tactic.  This document provides an overview of the
   various technologies that can be used to implement regional blocking
   of Internet connectivity and discusses the implications of these
   options.  This document does not advocate any policy or given
   blocking mechanism, but does attempt to articulate the implications
   of these blocking technologies for policy makers.  The document also
   intends to help inform policy makers from countries who could be
   exposed to such blocking techniques on the implications of these
   methods.

   The content expressed in this document solely reflects the views of
   the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or positions of
   any of our organizations, affiliates, friends, or enemies.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Scope

   The scope of this document it limited to a description of well-known
   methods for disrupting core Internet services including physical
   cabling, Internet routing, filtering, and the Domain Name System.

   The document does not intend to give any political directions or
   advocate for implementing the described methods, nor does it intend
   to be a guide for malicious attackers hence it will purely describe
   concepts and does not provide actual configuration or implementation
   methods.

3.  Disconnection Methods

   There are many ways of blocking a region's Internet connectivity.  In
   this section, we discuss some of them, their implications,
   capabilities, advantages, and disadvantages.








Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


3.1.  Physical layer

   Disconnection at the physical layer is the most definitive method.
   Cutting cables and severing fibers will most definitely stop bits
   from passing.  Unfortunately, this approach is also the most
   expensive to repair.  In the optimistic view that disconnection is
   only intended to be temporary, creating downstream costs of physical
   repair is distinctly suboptimal.  This approach may also be selected
   by the unscrupulous who have physical access to the media, but do not
   have further physical or managerial access.

   A less destructive physical layer disconnection is simply
   disconnecting the fiber or cable, either at the terminating device,
   optical module, patch panel, amplifier, repeater, or transponder.
   This is easily repaired, but still requires physical access.
   Unscrupulous parties that wish to prevent easy repairs would be
   unlikely to select this option.

   The simplest physical layer disconnection is administrative shutdown.
   Managerially disabling a physical circuit is a trivial configuration
   option that will sever communications.  It is trivial to revert.

3.2.  Routing layer

   The Internet is a collection of many enterprises, web and cloud
   hosting, access-providers, etc. networks connected to each other
   using the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) [RFC4271] to exchange routing
   information between those networks.

   The simplest explanation of how BGP works is to compare it to a group
   of networks using the earlier described physical connections to
   gossip with each other on their knowledge about their own and
   neighboring networks.  In other words, they exchange routing
   information describing how to reach destinations on the Internet.

   Connected entities play different roles in this ecosystem, some will
   know how to reach all destinations on the Internet.  These networks
   are so-called Tier 1 providers and provide connectivity to Tier 2 and
   Tier 3 networks.  They offer services on a global scale and connect
   thousands of networks.

   Tier 2 providers are large regional or national operators (for
   example the national service providers) offering services in country
   or regional.  They have connections to many other networks, provide
   services to Tier 3 networks, but also purchase services from Tier 1
   networks to reach destinations on the Internet they cannot reach
   themselves.




Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


   Tier 3 providers don't provide routing information knowledge to other
   networks and are dependent from Tier 1 and Tier 2 networks to reach
   destinations on the Internet.  In this category are small service
   providers or webhosting providers.

   The BGP protocols offers several options to manipulate the routing
   information that is exchanged between these networks.

3.2.1.  Autonomous System Number Filtering

   Networks participating in the exchange of routing information with
   other networks use unique Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs) to
   identify themselves.  These numbers are assigned to them by the
   Regional Internet Registries.

   The ASN is used to construct a path to a destination prefix on the
   Internet.  For example, a Tier 1 advertises its prefix to a Tier 2
   originating from its own ASN.  Next the Tier 2 advertises the prefix
   to a Tier 1 and adds its own ASN to the path.  The route to reach
   this prefix now looks as follows: ASN2 ASN1.

   As networks are highly connected there are many ASN paths through the
   Internet to reach destinations.  The 'further away' the destination
   is the longer the ASN path will be.  On average most destinations on
   the Internet are reachable in a maximum of 5 hops.  In other words,
   most destinations on the Internet can be reached via a maximum of 5
   networks.

   Networks that have a need to filter out another network with which
   they don't have a direct peering session completely have, next to
   filtering prefixes, the option to filter on ASN.  When applying an
   ASN filter, it will filter out all prefixes originating from that
   specific ASN.

   Mitigating ASN filtering requires similar measures as mitigating
   prefix filters; networks with many upstream connections to Tier 1 and
   2 networks will have a much lower chance of being completely filtered
   as, if one out of many upstream peers filters the ASN (and so its
   originating prefixes), others might still propagate them.  This could
   still result in prefixes not being globally reachable anymore, but
   the chances are much lower.

3.2.2.  De-peering

   BGP uses a TCP session between two networks to exchange routing
   information.  Such a session is called a peering session.  Disabling
   such a session is referred to as de-peering.




Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


3.2.2.1.  De-peering Tier 3 networks

   In many cases Tier 3 networks are using a single Tier 1 or 2 network
   for their connectivity to the Internet.  In that case it's relatively
   easy to disconnect such networks from the Internet by disabling their
   peering sessions on the Tier 1 or 2 side.

3.2.2.2.  De-peering Tier 2 networks

   As described earlier these networks have multiple connections to
   other Tier 2 providers and typically between 2-8 Tier 1 providers to
   provide connectivity to the Internet.  Subsequently, they could also
   receive routing information via Internet Exchange Points giving them
   even more options to reach destinations on the Internet.

   De-peering such a network is much harder as one would need to disable
   peering sessions in many networks and at multiple (probably
   international) locations.  Tier 2 networks will likely have
   international connections as well.  Pursuing networks to disable
   these peering sessions in another jurisdiction could be very
   complicated.

3.2.2.3.  De-peering Tier 1 networks

   By their nature, Tier 1 networks have global span and have thousands
   of connections with other Tier 1, 2 and 3 networks.  Fully
   disconnecting such networks is considered almost impossible without
   having physical and administrative access to the network itself.
   Pursuing other networks to de-peer a Tier 1 network is impossible
   because of the many countries they are present in and their
   jurisdictions.

3.2.3.  Countering De-peering

   Entities that want to protect themselves against de-peering would
   have a diversified connectivity strategy including multiple Tier 1
   and 2 peers, actively peering on Internet Exchange Points, and
   preferably possessing its own physical infrastructure to connect to
   other networks in different countries or regions.

   Tier 3 networks are most vulnerable to de-peering.










Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


3.2.4.  Prefix Filtering

   Each network that is part of the Internet uses unique IPv4 and IPv6
   address prefixes ranges to expose services to its directly connected
   (local) customers but also those connected via the Internet.  These
   prefixes are advertised over a BGP peering session to the neighboring
   network so they will learn which prefixes originate from their
   neighbor and know how to reach them.  Subsequently, they will
   advertise any routing knowledge they have about their neighboring
   networks and the neighboring network of their neighbors, etc.  This
   way every network builds it own view of the Internet and map of how
   to reach destinations.

   For example, Tier 1 and 2 networks will both have 'downstream'
   (customer) peering sessions with networks of which they have
   knowledge about; the prefixes they are advertising.  If one of these
   networks wants to filter a neighbor, they could de-peer them as
   discussed earlier but that would basically filter all prefixes.  In
   many cases, for example when intending to filter out social media, a
   subset of the prefixes is enough to accomplish this goal.

   With this method a Tier 1 could also filter out prefixes from a Tier
   3 that it learns via a Tier 2.  De-peering the Tier 2 would result in
   all Tier 2 and all its customer prefixes becoming unreachable via
   this Tier 1.  If only prefixes advertised by the single Tier 3 need
   to be filtered, the Tier 1 applies a prefix filter to the peering
   session from which it receives the advertisements.

   Contrary, networks with many upstream connections to Tier 1 and 2
   networks will have a much lower chance of being completely filtered
   as, if one out of many upstream peers filters the prefixes, others
   might still propagate them.  This could still result in the prefix
   not being globally reachable anymore, but the chances are much lower.

3.3.  Packet Filtering

   Most network layer devices have the ability to filter traffic.  The
   mechanism for doing this is commonly called an "Access Control List"
   (ACL).  This is a possible mechanism for implementing a
   disconnection.  Typically, an ACL allows filtering on a combination
   of source address, destination address, protocol number, and TCP/UDP
   source or destination port number.









Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


3.3.1.  GeoIP ACLs

   The question then becomes one of ACL construction.  However, this is
   not simple.  IP address space is delegated in large sets, commonly
   known as 'prefixes.'  Each prefix is assigned to an organization.
   Some organizations, such as Internet Service Providers (ISPs) will in
   turn delegate a portion of their address space to a customer.
   Customers and service providers do not necessarily fall along clean
   regional lines.  Large multi-national corporations can receive a
   prefix from an ISP in one region and may use it in an entirely
   different region or even globally.  They may also receive a prefix
   directly from a Regional Internet Registry (RIR).  Service providers
   can obtain a prefix from an RIR and delegate parts of that prefix to
   customers from another region.  This can create both false positives
   and false negatives when trying to map between a prefix and a region.

   There are services which attempt to provide mappings from an IP
   address or prefix to a region, commonly called 'GeoIP' services.
   However, due to the above issues, these services cannot guarantee
   their accuracy.  Constructing an ACL based on GeoIP services is
   likely to have unintended consequences, both filtering unintended
   addresses and not filtering intended addresses.  Some commercial
   applications (notably streaming video) are willing to accept these
   inaccuracies, but this may not be acceptable in all circumstances.

   Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) and other tunneling mechanisms can be
   used to create virtual topologies.  If a single VPN server within a
   target region is not blocked, then it can provide access to
   innumerable other systems within the region, effectively bypassing
   GeoIP filtering services.  When these are discovered, they are
   typically added to GeoIP databases, but this creates an ongoing
   battle between VPN service providers and GeoIP providers.  As a
   result, this is an imperfect solution that may or may not be
   sufficiently accurate.

3.4.  DNS

   Blocking DNS capabilities can be an effective method for inhibiting
   end users from easily accessing Internet resources in a given region.
   For example, removing the delegation entries in the root servers for
   a given country code can prevent users from resolving the names of
   all domains for that country code.  This approach can be circumvented
   to an extent with the creation of stub zones on resolving
   nameservers, which can provide a shortcut delegation to the country
   code top-level domain servers (ccTLDs) that are authoritative for
   that country code.  But these stub zone entries would have to be
   manually created on any resolving nameserver that serves the
   resolution requests of users seeking resolution of domains for that



Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


   particular country code.

   In the opposite direction, blocking resolution requests can inhibit
   users coming from a region from easily accessing Internet resources.
   Specifically, filters can be used to block resolving nameservers from
   a given region, or can block resolution requests from end users
   within a given region from making resolution requests to resolving
   nameservers that reside outside that region.

4.  Gaps

   The mechanisms discussed above cover the salient technical points for
   blocking a region.  In this section, we discuss the various other
   considerations that are relevant to regional blocking.

4.1.  Information Dissemination

   At the very lowest level, the Internet copies bits from one location
   to another.  Bits that are injected at one point are packetized,
   forwarded, and hopefully show up at their intended destination.  The
   technology of the Internet does not care what is encoded in those
   bits.  Whether it is state secrets or yesterday's grocery list, the
   Internet will happily ship it all the way around the world in
   milliseconds.  The intrinsic value, properties, and attributes of the
   information conveyed in those bits is immaterial at the technological
   level.

4.1.1.  Information Value

   Policies considering blocking the transfer of information must also
   consider the value of the information that is being blocked.
   Filtering mechanisms can be extremely coarse and block all
   information, and this may not match the purposes of the policy.
   Thus, a blocking policy may need to be extremely specific about its
   goals and purposes.

   A policy may want some information to be able to enter into a region.
   Sending certain messages into the region may be beneficial to the
   policy maker.  Similarly, being able to get information out of a
   region may be beneficial.  Further, parties within a region may be
   depending on global Internet connectivity to coordinate activities.
   A policy that blocks too much information may be counterproductive to
   the aims of the policy maker.  A more selective policy would want
   some information to be communicated and not other information.
   Further, a selective policy is likely to be highly directional.
   Information that should flow into the region may not be permitted
   back out, and vice versa.




Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


4.2.  Information Concealment

   If a policy allows any information to transit a boundary, then there
   is the technological possibility that other information may also
   transit that boundary.  Information can be disguised or concealed
   through the use of cryptography, steganography, or other techniques.
   Policy makers should assume that any mechanism that allows any
   information to transit a boundary would eventually be used to
   transfer information against the purposes of the policy.

4.3.  Misinformation

   If a policy blocks information from flowing into a region, that may
   allow parties within that region to generate misinformation that is
   not disputed by outside information.  This may be highly advantageous
   to the parties within the region.  In the past, there have been many
   occurrences when parties within a region disconnected from the
   Internet precisely so that internal information could not be
   disputed.

4.4.  Target Inaccuracy

   The Internet infrastructure does not assign address space or ASNs
   according to strict regional, national, or continental boundaries.
   While there is some rough correlation, that is the result of
   administrative convenience.  Thus, a prefix that is allocated from
   the general pool of European address space may end up covering part
   of Europe and Greenland.  An ASN that was allocated for Singapore may
   be used in Australia.

   This is further complicated by the fact that the parties that receive
   an ASN or prefix are not obligated or constrained to use it in a
   given region.  If an organization acquires an ASN and subsequently
   grows outside of its original region, it may still use that ASN.  If
   a company is assigned a prefix and the company is acquired by another
   firm, then that prefix could be used in a completely different
   hemisphere.

   Consequently, if a policy elects to block traffic based on ASNs and
   prefixes, it may have unintended consequences, potentially blocking
   unintended traffic and not blocking proscribed traffic.










Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


4.4.1.  Accuracy of Registry Information

   Many public resources are available to query Internet routing related
   information including, IPv4, IPv6 and ASN resource holders, routing
   intentions and actual reachability data.  Unfortunately, the data
   doesn't always represent the actual situation, can be incomplete and
   in quite a few occasions outdated.

4.4.1.1.  Internet Routing Registries

   Internet Routing Registry (IRR) databases hold information about
   network operators routing intentions.  For example, ASN holders can
   specify with whom they have peering relationships.  This could give
   an indication which networks a specific ASN is connected to, however
   the data is entered (manually or automated) by network operators and
   isn't per se verified.

   In practice IRR databases are between 40-70% accurate.  However, some
   show an accuracy of around 95%.

4.4.1.2.  RPKI

   Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) is a public key
   infrastructure (PKI) framework to support improved security for the
   Internet's BGP routing infrastructure.  The most important property
   is that in RPKI only legitimate resource holders can make statements
   about the IPv4, IPv6 and ASN resources they hold.  This means that
   any information, right or wrong, found in RPKI databases represents
   the intention of, or at least is entered into RPKI by, the rightful
   holder.

   RPKI is therefore considered to be 100% accurate.  The downside of
   RPKI is that there aren't records for every resource and a large
   portion of the IPv4, IPv6 and ASN resources don't have records in
   RPKI.

4.5.  Spoofing ASNs and Hijacking Prefixes

   If a policy attempts to filter routing advertisements based on an
   ASN, then the opposition may attempt to counter that filtering
   attempt by using an alternate ASN.  The alternate ASN may be an
   unused one, an ASN that has been assigned but is not actively in use
   elsewhere, or could be one that is actively assigned to another
   party.  Using this ASN, the opposition could advertise its prefixes
   into BGP, bypass the ASN filter, and regain connectivity.






Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


   Similarly, if a policy attempts to filter routing advertisements or
   implement forwarding plane filters based on assigned prefixes, then
   the opposition may attempt to circumvent these policies by obtaining,
   advertising, and deploying alternate prefixes.  As with ASNs, these
   prefixes could come from unassigned address space, address space that
   has been assigned but is not actively advertised, or even address
   space that is actively advertised by other parties.

   There are security mechanisms that have been developed to help
   counter these possible attacks (IRR filtering [RFC7682], RPKI
   [RFC6811], and BGPsec [RFC8205]), but they are not ubiquitously
   deployed and may or may not be effective, depending on the
   operational procedures of ISPs that provide connectivity to the
   region.

4.6.  Porous Borders

   The Internet is, by design, a decentralized system of
   interconnections.  Thus, it is nearly impossible to completely block
   Internet access for a region.  Simply put, there will always be ways
   to circumvent any blocking attempts by sufficiently motivated
   parties.  However, there are certain chokepoints and various methods,
   as described above, that can significantly inhibit connectivity and
   throughput for users going to/coming from a given region.

4.7.  Acknowledgments

   This document was inspired by the thoughtful comments of many friends
   and colleagues.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests of IANA.

6.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses technical and policy considerations of
   blocking Internet access for regions, and their potential impact on
   global security.

   This document does not present new attack or defense strategies and
   merely discusses the implications of a variety of technical
   approaches.  This document does not advocate or dissuade any policy
   about blocking Internet connectivity, it discusses various
   considerations that policy makers should understand prior to setting
   policy.

7.  References



Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Blocking Considerations              March 2022


7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Ed., Li, T., Ed., and S. Hares, Ed., "A
              Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4271, January 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4271>.

   [RFC6811]  Mohapatra, P., Scudder, J., Ward, D., Bush, R., and R.
              Austein, "BGP Prefix Origin Validation", RFC 6811,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6811, January 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6811>.

   [RFC7682]  McPherson, D., Amante, S., Osterweil, E., Blunk, L., and
              D. Mitchell, "Considerations for Internet Routing
              Registries (IRRs) and Routing Policy Configuration",
              RFC 7682, DOI 10.17487/RFC7682, December 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7682>.

   [RFC8205]  Lepinski, M., Ed. and K. Sriram, Ed., "BGPsec Protocol
              Specification", RFC 8205, DOI 10.17487/RFC8205, September
              2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8205>.

Authors' Addresses

   Lenny Giuliano
   Email: lenny@lenny.net


   Melchior Aelmans
   Email: melchior@aelmans.eu


   Tony Li
   Email: tony.li@tony.li






Giuliano, et al.        Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 13]
