
                                                                         
                                                        Matthew R. Meyer 
                                                        Global Crossing 
                                                          Denver Maddux 
                                                            Nitrous.net 
                                                  Jean-Philippe Vasseur 
                                                    Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                       Curtis Villamizar 
                                                           Avici Systems  
                                                           Amir Birjandi  
                                                                    MCI 
IETF Internet Draft 
Expires: April, 2004                                                
October, 2004 
 
 
                                     
                                     
               <draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt> 
                                     
                                     
               MPLS Traffic Engineering Soft preemption 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable  
patent or IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, and any  
of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC  
3668.  
     
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with  
all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.   
     
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering  
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that       
other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
Drafts.  
     
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months  
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any  
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference  
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
     
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  1 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


 
 
Abstract 
 
This document details MPLS Traffic Engineering Soft Preemption, a suite 
of protocol modifications extending the concept of preemption with the 
goal of reducing/eliminating traffic disruption of preempted Traffic 
Engineered Label Switched Paths. Initially MPLS RSVP-TE was defined 
supporting only immediate Label Switched Path displacement upon 
preemption. The utilization of a preemption pending flag helps more 
gracefully mitigate the re-route process of preempted Label Switched 
Paths. For the brief period soft preemption is activated, reservations 
(though not necessarily traffic levels) are in effect under-provisioned 
until the Label Switched Path can be re-routed. For this reason, the 
feature is primarily but not exclusively interesting in MPLS enabled IP 
networks with Differentiated Services and Traffic Engineering 
capabilities. 
 
 
Conventions used in this document  
 
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED","MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this  
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [REQ-LEVELS]. 
 
 
1. Terminology 
 
This document follows the nomenclature of the MPLS Architecture RFC 
3031 [MPLS-ARCH]. 
 
1.1. Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 
CSPF            Constraint-based Shortest Path First. 
DS              Differentiated Services 
LER             Label Edge Router 
LSR             Label Switching Router 
LSP             Label Switched Path 
MPLS            MultiProtocol Label Switching 
PPend           Preemption Pending 
RSVP            Resource ReserVation  
TE              Traffic Engineering 
 
1.2. Nomenclature 
 
Make Before Break - Technique used to non-intrusively alter the path of 
an LSP. The ingress LER first signals the new path, sharing the 
bandwidth with the primary LSP (to avoid double booking), then switches 
forwarding over to a new path. Finally the old path state is torn down. 
 
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  2 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


Numerically Lower Preemption Priority - RSVP TE LSPs have setup and 
hold preemption priorities of zero (best) through seven (worst).  A 
numerically lower setup priority LSP is capable of preempting a 
numerically higher hold priority in a MPLS-TE environment.  
 
Preemption Pending flag - This flag is set on an IPv4 or IPv6 RSVP Resv 
RRO sub-object to signal to the TE LSP ingress LER that the TE LSP is 
about to be preempted and must be re-signaled (in a non disruptive 
fashion, with make before break) along another path. If present in the 
Path RRO, it is used to alert downstream LSRs that the LSP was soft 
preempted upstream. 
 
Point of Preemption - the midpoint or ingress LSR which due to RSVP 
provisioning levels is forced to either hard preempt or under-provision 
and signal soft preemption.  
 
Hard Preemption - The (typically default) preemption process in which 
higher numeric priority LSPs are intrusively displaced at the point of 
preemption by lower numeric priority LSPs. In hard preemption the LSP 
is torn down before reestablishment. 
 
Soft Preemption - The preemption process in which the point of 
preemption allows a brief under-provisioning period while the ingress 
router is alerted to the requirement for reroute. In soft preemption 
the LSP is reestablished before being torn down. 
 
Soft Preemption Desired Flag - This flag is set on the 
SESSION_ATTRIBUTES Flags in the Path message for the LSP indicate to 
LSRs along the path that, should the LSP need to be preempted, soft 
preemption should be used if supported. 
 
     
2. Motivations 
 
Initially MPLS RSVP-TE [RSVP-TE] was defined supporting only one method 
of TE LSP preemption which immediately tore down TE LSPs, disregarding 
the preempted in-transit traffic. This simple but abrupt process nearly 
guarantees preempted traffic will be discarded, if only briefly, until 
the RSVP Path Error message reaches and is processed by the ingress LER 
and a new forwarding path can be established. In cases of actual 
resource contention this might be helpful, however preemption may be 
triggered by mere reservation contention and reservations may not 
reflect forwarding plane contention up to the moment. The result is 
that when conditions that promote preemption exist and hard preemption 
is the default behavior, inferior priority preempted traffic may be 
needlessly discarded when sufficient bandwidth exists for both the 
preempted LSP and the preempting LSP   
 
Hard preemption may be a requirement to protect numerically lower 
preemption priority traffic in a non Diff-Serv enabled architecture, 
but in a Diff-Serv enabled architecture, one need not rely exclusively 
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  3 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


upon preemption to enforce a preference for the most valued traffic 
since the marking and queuing disciplines should already be aligned for 
those purposes. Moreover, even in non Diff-Serv aware networks, 
depending on the TE LSP sizing rules (imagine all LSPs are sized at 
double their observed traffic level), reservation contention may not 
accurately reflect the potential for forwarding plane congestion. 
 
 
3. Introduction 
 
In an MPLS RSVP-TE [RSVP-TE] enabled IP network, hard preemption is the 
default behavior. Hard preemption provides no mechanism to allow 
preempted TE LSPs to be handled in a make-before-break fashion: the 
hard preemption scheme instead utilizes a very intrusive method that 
can cause traffic disruption for a potentially large amount of TE LSPs. 
Without an alternative, network operators either accept this 
limitation, or remove functionality by using only one preemption 
priority or using invalid bandwidth reservation values. Understandably 
desirable features like ingress LER automated TE reservation 
adjustments are less palatable when preemption is intrusive and high 
network stability levels are a concern.  
 
This document defines the use of additional signaling and maintenance 
mechanisms to alert the ingress LER of the preemption that is pending 
and allow for temporary under-provisioning while the preempted tunnel 
is re-routed in a non disruptive fashion (make-before-break) by the 
ingress LER. During the period that the tunnel is being re-routed, link 
capacity is under-provisioned on the midpoint where preemption 
initiated and potentially one or more links upstream along the path 
where other soft preemptions may have occurred. Optionally the 
downstream path to the egress LER may be signaled as well to more 
efficiently deal with any  near simultaneous soft preemptions that may 
have been triggered downstream of the initial preemption. 
 
 
4. RSVP Extensions 
 
4.1. SESSION-ATTRIBUTES Flags 
 
To explicitly signal the desire for a TE LSP to benefit from the soft 
preemption mechanism (and so not to be hard preempted), the following 
flag of the SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object (for both the C-Type 1 and 7) is 
defined: 
                
Soft preemption desired:  0x40  
   
4.2. RRO IPv4/IPv6 Sub-Object Flags 
 
To report that a soft preemption is pending for an LSP, a flag is 
defined in the IPv4/IPv6 sub-object carried in the RRO object message 
defined in RFC3209[RSVP-TE]. This flag is called the preemption pending 
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  4 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


(PPend) flag. A compliant LSR MUST support the RRO object, as defined 
in RFC 3209[RSVP-TE]. 
 
RRO IPv4 and IPv6 sub-object address 
 
These two sub-objects currently have the following flags defined in RFC 
3209 [RSVP-TE]and [FAST-REROUTE]: 
 
  Local protection available: 0x01 
     Indicates that the link downstream of this node is protected via a 
     local repair mechanism, which can be either one-to-one or facility 
     backup. 
 
  Local protection in use: 0x02 
     Indicates that a local repair mechanism is in use to maintain this 
     tunnel (usually in the face of an outage of the link it was 
     previously routed over, or an outage of the neighboring node). 
 
  Bandwidth protection: 0x04 
     The PLR will set this when the protected LSP has a backup path 
     which is guaranteed to provide the desired bandwidth specified in 
     the FAST_REROUTE object or the bandwidth of the protected LSP, if 
     no FAST_REROUTE object was included. The PLR may set this whenever 
     the desired bandwidth is guaranteed; the PLR MUST set this flag 
     when the desired bandwidth is guaranteed and the "bandwidth 
     protection desired" flag was set in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object. 
     If the requested bandwidth is not guaranteed, the PLR MUST NOT set 
     this flag. 
 
  Node protection: 0x08 
     The PLR will set this when the protected LSP has a backup path 
     which provides protection against a failure of the next LSR along 
     the protected LSP. The PLR may set this whenever node protection 
     is provided by the protected LSP's backup path; the PLR MUST set 
     this flag when the node protection is provided and the "node 
     protection desired" flag was set in the SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object. 
     If node protection is not provided, the PLR MUST NOT set this 
     flag. Thus, if a PLR could only setup a link-protection backup 
     path, the "Local protection available" bit will be set but the 
     "Node protection" bit will be cleared. 
 
 
Soft preemption makes use of the Preemption pending flag defined here: 
 
  Preemption pending: 0x10 
     The preempting node sets this flag if a pending preemption is in 
     progress for the TE LSP. This indicates to the ingress LER of this 
     LSP that it SHOULD be re-routed. 
         
4.3. Use of the RRO IPv4/IPv6 Sub-Object in Path message 
 
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  5 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


An LSR MAY use the Preemption pending flag in the IPv4/IPv6 RRO sub-
object carried in a PATH RRO message to simultaneously alert downstream 
LSRs that the LSP was soft preempted upstream.  This information could 
be used by the downstream LSR to bias future soft preemption candidates 
toward LSPs already soft preempted elsewhere in their path. 
 
 
5. Mode of Operation 
 
5.1. Example set up  
 
R0--1G--R1---155----R2          LSP1:        LSP2:  
        | \         |  
        |   \      155        R0-->R1      R1<--R2  
        |    \      |                 \      |  
       155   1G     R3                 V     V  
        |       \   |                 R5     R4  
        |        \ 155  
        |          \|  
        R4------1G--R5  
 
Fig 1. 
 
In the network depicted above in figure 1, consider the following 
conditions: 
 
-Reservable BW on R0-R1, R1-R5 and R4-R5 is 1Gb/sec 
-Reservable BW on R1-R2, R1-R4, R2-R3, R3-R5 is 155 Mb/sec. 
-Bandwidths and costs are identical in both directions 
-Each circuit has an IGP metric of 10 and IGP metric is used by CSPF 
-Two TE tunnels are defined:  
        -LSP1: 155 Mb, setup/hold priority 0 tunnel path R0-R1-R5.  
        -LSP2: 155 Mb, setup/hold priority 7 tunnel path R2-R1-R4.  
Both TE LSPs are signaled with the soft preemption desired bit of their 
SESSION-ATTRIBUTE Path object set. 
-Circuit R1-R5 fails. 
-Soft Preemption is functional. 
 
5.2. Basic Operation 
 
When the circuit R1-R5 fails, R1 detects the failure and sends an 
updated IGP LSA/LSP and Path Error message to all the ingress LERs 
having a TE LSP traversing the failed link (R0 in the example above). 
Either form of notification may arrive at the ingress LERs first. Upon 
receiving the link failure notification, ingress LER R0 triggers a TE 
LSP re-route of LSP1, and re-signals LSP1 along shortest path available 
satisfying the TE LSP constraints: R0-R1-R4-R5 path. The Resv messages 
for LSP1 travel in the upstream direction (from the destination to the 
ingress LSR - R5 to R0 in this example). LSP2 is soft preempted at R1 
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  6 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


as it has a numerically lower priority value and both bandwidth 
reservations cannot be satisfied on the R1-R4 link. 
 
Instead of sending a path tear for LSP2 upon preemption as with hard 
preemption (which would result in an immediate traffic disruption for 
LSP2), R1s local BW accounting for LSP2 is zeroed and a preemption 
pending flagged Resv RRO for LSP2 is issued upstream toward the ingress 
LER, R2. Optionally, R1 MAY simultaneously send a soft preemption 
flagged Path RRO notifying downstream LSRs of LSP2s soft preemption.  
If more than one soft preempted LSP has the same ingress LER (egress 
LER), these soft preemption Resv (Path) messages MAY be bundled 
together (see [REFRESH-REDUCTION]). 
 
The preempting node MUST immediately send a Resv message with the 
preemption pending RRO flag set for each soft preempted TE LSP.  The 
node MAY use the occurrence of soft preemption to trigger an immediate 
IGP update or influence the scheduling of an IGP update.  
 
Should a refresh event for LSP2 arrive before LSP2 is re-routed, soft 
preempting nodes such as R1 MUST continue to refresh the LSP.  Resv 
messages with the RRO preemption pending flag set SHOULD be sent in 
reliable mode (see [REFRESH-REDUCTION]). 
 
Upon reception of the Resv with the preemption pending flag set, the 
ingress LER (of LSP2 in this case) MAY update the working copy of the 
TE-DB before running CSPF for the new LSP.  In the case that Diff-Serv 
[DIFF-MPLS] & TE [RSVP-TE]are deployed (as opposed to Diff-Serv-aware 
TE [DS-TE]), receiving preemption pending may imply to a ingress LER 
that the available bandwidth for the affected priority level and 
numerically greater priority levels has been exhausted for the 
indicated node interface.  An ingress LER MAY choose to reduce or zero 
available BW for the implied priority range until more accurate 
information is available (i.e. a new IGP TE update is received). 
 
In the case that reservation availability is restored at the point of 
preemption (R1) the point of preemption MAY issue a Resv message with 
the preemption pending flag unset to signal restoration to the ingress 
LER.  This implies that a ingress LER might have delayed or been 
unsuccessful in re-signaling. 
 
To guard against a situation where bandwidth under-provisioning will 
last forever, a local timer (soft preemption expiration timer) MUST be 
started on the preemption node, upon soft preemption. If this timer 
expires, the soft preempted TE LSP SHOULD be hard preempted. 
 
After the ingress LER has successfully established a new LSP, the old 
path MUST be torn down. 
 
As a result of soft preemption, no traffic will be needlessly black-
holed due to mere reservation contention.  If loss is to occur, it will 

  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  7 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


be due only to an actual traffic congestion scenario and according to 
the operators Diff-Serv (if Diff-Serv is deployed) and queuing scheme. 
 
5.3. Selection of the preempted TE LSP at a preempting mid-point 
 
When a numerically lower priority TE LSP is signaled that requires the 
preemption of a set of numerically higher priority LSPs, the node where 
preemption is to occur has to make a decision on the set of TE LSP, 
candidates for preemption. This decision is a local decision and 
various algorithms can be used, depending on the objective. See 
[PREEMPT-EXP]. 
 
As already mentioned, soft preemption causes a temporary link under-
provisioning condition while the soft preempted TE LSPs are re-routed 
by their respective ingress LERs.  In order to reduce this under-
provisioning exposure, a soft-preempting LSR MAY check first if there 
exists soft preempt-able TE LSP bandwidth flagged PPend by another node 
but still available for soft-preemption locally. If sufficient overlap 
bandwidth exists the LSR MAY attempt to soft preempt the same LSP. This 
would help reducing the temporarily elevated under-provisioning ratio 
on the links where soft preemption occurs.  
 
Optionally, a midpoint LSR upstream or downstream from a soft 
preempting node MAY choose to cache the LSPs soft preempted state. In 
the event a local preemption is needed, the relevant priority level 
LSPs from the cache are soft preempted first, followed by the normal 
soft and hard preemption selection process for the given priority. 
 
 
5.4. Interoperability 
 
Backward compatibility should be assured as long as the implementation 
followed the recommendations set forth in RFC 3209[RSVP-TE]. "When 
processing an RRO, unrecognized subobjects SHOULD be ignored and passed 
on". An LSR without soft preemption capabilities but that followed the 
aforementioned recommendation will simply ignore the RRO Preemption 
Pending flag and treat the Resv message as a regular Resv refresh 
message. As a consequence, the soft preempted TE LSP will not be re-
routed with make before break by the ingress LER.  
 
As mentioned prior, to guard against a situation where bandwidth under-
provisioning will last forever, a local timer (soft preemption 
expiration timer) MUST be started on the preemption node, upon soft 
preemption. When this timer expires, the soft preempted TE LSP SHOULD 
be hard preempted. This timer MAY be configurable. Optionally, an 
implementation MAY choose to soft preempt TE LSP for which the Soft 
preemption desired  bit has not been set. This might have the effect of 
buying time during extremely short term preemptions. The current hard 


  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  8 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


preemption scheme can be emulated with a soft preemption expiration 
timer set to zero. 
 
Soft Preemption as defined in this document is designed for use in MPLS 
RSVP-TE enabled IP Networks and may not functionally translate to some 
GMPLS technologies. As with backward compatibility, if a device does 
not recognize a flag, it should pass the subobject transparently. 
 
 
6. Management 
 
Both the point of preemption and the ingress LER SHOULD provide some 
form of accounting internally and to the network operator interface 
with regard to which TE LSPs and how much capacity is under-provisioned 
due to soft preemption. 
 
Displays of under-provisioning are recommended for the following 
midpoint, ingress and egress views: 
 - Sum of current bandwidth per preemption priority per local interface 
 - Sum of current bandwidth total per local interface 
 - Sum of current bandwidth total local router (ingress, egress, 
midpoint) 
 - List current LSPs and bandwidth in PPend status  
 - List current sum bandwidth and session count in PPend status per 
observed ERO hops (ingress, egress views only). 
 - Cumulative PPend events per observed ERO hops. 
 
 
7. IANA Considerations 
 
IANA [RFC-IANA] will not need to create a new registry. This document 
requires the assignment of flags related to RFC3209[RSVP-TE] sections 
4.1.1.1, 4.1.1.2, 4.7.1 and 4.7.2. 
 
IANA will assign RRO IPv4/IPv6 sub-object flags defined in RFC3209 
[RSVP-TE] sec 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2 as detailed in section 4.2 of this 
document. 
 
IANA will assign session attribute flags for both the C-Type 1 and 7 
(defined in RFC3209 [RSVP-TE] sec 4.7.1 and 4.7.2) as detailed in 
section 4.1 of this document. 
 
 
8. Security Considerations 
 
This document does not introduce new security issues. The security 
considerations pertaining to the original RSVP protocol [RSVP] remain 
relevant. 
  
 
  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                  9 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


9. Acknowledgment 
 
The authors would like to thank Carol Iturralde, Dave Cooper, Loa 
Andersson, Arthi Ayyangar, and Ina Minei for their valuable comments. 
 
 
10. IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement 
 
By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable patent 
or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, and any of 
which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with  RFC 3668. 
 
  
11. References  
 
11.1. Normative References 
 
[MPLS-ARCH] Rosen, Viswanathan, Callon, "Multiprotocol Label Switching 
Architecture",  RFC3031, January 2001. 
 
[RSVP-TE] Awduche et al, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels",  
RFC3209, December 2001. 
 
[FAST-REROUTE] Pan, P. et al., "Fast Reroute Extentions to RSVP-TE for 
LSP Tunnels", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-
06.txt, November, 2004 
 
[ISIS-TE] Smit, Li, IS-IS extensions for Traffic Engineering, draft-
ietf-isis-traffic-04.txt, December 2002. 
 
[OSPF-TE] Katz, Kompella, Yeung, Traffic Engineering (TE) Extensions to 
OSPF Version 2, RFC 3630, September 2003.  
 
11.2. Informative references  
 
[REQ-LEVELS] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
Requirement Levels," RFC 2119.  
 
[RSVP] R. Braden, Ed., et al, "Resource ReSerVation protocol (RSVP) -- 
version 1 functional specification," RFC2205, September 1997. 
 
[TE-REQ] Awduche et al, Requirements for Traffic Engineering over MPLS, 
RFC2702, September 1999. 
 
[DS-TE] Le Faucheur et al, "Requirements for support of Diff-Serv-aware 
MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC3564, July  2003. 
 
[DS-TE-PROT] Le Faucheur et al, "Protocol extensions for support of    

  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                 10 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-tewg-diff-te- 
proto-06.txt, January 2004 
 
[REFRESH-REDUCTION] Berger et al, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction  
Extensions", RFC 2961, April 2001. 
 
[PREEMPT-EXP]DE Oliviera, JP. Vasseur, L.Chen and C. Scoglio " LSP  
Preemption Polcies for MPLS Traffic Engineering",  
daft-deoliviera-diff-te-preemption-02.txt, October 2003 
 
[DIFF-MPLS]  Le Faucheur, F., Wu, L., Davie, B., Davari, S., Vaananen, 
P., Krishnan, R., Cheval, P. and J. Heinanen, "Multi-Protocol Label 
Switching (MPLS) Support of Differentiated Services", RFC 3270, May 
2002. 

[RFC-IANA] T. Narten and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA 
Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434. 
 
 
12. Authors Addresses 
 
Matthew R. Meyer 
Global Crossing 
3133 Indian Valley Tr. 
Howell, MI 48855 
USA 
email: mrm@gblx.net, mrm@packetshovel.net 
 
Denver Maddux 
Nitrous.net 
1020 SW 35th St 
Corvallis, OR 97333 
USA 
email: denver@nitrous.net 
 
Jean Philippe Vasseur 
Cisco Systems, Inc. 
300 Beaver Brook Road 
Boxborough , MA 01719 
USA 
Email: jpv@cisco.com  
 
Curtis Villamizar 
Avici Systems Inc. 
USA 
Email: curtis@avici.com 
 


  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                 11 
 
Draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-03.txt                     October,2004 


Amir Birjandi  
MCI 
22001 Louden County pky  
Ashburn, VA 20147 
USA 
 
13. Full Copyright Statement 
     
"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject 
to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights."  
     
"This document and the information contained herein are provided on an  
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS  
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET  
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,  
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE  
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED  
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."  
 





























  
 Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi 
                                 12 

