

Problem Statement                                        E. Davies (ed.)
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Expires: November 8, 2003                                   May 10, 2003


                         IETF Problem Statement
               draft-ietf-problem-issue-statement-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 8, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo summarizes perceived problems in the structure, function
   and processes of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  We are
   attempting to identify these problems, so that they can be addressed
   and corrected by the IETF community.

   The problems have been digested and categorized from an extensive
   discussion which took place on the 'problem-statement' mailing list
   from November 2002 to May 2003.  The problem list has been further
   analyzed to try and determine the root causes, that are at the heart
   of the perceived problems: The result will be used to guide the next
   stage of the process in the Problem Statement working group which is
   to determine the structures and processes that will carry out the
   corrections.



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction: Issues/Problems in the IETF process  . . . . .  3
   1.1   Consequences of Past Growth  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.2   The Aim is Improvement, not Finger-pointing  . . . . . . . .  4
   1.3   Perception and not Consensus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.4   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   1.5   Major Changes between Versions 00 and 01 . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.    Root Cause Problems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.1   Participants in the IETF do not Share a Common
         Understanding of its Mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.2   The IETF does not Consistently use Effective Engineering
         Practices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   2.3   The IETF has Difficulty Handling Large and/or Complex
         Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   2.4   The IETF's Workload Exceeds the Number of Fully Engaged
         Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   2.5   The IETF Management Structure is not Matched to the
         Current Size and Complexity of the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . 10
   2.5.1 Span of Authority  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.5.2 Procedural Blockages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.5.3 Consequences of Low Throughput in IESG . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.5.4 Lack of Formal Recognition outside IESG and IAB  . . . . . . 12
   2.5.5 Concentration of Influence in Too Few Hands  . . . . . . . . 12
   2.6   Working Group Practices can make Issue Closure Difficult . . 12
   2.7   IETF Participants and Leaders are Inadequately Prepared
         for their Roles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   3.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   4.    IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
         Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
         Illustrative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 18


















Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


1. Introduction: Issues/Problems in the IETF process

   Discussions over the last few months have revealed a significant
   number of perceived problems with the way the Internet Engineering
   Taskforce (IETF) operates. In advance of trying to change the IETF
   procedures and rules to deal with these problems, the IETF should
   have a clear, agreed-upon description of what problems we are trying
   to solve.

   The Problem Statement working group was chartered to create this
   document, which contains the description of the problems, and to use
   this analysis to suggest processes to address the identified
   problems.

   Taken in isolation, this document may appear to be exceedingly
   negative. Clearly the IETF needs to refresh its management structure
   and processes to address today's challenges, but it should not be
   forgotten that the IETF has produced a large body of high quality
   work which has lead to an extremely successful, all-pervasive network
   infrastructure.  Against this background, we should see the current
   document as a necessary piece of self-criticism leading to renewal
   and continued success. The discussion of the positive aspects has
   been deliberately confined to the IETF Problem Resolution Processes
   document [4] which considers the core values that the IETF needs to
   maintain whilst correcting the problems that participants perceive as
   affecting the IETF at present.

   The raw material for this document was derived by summarizing the
   extensive discussions which took place initially on the 'wgchairs'
   mailing list and subsequently on the 'problem-statement' mailing list
   from November 2002 through to May 2003, incorporating additional
   input from relevant drafts published during this period (see [1], [2]
   and [3]) and the minutes of recent plenary discussions. This produced
   a, still extensive, list of perceived problems which were classified
   into a number of related groups using a classification suggested by
   the processes which go on in the IETF.

   This document has digested these perceived problems into a small set
   of root cause issues, and a short list of subsidiary issues which
   appear to be the most pressing items engendered by the root cause.
   This list is set out in Section 2.

   Section 1.1 gives a short explanation of the thinking that has taken
   place in coming to the current view of the root causes.

   The original summary of perceived problems has been posted to the
   Problem Statement Working Group mailing list so that it can be
   referred to in future. Note that it remains classified according the



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   original scheme so that the raw data is available if alternative root
   cause analysis is needed.

1.1 Consequences of Past Growth

   As the problems of the IETF were examined, it became clear that they
   are neither new nor are they symptoms of a problem which is novel in
   the science of organizations.

   The IETF started off as a small, focused organization with a clearly
   defined mission and participants who had been working in this area
   for a significant period of time. Over the period 1989-1999 the IETF
   grew by a factor of ten or more in terms of number of participants,
   and in terms of work in progress. The effects of this growth have
   been compounded by the extension of the scope of the IETF which makes
   the work much more varied.  Many of the problems and symptoms appear
   to be fundamentally caused by the organization failing to fully adapt
   its management structure and processes to its new larger size, and
   failing to clearly define its future mission once the initial mission
   had been completed or outgrown.

   These failures are just those that afflict many small organizations
   trying to make the transition from a small organization which can be
   run informally and where essentially all participants fully share the
   aims, values and motivations of the leadership, to a medium sized
   organization where there are too many participants for informal
   leadership and later arrivals either do not fully understand or have
   a different perception of the ethos of the organization.

   Some IETF participants have been aware of these issues for a long
   time. Extant evidence dating back to at least 1992 drew similar
   conclusions.

1.2 The Aim is Improvement, not Finger-pointing

   Many of the problems identified in this memo have been remarkably
   persistent over a 15-year period, surviving a number of changes in
   personnel. We see them as structural problems, not personnel
   problems. No blame for any of the perceived problems should be
   directed to any individual, and the sole aim of the review process is
   to identify how the IETF can improve itself so that it knows what it
   is about and becomes fit for that purpose in the shortest possible
   timeframe.

1.3 Perception and not Consensus

   The working group participants would like emphasize that both the
   long list of problems and the root cause issues that we have derived



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   from them are problems that have been *perceived* to exist by a
   significant constituency, either on the mailing list and/or in
   private discussions.  We also note that many of these problems appear
   to be of long standing, as a very similar list has survived from the
   discussions that took place prior to the changes documented in the
   Kobe agreement from 1992.  We, in line with many contributors to the
   mailing list, do not believe that the process of problem resolution
   will be helped by continued rework of the root issues in what would
   probably be a vain attempt to achieve any sort of consensus.
   Instead, the general tenor and scope of the problems identified will
   provide a guide in setting up the processes needed to resolve the
   problems and provide input to the resolvers.

1.4 Acknowledgements

   Apart from the contributions of all those who provided input on the
   problem statement mailing list, the final reduction of the problems
   was especially assisted by the following people:

      Avri Doria <avri@apocalypse.org> (WG co-chair)
      Dave Crocker <dcrocker@brandenburg.com>
      Jeanette Hoffmann <jeanette@wz-berlin.de>
      Marc Blanchet <Marc.Blanchet@viagenie.qc.ca>
      Margaret Wasserman <mrw@windriver.com>
      Melinda Shore <mshore@cisco.com> (WG co-chair)
      Rob Austein <sra@hactrn.net>.
      Spencer Dawkins <spencer@mcsr-labs.org>

   Special thanks are due to Margaret Wasserman for extensive reviewing
   and contributions to the wording of Section 2.

   The early part of the reduction of the problem statement mailing list
   input was done by Harald Alvestrand and the latter part by Elwyn
   Davies and the team acknowledged above. There were a very large
   number of extensive and thoughtful contributions (some making several
   points). The thread was started by a call for volunteers in helping
   draft a problem statement, but quickly turned into a discussion of
   what the problems were.

1.5 Major Changes between Versions 00 and 01

   o  Section 1.3 added to clarify intentions of document.

   o  Section 2.3 added to document additional root cause involving
      IETF's difficulties with large and/or complex problems.

   o  Section 2.5 rewritten in line with mailing list comments.




Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   o  Definition of SDO corrected - "Defining" rather than
      "Determining".

   o  Appendix A removed and posted to mailing list to ensure survival,
      pending possible conversion into a separate Informational RFC.

   o  Version 00 was perceived as excessively negative in tone.  This
      was particularly true of the section headings in Section 2 which
      were resolutely absolutist and gave hostages to fortune in the
      form of neat sound bites readily accessible to detractors looking
      for ready ammunition.  Consequently, the language in these
      headings has been modified. Additionally, some words have been
      added to the introduction noting the past successes of the IETF,
      pointing to the analysis of core values in the companion
      'processes' draft [4] and positioning this document as a piece of
      vital self-criticism presaging effective renewal and rebirth.



































Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


2. Root Cause Problems

   This section forms the heart of this analysis, and lists the issues
   which we believe lie at the core of the problems. Apart from the
   first issue which is fundamental, the problems are not necessarily in
   priority order, but they will be seen to be interlinked in various
   ways.

2.1 Participants in the IETF do not Share a Common Understanding of its
    Mission

   The IETF lacks a clearly defined and commonly understood Mission: As
   a result the goals and priorities for the IETF as a whole and any
   Working Groups (WGs) that are chartered are also unclear.

   The lack of a common mission has many consequences, of which the
   principal ones appear to be:

   o  The IETF is unsure what it is trying to achieve and hence cannot
      know what its optimum internal organization should be to achieve
      its aims.

   o  The IETF cannot determine what its 'scope' should be, and hence
      cannot decide whether a piece of proposed work is either in-scope
      or out-of-scope.

   o  The IETF is unsure who its customers are, and consequently has
      managed to drive certain classes of customer, who would otherwise
      provide important input to the process, more or less completely
      out of the process.

   o  Working Groups can potentially be hijacked by sectional interests
      to the detriment of the IETF's reputation.

   o  The misty vision has restricted the associated architectural view
      to an outline top level view.  It would be desirable to have
      roadmaps and architectural views for portions of work which extend
      beyond a single working group:  It may also be the case that it is
      no longer possible to fit the whole Internet within a single
      architecture

   o  The lack of precision regarding our goals leads to WG charters and
      requirements that are poorly thought out and/or not aligned with
      the overall architecture.

   The IETF creates standards and is therefore necessarily a Standards
   Development Organization (SDO) but many participants would like to
   differentiate the IETF and its way of working from the 'conventional'



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   SDOs which emphasize corporate involvement and mandated delegates.
   Externally, the IETF is often placed in the same bracket as these
   conventional SDOs, especially by detractors, because the
   differentiation in the IETF's mission and processes and the rationale
   for those differences are not clear.  This can lead to the IETF being
   shown in a poor light or communications between SDOs not being
   effective.

2.2 The IETF does not Consistently use Effective Engineering Practices

   For an organization with 'engineering' in its title and participants
   who are likely to trot out the statement "Trust me, I'm an engineer!"
   when confronted with the need to find a solution to a particularly
   knotty problem, the IETF has, at least in some cases, extremely
   ineffective Engineering Practices.

   The frequent inability of the IETF to deliver specifications within
   the timeframe that the markets need and the excessive perfectionism
   that is exhibited in some cases could both be improved if appropriate
   Engineering Practices were in use.

   Engineering requires appropriate trade-offs: Engineering success
   needs refinement only to the point of 'fitness for purpose' which
   should help to balance the tension between time to market and
   perfectionism. The use of appropriate Engineering Practices should,
   for example, prevent specifications being recycled in pursuit of
   perfection when they are already adequate improvements on the status
   quo.

   Some of the key areas where the IETF's practices appear to need
   tightening up include:

   o  Lack of explicit quality auditing throughout the standards
      development process.

   o  Lack of written guidelines or templates for the content of
      documents (as opposed to the overall layout) and matching lists of
      review criteria.

   o  Poorly defined success criteria for WGs and individual documents.

   o  Lack of criteria for determining when a piece of work is
      overrunning and/or is unlikely to be concluded successfully either
      at all or within an acceptable time frame: Lack of process for
      either extending the time frame, adjusting the scope or
      terminating the work item or the whole Working Group.

   o  Tools to support the engineering process are minimal.



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   In addition, IETF processes, and Working Group processes in
   particular, suffer because commonly accepted Project Management
   techniques are not regularly applied to the progress of work in the
   organization.

   o  Project entry, goal setting and tracking processes are all either
      missing or implemented less effectively than the norm for
      commercial organizations in related activities.

   o  Charters regularly fail to set sufficiently granular milestones at
      which progress of WGs, individuals and documents can be evaluated.

   o  Better estimation procedures need to be used to determine what the
      expected delivery timescale for Working Group outputs should be.
      These estimates must be compared with the acceptable market and
      customer time frames for the work to be ready, and the scope of
      the work adjusted if timely delivery appears impossible.  This
      process must be repeated from time to time during the project.

   One problem which the IETF does not appear to suffer from is
   excessive bureaucracy, especially written bureaucracy. It is
   important that any changes introduced do not significantly increase
   the bureaucratic load.

   Finally, even where the IETF does have Engineering Practices defined,
   there are frequently cases where they are ignored or distorted.

2.3 The IETF has Difficulty Handling Large and/or Complex Problems

   The IETF has historically been most successful when dealing with
   tightly focused problems that have few interactions with other parts
   of the total problem solution.

   IETF standardization procedures are optimized for tightly constrained
   working groups and are generally less effective if 'engineering in
   the large' is needed to reach a satisfactory solution. Engineering in
   the large can encompass many aspects of system design including:

      Architecture
      Frameworks
      Security
      Internationalization

   The IETF has historically standardized protocol components rather
   than complete systems but the current greater emphasis on work in the
   Applications area tends to require more engineering in the large.

   Part of the cause of this difficulty may be that the formal reporting



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   structure of the IETF emphasises communication between the IESG
   through the ADs and the WGs and does not place much reliance on
   inter-WG communications:

   o  The IETF is not consistently effective at resolving issues that
      cross WG or area boundaries.

   o  The IETF does not posess effective mechanisms for inter-WG
      cooperation or communication.

   o  The IETF does not have an effective means for defining
      architectures and frameworks that will shape the work of multiple
      WGs.


2.4 The IETF's Workload Exceeds the Number of Fully Engaged Participants

   There are a number of respects in which IETF participants and
   contributors appear to have become less fully engaged with the IETF
   processes than previously, for example:

   o  Although there may be large attendances at many WG meetings, in
      many cases 5% or less of the participants have read the drafts
      which are under discussion or have a bearing on the decisions to
      be made.

   o  Commitments to write, edit or review a document are not carried
      out in a timely fashion.

   o  Little or no response is seen when a request for 'last-call'
      review is issued either at WG or IETF level.

   Whilst this might be put down to contributors having less time
   available in their work schedule during the downturn of the last two
   years, this is not the whole story because there were signs of this
   malaise back at the height of the boom in 2000.

   This problem exacerbates the problems which the IETF has had with
   timely delivery and may weaken the authority of IETF specifications
   if decisions are seen to be taken by badly informed participants and
   without widespread review.

2.5 The IETF Management Structure is not Matched to the Current Size and
    Complexity of the IETF

   The management and technical review processes currently in place were
   adequate for the older, smaller organization, but are apparently not
   scalable to the current size of the organization. One set of changes



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   has already been made with the Internet Engineering Steering Group
   (IESG) taking over some of the functions of the Internet Architecture
   Board (IAB) as a result of the Kobe agreement in 1992, but that is
   now a long time ago, and the organization has undergone considerable
   further growth as well as extending the scope of its activities as
   the Internet has become more complex.

2.5.1 Span of Authority

   Overt authority in the IETF is concentrated in the small number of
   people sitting on the IESG at that time. Existing IETF processes work
   to funnel tasks on to this small number of people (primarily the Area
   Directors (ADs) in the IESG).  This concentration slows up the
   process and puts a very large load of responsibility on to the
   shoulders of these people who are required to act as the senior
   management for Working Group (WG) chairs as well as acting as quality
   backstops for the large number of documents issued by the IETF.  The
   situation has not been helped by the widening of the scope of IETF
   which has resulted in somewhat more WGs and a need for a very broad
   spectrum of knowledge within the set of ADs.

2.5.2 Procedural Blockages

   The current procedural rules combined with the management and quality
   roles of the ADs can lead to situations where WGs or document authors
   perceive that one or two ADs are deliberately blocking the progress
   of a WG document without good reason or public justification. Appeal
   processes in these circumstances are limited and the only sanction
   that could be applied to the relevant ADs is recall, which has almost
   always been perceived to be out of scale with the apparent offence
   and hence almost never invoked.  This perception of invulnerability
   has led to a view that the IESG in general and the ADs in particular
   are insufficiently accountable for their actions to their WGs and the
   IETF at large, although the recent introduction of the Internet Draft
   Tracker tool makes it easier to determine if and how a document has
   become blocked, and hence to take appropriate steps to release it.

2.5.3 Consequences of Low Throughput in IESG

   If documents are inappropriately (or even accidentally) delayed or
   blocked as a result of IESG (in)action, this can cause much
   frustration inside the organization, a perception of disunity seen
   from outside the organization and delay of standards possibly to the
   point where they are too late to match market requirements: Work
   which has been properly authorized as being within scope of the IETF
   and properly quality checked during development should almost never
   come up against such a blockage.




Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   IESG delays must not be used to disguise or excuse slow work in WGs
   and ongoing cooperation between the ADs, WG chairs and WG members is
   essential to improving throughput.

2.5.4 Lack of Formal Recognition outside IESG and IAB

   The small number of formally recognized 'preferred' positions within
   the IETF, also limits the (intangible) rewards for participants.
   This can lead to useful and effective participants leaving because
   they cannot obtain any recognition (the only currency the IETF has to
   pay participants), which they use to fuel their own enthusiasm and
   help justify their continued attendance at IETF meetings to cost
   constrained employers.

2.5.5 Concentration of Influence in Too Few Hands

   Until the last couple of years, successive IETF Nominating Committees
   have chosen to give heavy weighting to continuity of IESG and IAB
   membership. Thus, the IETF appeared to have created a 'ruling class'
   system which tended to re-select the same leaders from a limited pool
   of people who had proved competent and committed in the past.

   Members of this 'ruling class' tend to talk more freely to each other
   and former members of the 'ruling class' - this may be because the
   'ruling class' has also come to share a cultural outlook which
   matches the dominant ethos of the IETF. Newcomers to the organization
   and others outside the 'ruling class' are reluctant to challenge the
   apparent authority of the extended 'ruling class' during debates and
   consequently influence remains concentrated in a relatively small
   group of people.  This reluctance may also be exacerbated if
   participants come from a different cultural background than the
   dominant one.

2.6 Working Group Practices can make Issue Closure Difficult

   The IETF appears to be poor at making timely and reasonable decisions
   that can be guaranteed to be adhered to during the remainder of a
   process or until shown to be incorrect.

   Participants are frequently allowed to re-open previously closed
   issues just to replay parts of the previous discussion without
   introducing new material.  This may be either because the decision
   has not been clearly documented or it may be a maneuver to try to get
   a decision changed because the participant did not concur with the
   consensus originally.  In either case revisiting decisions stops the
   process moving forward, and in the worst cases can completely derail
   a working group.  On the other hand, the decision making process must
   allow discussions to be re-opened if significant new information



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   comes to light or additional experience is gained which appears to
   justify alternative conclusions for a closed issue.

2.7 IETF Participants and Leaders are Inadequately Prepared for their
    Roles

   Participants and leaders at all levels in the IETF need to be taught
   the principles of the organization (Mission and Architecture(s)) and
   trained in carrying out the processes which they have to use in
   developing specifications, etc.

   The IETF currently has voluntary and inconsistent processes for
   educating its participants which may be why significant numbers of
   participants seem to fail to conform to the proper principles when
   working in the IETF context.

   The people in authority have generally been steeped in the principles
   of the IETF (as they see them) and first-time non-compliance by newer
   participants is sometimes treated as an opportunity for abuse rather
   than by recognition of a training failure.

   Lack of training compounded with concentration of influence in the
   'ruling class' can lead to newcomers being ignored during
   discussions, consequently being ineffective either in their own eyes
   or their employers and so leaving the IETF.


























Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


3. Security Considerations

   This document does not of itself have security implications, but it
   may have identified problems which raise security considerations for
   other work.  Any such implications should be considered in the
   companion document which will be produced setting out how the IETF
   should set about solving the problems identified.












































Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


4. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations defined in this document.
















































Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


Normative References

   [1]  Huston, G. and M. Rose, "A Proposal to Improve IETF
        Productivity", draft-huston-ietf-pact-00 (work in progress),
        October 2002.

   [2]  Blanchet, M., "Suggestions to Streamline the IETF Process",
        draft-blanchet-evolutionizeietf-suggestions-00 (work in
        progress), November 2002.

   [3]  Hardie, T., "Working Groups and their Stuckees",
        draft-hardie-wg-stuckees-00 (work in progress), February 2003.







































Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


Illustrative References

   [4]  Wasserman, M., "IETF Problem Resolution Processes",
        draft-ietf-problem-process-00 (work in progress), May 2003.


Author's Address

   Elwyn B. Davies
   Nortel Networks
   Harlow Laboratories
   London Road
   Harlow, Essex  CM17 9NA
   UK

   Phone: +44 1279 405 498
   EMail: elwynd@nortelnetworks.com


































Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           IETF Problem Statement                 May 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Davies (ed.)            Expires November 8, 2003               [Page 19]

