DMM Working Group                                        Kyoungjae Sun
Internet Draft                                            Younghan Kim
Intended status: Informational                     Soongsil University
Expires: Janurary 2017                                    July 6, 2016



                        Multicast Anchoring in DMM
                draft-kjsun-dmm-multicast-anchoring-03.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Janurary 5, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.









Sun, et al.              Expires January 5, 2017              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


Abstract

   In this draft, we define multicast support functions in a
   Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) environment. Based on the
   decomposed mobility management functions in [RFC7429], each defined
   multicast support function can be located and operated with DMM
   functions.


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ................................................ 2
   2. Conventions and Terminology ................................. 3
   3. Multicast Support Functions in DMM .......................... 3
      3.1. Multicast Anchoring Function (Multicast AF) ............ 3
      3.2. Multicast Group Management Function (Multicast GM) ..... 4
      3.3. Multicast Forwarding Management Function (Multicast FM). 5
   4. Deploying Multicast Functions into Current Approaches ....... 5
      4.1. Distributed AM, LM, and FM : All-in-One ................ 6
      4.2. Distributed AF-DP, LM and FM with centralized AF-CP .... 6
      4.3. Distributed AF-DP and FM-DP with centralized AF-CP, LM,
	       and FM-CP                      .......................... 6   
   5. Security Considerations ..................................... 6
   6. IANA Considerations ......................................... 6
   7. References .................................................. 7
      7.1. Normative References ................................... 7
      7.2. Informative References ................................. 8
   8. Acknowledgments ............................................. 8


1. Introduction

   Based on [RFC7333], a multicast solution in Distributed Mobility
   Management (DMM) should be considered early in the process of
   designing protocol and deployment models. Multicast support in DMM
   should avoid inefficient methods, such as non-optimal forwarding or
   tunnel convergence.

   To support IP multicasting, we need several functions: a multicast
   routing protocol, membership management, etc. When we consider
   multicast support in DMM, we should determine how efficiently these
   functions can be operated with the mobility management functions in
   DMM. Possible use cases are already described in [Use Case for
   Multicast DMM]. However, since current DMM research considers
   control/data separation and functional decomposition, we need to
   define multicast support functions following decomposed DMM anchor
   functions and operate with them.


Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


   In this draft, we define multicast mobility management functions
   that enable us to deploy the DMM functions defined in [RFC7429]. We
   define multicast mobility management functions in a similar way
   because it is easier to deploy multicast mobility management
   functions with DMM functions.

2. Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   This document uses the terminology defined in [RFC5213], [RFC3810],
   and [RFC4601]. New entities are defined by relying on the DMM
   functions specified in [RFC7429]:

   1. Anchoring Function (AF) is an allocation to a mobile node of an
   IP address (e.g. Home Address (HoA))) or prefix (e.g. Home Network
   Prefix (HNP)), topologically anchored by the advertising node.

   2. Internetwork Location Management (LM) function manages and keeps
   track of the internetwork location of an Mobile Node (MN). The
   location information may be a binding of the advertised IP
   address/prefix (e.g. HoA or HNP) to the MN's IP routing address, or
   it may be a binding of a node that can forward packets destined for
   the MN.

   3. Forwarding Management (FM) function intercepts and forwards a
   packet to/from the IP address/prefix assigned to the MN based on the
   internetwork location information, either to the destination or to
   some other network element that knows how to forward the packets to
   their destinations.

3. Multicast Support Functions in DMM

   In this chapter, we define functions to support multicasting in DMM
   environment. The multicast support of previous mobility management
   schemes (e.g., MIP and PMIP) deployed multicast router or MLD proxy
   functions into their mobility entities (e.g., HA, LMA, and MAG).
   According to the decomposition of previous mobility management
   functions and considering the separation of the control and data
   planes, a multicast support function also could be decompose into
   several functions.

3.1. Multicast Anchoring Function (Multicast AF)

   The multicast AF is defined as the anchoring point for multicast
   subscribers in DMM domain. It means that all multicast traffic
   from/to the DMM domain should be forwarded through the multicast AF.


Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


   Even if the multicast AF is anchor point for multicast traffic, it
   does not mean that it is anchor point for unicast traffic. In other
   words, this function could be deployed separately with the DMM AF
   (e.g. MTMA solution in [RFC7028]), or combined with the DMM AF
   (e.g. LMA in [RFC6224]). The multicast AF function provides
   connectivity to the multicast infrastructure out of the DMM domain.
   With the multicast AF, the network entity may be part of multicast
   tree. That is, multicast AFs have a Tree Information Base (TIB). It
   could be act role of MLD proxy function which generate MLD
   membership report or user-defined subset in the its upstream
   interface. In addition, the multicast AF acts as MLD Querier of
   other MLD proxy instances located in DMM.

   To support multicast listeners, the multicast AF collects MLD report
   messages from mobile nodes or other entities (e.g. MLD proxy defined
   in [RFC4605]). To provide an appropriate multicast subscription, the
   multicast AF should join/prune multicast channels based on MLD
   reports from the mobile nodes. To support the multicast sender, this
   function forwards the source information of the sender to the
   Rendezvous Point (RP) in multicast infrastructure.

   The multicast AF could be separated into control-plane function and
   data-plane function. In that case, the multicast AF Control Plane
   (multicast AF-CP) is responsible of managing multicast tree
   information and sharing source information through multicast
   infrastructure. In other words, the multicast AF-CP acts as MLD
   Querier for the DMM domain and MLD proxy for the multicast
   infrastructure. For that, the multicast AF-CP maintains multicast
   forwarding states at its corresponding downstream interface and
   aggregated multicast membership states at its upstream interface.
   The multicast Data Plane (multicast AF-DP) is responsible of
   anchoring multicast data packets destined to the appropriate
   subscribers in the DMM domain. It should forward multicast traffic
   according to the multicast forwarding rules configured by the
   multicast AF-CP.

3.2. Multicast Group Management Function (Multicast GM) 

   The multicast GM function is partially acts as MLD proxy which
   manages multicast subscriber information. According to [RFC4605],
   the MDL proxy devices maintain the membership database, which
   considers merging all subscriptions on the downstream interface. The
   membership database is presented a set of membership records,
   multicast addresses, filter modes and source lists. The multicast GM
   can maintain this database to support maintaining multicast
   subscribers and multicast sources. For that, the multicast AF
   function should create/delete/update membership database in the
   multicast GM when the mobile node join or leave multicast channel.


Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


   Especially the multicast GM support mobility management easily by
   requesting/updating subscriber information to this function. To
   track location of mobile node, the multicast GM can deployed with
   the location management function for DMM or can be extended flow
   entry table in that. Using this function, all multicast subscribers
   using the same multicast channel can be managed logically into the
   same records wherever they attach to so that it can avoid tunnel
   convergence problem. For example, even though two different nodes
   subscribing same multicast channel from different access router are
   moving to the same access node, the multicast GM can support to use
   only one upstream interface to the same multicast source address by
   updating its database and signaling with access node. Additionally
   the multicast GM function can support optimal multicast routing
   which sender and receiver are connected in the DMM domain. According
   group database in the multicast GM and location information of
   mobile nodes, in case that both sender and subscriber are located in
   DMM domain, the multicast AF can forward multicast packets directly
   to the access node where receiver is located in.


3.3. Multicast Forwarding Management Function (Multicast FM)

   The multicast FM function manages forwarding states that is used to
   forward packets from a source to a multicast group. Forwarding
   states could be managed together or separately with unicast
   forwarding states handled by the DMM FM function. In the former
   case, the multicast FM function should be located at the same entity
   where the DMM FM function is deployed (e.g. MAG function in
   [RFC7028] and [RFC6224]). Basically the multicast FM function
   maintains forwarding rules for routing from/to multicast
   infrastructure and multicast   subscribers, and additionally it can
   be used specific forwarding mechanism such as PMIP or GRE tunneling
   between multicast FM entities to support mobility.

   The multicast FM function can be split into the control and data
   plane. The multicast FM control plane (FM-CP) performs multicast
   routing mechanism, makes forwarding rules for multicast traffic and
   commands to the multicast Fm data plane (FM-DP). For communication
   between control and data plane, [dmm-fpc-cpdp] can be a method for
   configuring forwarding policies. Rule of forwarding multicast
   traffic can be considered in various way; a set of forwarding rules
   of multicast subscribers or a single rule for each multicast
   channel.

4. Considering multicast functions into current approaches
  
    In this section, we consider how multicast functions can be merged
    with DMM functional deployment model. In this section, based on DMM
    functional deployment model in [sijeon-dmm-deployment-models], we
    make use cases which combine or separate multicast functions as we
    defined in previous section.
  

   
Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016
      
   
4.1. Distributed AM, LM, and FM : All-in-One

   In this model, all of DMM anchor functions (AF, FM, LM) are combined
   into one physical entity and such physical entities are distributed
   at the edge of network. This model is presented in [seite-dmm-dma]
   and [bernardos-dmm-pmip] To support multicast, the multicast anchor
   functions may be deployed together in mobility router. Optionally,
   in case of central LM usage, the multicast GM entity also may be
   centralized. On the other hand, one or more multicast entity also
   may be deployed independently. For example, in case of deploying
   the multicast AF functions separately, Signaling messages for
   supporting mobility are required between All-in-One DMM entity and
   the multicast AF. In this example, DMM entity which includes the
   multicast FM function can perform as multicast proxy.

4.2. Distributed AF-DP, LM and FM with centralized AF-CP
  
   This model separates AF function into control and data plane. AF-DP
   is distributed with LM and FM while AF-CP is centralized in a single
   entity. In this model, centralized AF-CP can determine AF-DP based
   on policy or network condition. As presented in [RFC7389], specific
   routing protocol, such as GTP or GRE, can be used to forward MN's
   traffic between AF-DPs.
   To support multicast in this model, the multicast AF-CP may be co-
   located where DMM AF-CP is placed. The multicast AF-DP may deploy
   together with DMM AF-DP or separately. In the latter case, like as
   Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (MBMS) gateway in
   [3GPP TS 36.440], specific AF-DP gateway can be used. Centralized
   AF-CP which includes multicast AF-CP can determine the multicast
   AF-DP for forwarding multicast traffic of MN.
  
4.3. Distributed AF-DP and FM-DP with centralized AF-CP, LM, and FM-CP
  
   This model considers separation of FM-CP and FM-DP with separation
   of AF-CP and AF-DP. In this model, forwarding path between AF-DP can
   be provided more flexible. [matsushima-stateless-uplane-vepc] is
   one example of this model. To support multicast in this model,
   multicast FM-CP, AF-CP and GM may be implemented in centralized
   control plane of DMM. In this case, signaling messages between
   control and data plane can be used by extending messages which could
   be used in normal DMM. For example, [dmm-fpc-cpdp] can be extended
   to make rule for multicast traffic by defining group forwarding
   rules.
   
5. Security Considerations

   TBD

6. IANA Considerations

   TBD
			 
			 
Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


7. References

7.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2. Informative References

   [RFC5213] Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
             Patil, B., "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.

   [RFC3810] Vida, R., Costa, L., "Multicast Listener Discovery Version
             2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC4601] Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., Kouvelas, I.,
             "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
             Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.

   [RFC7429] Liu, D., Zuniga, JC., Seite, P., Chan, H., Bernardos, CJ.,
             "Distributed Mobility Management: Current Practices and
             Gap Analysis", RFC 7429, January 2015.

   [RFC7333] Chan, H., Liu, D., Seite, P., Yokota, H., Korhonen, J.,
             "Requirements for Distributed Mobility Management", RFC
             7333, August 2014.

   [Use Case for Multicast DMM] Figueiredo, S., Jeon, S., Aguiar, R.,
             L., "IP Multicast Use Cases and Analysis over Distributed
             Mobility Management", draft-sfigueiredo-multimob-use-case-
             dmm-03, October 2012 (Expired).

   [RFC4605] Fenner, B., He, H., Haberman, B., Sandick, H., "Internet
             Group Management Protocol (IGMP) / Multicast Listener
             Discovery (MLD)-Based Multicast Forwarding ("IGMP/MLD
             Proxying")", RFC 4605, August 2006.

   [RFC6224] Schmidt, T., Waehlisch, M., Krishnan, S., "Base Deployment
             for Multicast Listener Support in Proxy Mobile IPv6
             (PMIPv6) Domains", RFC 6224, April 2011.
          
   [dmm-fpc-cpdp] Liebsch, M., Matsushima, S., Gundavelli, S., Moses,
             D., Bertz, L., "Protocol for Forwarding Policy
             Configuration (FPC) in DMM", draft-ietf-dmm-fpc-cpdp-03
             (work in progress), March 2016.

   [sijeon-dmm-deployment-models] Jeon, S., Kim, Y., "Deployment Models
             for Distributed Mobility Management", draft-sijeon-dmm-
             deployment-models-02 (work in progress), March 2016.
	
	
Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


   [seite-dmm-dma] Seite, P., Bertin, P., and J. Lee, "Distributed Mobility
             Anchoring" (Expired), draft-seite-dmm-dma-07, February 2014.

   [bernardos-dmm-pmip] Bernardos, C., Oliva, A., and F. Giust, "A
             PMIPv6-based solution for Distributed Mobility
             Management", draft-bernardos-dmm-pmip-06 (work in
             progress), March 2016.

   [RFC7389] Wakikawa, R., Pazhyannur, R., Gundavelli, S., and C.
             Perkins, "Separation of Control and User Plane for Proxy
             Mobile IPv6", RFC 7389, October 2014.
          
   [3GPP TS 36.440] ETSI TS 36.440 v12.0.0, "LTE; Evolved Universal
             Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); General
             aspects and principles for interfaces supporting
             Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (MBMS) within
             E-UTRAN (3GPP TS 36.440 version 12.0.0 Release 12)",
             September 2014.

   [matsushima-stateless-uplane-vepc] Matsushima, S. and R. Wakikawa,
             "Stateless user-plane architecture for virtualized EPC
             (vEPC)", draft-matsushima-stateless-uplane-vepc-06 (work
             in progress), March 2016.


8. Acknowledgments


























Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Multicast Anchoring in DMM            July 2016


Authors' Addresses

   Kyoungjae Sun
   Soongsil University
   369, SSnagdo-ro, Dongjak-gu
   Seoul, Korea

   Email: gomjae@dcn.ssu.ac.kr


   Younghan Kim
   Soongsil University
   369, SSnagdo-ro, Dongjak-gu
   Seoul, Korea

   Email: younghak@ssu.ac.kr
































Sun, et al.             Expires January 5, 2017               [Page 9]

