





     PPPEXT Working Group                                       Baiju Patel
     INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   Intel
     Category: Standards Track                                Bernard Aboba
     <draft-ietf-pppext-l2tp-security-01.txt>                     Microsoft
     11 March 1998


                           Securing L2TP using IPSEC


     1.  Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working docu-
     ments of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),  its  areas,  and
     its  working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute work-
     ing documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  months
     and  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as  reference  mate-
     rial or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

     To  learn  the  current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
     ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts  Shadow
     Directories   on   ds.internic.net   (US  East  Coast),  nic.nordu.net
     (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

     The  distribution  of  this memo is unlimited.  It is filed as <draft-
     ietf-pppext-l2tp-security-01.txt>  and   expires  September  1,  1998.
     Please send comments to the authors.


     2.  Abstract

     This document discusses how L2TP may utilize IPSEC to provide for tun-
     nel authentication, privacy protection,  integrity  check  and  replay
     protection. Both the voluntary and compulsory tunneling cases are dis-
     cussed.


     3.  Requirements language

     This specification uses the same words as [6] for defining the signif-
     icance of each particular requirement.  These words are:


     MUST      This  word,  or  the adjectives "REQUIRED" or "SHALL", means
               that the definition is an absolute requirement of the speci-
               fication.

     MUST NOT  This phrase, or the phrase "SHALL NOT", means that the defi-
               nition is an absolute prohibition of the specification.





     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 1]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     SHOULD    This word, or the adjective "RECOMMENDED", means that  there
               MAY  exist  valid  reasons  in  particular  circumstances to
               ignore a particular item, but the full implications must  be
               understood and carefully weighed before choosing a different
               course.

     SHOULD NOT
               This phrase means that there MAY exist valid reasons in par-
               ticular   circumstances  when  the  particular  behavior  is
               acceptable or even useful, but the full implications  should
               be  understood  and the case carefully weighed before imple-
               menting any behavior described with this label.

     MAY       This word, or the adjective "OPTIONAL", means that  an  item
               is  truly  optional.   One  vendor may choose to include the
               item because a particular marketplace requires it or because
               the  vendor feels that it enhances the product while another
               vendor may omit the same item.  An implementation which does
               not include a particular option MUST be prepared to interop-
               erate with another implementation  which  does  include  the
               option,  though  perhaps  with reduced functionality. In the
               same vein an implementation which does include a  particular
               option  MUST be prepared to interoperate with another imple-
               mentation which does  not  include  the  option.(except,  of
               course, for the feature the option provides)

     Silently Discard
               The  implementation  discards  the  datagram without further
               processing, and without indicating an error to  the  sender.
               The  implementation SHOULD provide the capability of logging
               the error, including the contents of the discarded datagram,
               and SHOULD record the event in a statistics counter.

     An  implementation is not compliant if it fails to satisfy one or more
     of the MUST or MUST NOT requirements for the protocols it  implements.
     An  implementation  that  satisfies all the MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD and
     SHOULD NOT requirements for its protocols is said to be  "uncondition-
     ally compliant"; one that satisfies all the MUST and MUST NOT require-
     ments but not all the SHOULD or SHOULD NOT requirements for its proto-
     cols is said to be "conditionally compliant."


     4.  Terminology


     Voluntary Tunneling
               In  voluntary  tunneling,  a  tunnel is created by the user,
               typically via use of a tunneling client. As  a  result,  the
               user  will  send  L2TP packets to the NAS which will forward
               them on to the LNS. In voluntary tunneling, the NAS does not
               need  to  support  L2TP,  and  the  LAC  resides on the same
               machine as the user.





     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 2]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     Compulsory Tunneling
               In compulsory tunneling, a tunnel  is  created  without  any
               action  from  the  user  and  without  allowing the user any
               choice. As a result, the user will send PPP packets  to  the
               NAS/LAC, which will encapsulate them in L2TP and tunnel them
               to the LNS. In the compulsory tunneling  case,  the  NAS/LAC
               must be L2TP capable.


     5.  Introduction

     L2TP,  described  in  [1], is a protocol that tunnels PPP traffic over
     variety of networks (e.g., IP, SONET, ATM). Since the protocol  encap-
     sulates  PPP,  L2TP  inherits  PPP  authentication, as well as the PPP
     Encryption Control Protocol (ECP) (described in [19]),  and  the  Com-
     pression  Control  Protocol  (CCP)  (described  in  [18]).  L2TP  also
     includes support for tunnel authentication, which can be used to mutu-
     ally  authenticate the tunnel endpoints. However, L2TP does not define
     tunnel protection mechanisms.

     IPSEC is a protocol suite defined by IETF working group on IP security
     to  secure  communication  at  the network layer between communicating
     peers.  This protocol is comprised of ISAKMP, described in [11],  IKE,
     described in [12], IPSEC AH, described in [7] and IPSEC ESP, described
     in [9]. ISAKMP is the key management protocol while  AH  and  ESP  are
     used to protect IP traffic.

     This  draft  proposes  use  of the IPSEC protocol suite for protecting
     L2TP traffic over IP and Non-IP networks, and discusses how IPSEC  and
     L2TP  should be used together. This document does not attempt to stan-
     dardize end-to-end security. When end-to-end security is required,  it
     is  recommended  that additional security mechanisms (such as IPSEC or
     TLS) be used inside the tunnel, in addition to L2TP tunnel security.


     6.  L2TP security requirements

     L2TP tunnels PPP traffic over  the  IP  and  non-IP  public  networks.
     Therefore, both the control and data packets of L2TP protocol are vul-
     nerable to attack.  Examples of attacks include:

     1. The adversary may try to discover user identities by snooping  data
     packets.

     2. The adversary may try to modify packets (both control and data).

     3.  The adversary may try to hijack the L2TP tunnel or the PPP connec-
     tion inside the tunnel.

     4. An adversary can launch denial of service  attacks  by  terminating
     PPP connections, or L2TP tunnels.

     5.  An  adversary  may  attempt  to disrupt the PPP ECP negotiation in
     order to weaken or remove confidentiality  protection.  Alternatively,



     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 3]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     an  adversary  may wish to disrupt the PPP LCP authentication negotia-
     tion so as to weaken the PPP authentication process or gain access  to
     user passwords.

     To  address  these threats, the L2TP security protocol MUST be able to
     provide authentication, integrity and replay  protection  for  control
     packets.  In addition, it SHOULD be able to protect confidentiality of
     control packets. It MUST be able to provide integrity and replay  pro-
     tection of data packets, and MAY be able to protect confidentiality of
     data packets. An L2TP security protocol MUST also provide  a  scalable
     approach to key management.

     The  L2TP  protocol, and PPP authentication and encryption do not meet
     the security requirements  for  L2TP.  L2TP  authentication  typically
     mutually  authenticates LAC to LNS at tunnel origination and may peri-
     odically re-authenticate. Therefore, it does not protect  control  and
     data  traffic  on a per packet basis. Thus, L2TP tunnel authentication
     leaves L2TP tunnel vulnerable to attack. PPP authenticates the  client
     to  the  LNS,  but  also  does not provide per- packet authentication,
     integrity, or replay protection. PPP encryption meets  confidentiality
     requirements  for  PPP  traffic  but  does not address authentication,
     integrity and key management requirements. In addition, PPP ECP  nego-
     tiation, outlined in [19] does not provide for a protected ciphersuite
     negotiation.  Therefore, PPP encryption provides a weak security solu-
     tion,  and  in addition does not assist in securing L2TP control chan-
     nel.

     Key management facilities are not provided by the L2TP protocol.  How-
     ever,  where L2TP tunnel authentication is desired, it is necessary to
     distribute keys. Where manual key distribution is not feasible, a  key
     management protocol is required. Since secure key management protocols
     are difficult to design, protocols designed for another purpose  (such
     as RADIUS) MUST NOT be used for L2TP key management.

     Note  that several of the attacks outlined above can be carried out on
     PPP packets sent over the link between the  client  and  the  NAS/LAC,
     prior  to  encapsulation  of  the packets within an L2TP tunnel. While
     strictly speaking these attacks are outside the scope  of  L2TP  secu-
     rity,  in  order  to protect against them, the user SHOULD provide for
     confidentiality, authentication and integrity protection for PPP pack-
     ets  sent  over the dial-up link. Authentication and integrity protec-
     tion are not currently supported by the PPP  encryption  methods  out-
     lined in [20]-[22].


     6.1.  L2TP Security Protocol

     Where  security is required, L2TP tunnels MUST be secured using IPSEC,
     both for IP and non-IP networks. IPSEC AH or ESP MUST be used to  pro-
     vide  for authentication, integrity and replay protection, and ESP MAY
     be used to provide for confidentiality.

     The L2TP tunnel is secured between either LAC and LNS, or between  LAC
     and  a  firewall  (when  a firewall is present and is trusted by LAC).



     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 4]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     Both LAC and LNS must meet L2TP security requirements.

     All compliant implementations MUST implement IPSEC  ESP  for  securing
     control   packets.    Optionally,  IPSEC AH  MAY  also  be  supported.
     All compliant implementations SHOULD also implement IPSEC ESP for pro-
     tection  of data packets. In addition to the mandated cipher suites in
     IPSEC for AH and ESP, NULL encryption MUST be supported for L2TP secu-
     rity.  Other   IPSEC   ESP required ciphers MAY also be supported. The
     implementations MUST meet replay protection requirements of IPSEC.

     L2TP security MUST meet the key management requirements of  the  IPSEC
     protocol  suite.  ISAKMP SHOULD be supported for authentication, secu-
     rity association negotiation, and key management using the IPSEC  DOI.


     6.2.  Stateless compression and encryption

     Stateless  encryption and/or compression is highly desirable when L2TP
     is run over IP. Thus IPSEC encryption and IP  compression  (stateless)
     are  to  be preferred over stateful PPP encryption/compression methods
     wherever possible.  Since L2TP is a connection-oriented protocol,  use
     of  stateful compression/encryption is feasible, but when run over IP,
     this is not desirable. While providing better compression,  and  some-
     what  more secure encryption, when used without an underlying reliable
     delivery mechanism stateful methods magnify packet  losses,  and  thus
     are  problematic  when used over the Internet where packet loss can be
     significant. In addition, although L2TP is  connection  oriented,  the
     L2TP  specification does not mandate packet ordering, which can create
     difficulties  in  implementation  of  stateful  compression/encryption
     schemes.  However, these considerations are not as important when L2TP
     is run over non-IP media such as ATM,  X.25,  or  Frame  Relay,  since
     these media guarantee ordering, and packet losses are typically low.


     6.3.  Implementation considerations for L2TP over Non-IP networks

     L2TP requires that a non-IP network supports packet transport, so that
     the non-IP network should be able to carry L2TP control and data pack-
     ets.

     Since  ESP  functions  are defined on the IP payload (excluding the IP
     header), the presence of an IP header is not a requirement for use  of
     ESP.  Therefore,  L2TP  implemented on non-IP networks MUST be able to
     transport IPSEC ESP packets. The next payload field of the ESP  header
     MUST be set to the L2TP protocol number.

     IKE  messages  use  UDP transport. Therefore, in order to be compliant
     with the IKE protocol on non-IP media,  the  non-IP  media  (which  is
     capable  of  transporting packets) MUST support transport of UDP data-
     grams. Since the IP header is not present in  the  UDP  datagram  over
     non-IP  media,  the UDP checksum MUST be set to zero by the source and
     ignored by the destination.





     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 5]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     The exact mechanisms for enabling transport of  ESP  and  UDP  packets
     over  non-IP media MUST be addressed in appropriate standards for L2TP
     over specific non-IP networks.


     7.  L2TP/IPSEC interoperability guidelines

     The  following  guidelines  are  established  to  meet  L2TP  security
     requirements  using IPSEC in practical situations. Note that this sec-
     tion is not a requirement for an implementation to  be  L2TP  security
     compliant.   Its  purpose  to  make  the implementors aware of certain
     efficiency and security considerations.

     In the scenarios that follow, it is assumed that both L2TP clients and
     servers are able to set and get the properties of IPSEC security asso-
     ciations, as well as to influence the IPSEC security services  negoti-
     ated.   Furthermore,  it  is assumed that L2TP clients and servers are
     able to influence the negotiation process for PPP encryption and  com-
     pression.   These  and  other  API-related  questions are addressed in
     [31].


     7.1.  Compulsory tunnel

     In the case of a compulsory tunnel, the dial-in user will  be  sending
     PPP packets to the LAC, and will typically not be aware that its pack-
     ets are being tunneled, nor that any security services  are  in  place
     between  the  LAC  and LNS. From the LNS's point of view, it will note
     arrival of a PPP data packet encapsulated in  L2TP,  which  is  itself
     encapsulated  in  an  IP  packet.  Assuming  that  the  LNS is able to
     retrieve the properties of the Security  Association  set  up  between
     itself and the LAC, it will have knowledge of the security services in
     place between the LAC and itself. Thus  in  the  compulsory  tunneling
     case,   the  dial-in  user  and  the LNS have unequal knowledge of the
     security services in place between them.

     Since the LNS is capable of knowing whether confidentiality, authenti-
     cation,  integrity  and replay protection are in place between the LAC
     and itself, it can use this knowledge in order to modify its  behavior
     during  PPP  ECP and CCP negotiation.  For example, let us assume that
     LNS confidentiality policy can be described by one  of  the  following
     terms:  "Require  Encryption," "Allow Encryption" or "Prohibit Encryp-
     tion." If IPSEC confidentiality services are in  place,  then  an  LNS
     implementing  a  "Prohibit  Encryption"  policy will act as though the
     policy had been violated. Similarly, an LNS  implementing  a  "Require
     Encryption"  or  "Allow  Encryption"  policy  will act as though these
     policies were satisfied, and would not mandate use of  PPP  encryption
     or  compression.  Note however, that this is not the same as insisting
     that PPP encryption and compression be turned off, since this decision
     will depend on the policy of the dialin user.

     Since  the  dial-in  user has no knowledge of the security services in
     place between the LAC and the LNS, and since it may not trust the  LAC
     or  the  wire  between  itself  and  the  LAC,  the  dial-in user will



     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 6]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     typically want to ensure sufficient security through use of end-to-end
     IPSEC or PPP encryption/compression between itself and the LNS.

     A  dial-in  user  wishing  to ensure security services over the entire
     travel path would not modify this behavior even if it had knowledge of
     the  security  services  in place between the LAC and the LNS. This is
     because the dial-in user needs to negotiate  confidentiality  services
     between  itself  and  the  LNS in order to provide privacy on the wire
     between itself and the LAC. Similarly, the dial-in user needs to nego-
     tiate  end-to-end  security between itself and the endstation in order
     to ensure confidentiality on the portion of the path between  the  LNS
     and the endstation.

     Given  that the dial-in user will typically not trust the LAC and will
     negotiate confidentiality and compression services on its own, the LAC
     may only wish to negotiate IPSEC AH (authentication + integrity check)
     with the LNS, and the LNS will request replay  protection.  This  will
     ensure  that  confidentiality  and  compression  services  will not be
     duplicated over the path between the LAC and the LNS. This will  typi-
     cally  result in better scalability for the LAC, since encryption will
     be handled by the dial-in user and the LNS.

     The dial-in user can satisfy its desire for  confidentiality  services
     in one of two ways. If it knows that all endstations that it will com-
     municate with are IPSEC-capable (or if it refuses to talk to non-IPSEC
     capable  endstations),  then  it  can  refuse to negotiate PPP encryp-
     tion/compression and negotiate IPSEC ESP with the endstations instead.
     If  the  client does not know that all endstations it will contact are
     IPSEC capable (the most likely  case),  then  it  will  negotiate  PPP
     encryption/compression.   This   may   result  in  duplicate  compres-
     sion/encryption  which  can  only  be  eliminated  if   PPP   compres-
     sion/encryption  can  be  turned  off on a per-packet basis. Note that
     since the LNS knows that the dial-in user's packets are being tunneled
     but  the dial-in user does not, the LNS can ensure that stateless com-
     pression/encryption is used by offering stateless  compression/encryp-
     tion methods if available in the ECP and CCP negotiations.


     7.2.  Voluntary tunnel

     In  the  case  of a voluntary tunnel, the dial-in user will be sending
     L2TP packets to the NAS, which will route them to  the  LNS.   Over  a
     dialup  link,  these  L2TP packets will be encapsulated in IP and PPP.
     Assuming that it is possible for the  dial-in  user  to  retrieve  the
     properties of the Security Association between itself and the LNS, the
     dial-in user will have knowledge of any security  services  negotiated
     between itself and the LNS. It will also have knowledge of PPP encryp-
     tion/compression services negotiated between itself and the NAS.

     From the LNS's point of view, it will note a PPP  packet  encapsulated
     in  L2TP,  which is itself encapsulated in an IP frame. This situation
     is identical to the compulsory tunneling case. Assuming that  the  LNS
     is  able to retrieve the properties of the Security Association set up
     between itself and the dial-in user, it will  have  knowledge  of  the



     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 7]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     security  services  in place between the dial-in user and itself. Thus
     in the voluntary tunneling case, the dial-in user  and  the  LNS  have
     symmetric knowledge of the security services in place between them.

     Since the LNS is capable of knowing whether confidentiality, authenti-
     cation, integrity check or replay protection is in place  between  the
     dial-in  user  and  itself, it is able to use this knowledge to modify
     its PPP ECP and CCP negotiation stance. If IPSEC confidentiality is in
     place,  the  LNS can behave as though a "Require Encryption" directive
     had been fulfilled, not mandating use of PPP  encryption  or  compres-
     sion.  Typically  the LNS will not insist that PPP encryption/compres-
     sion be turned off, instead leaving this decision to the dial-in user.

     Since the dial-in user has knowledge of the security services in place
     between itself and the LNS, it can act as though  a  "Require  Encryp-
     tion"  directive  had been fulfilled if IPSEC ESP was already in place
     between itself and the LNS. Thus, it can request that  PPP  encryption
     and  compression  not  be negotiated. Note that if IP compression ser-
     vices cannot be negotiated, it will typically be desirable to turn off
     PPP  compression if no stateless method is available, due to the unde-
     sirable effects of stateful PPP compression.

     Thus in the voluntary tunneling case the dial-in  user  and  LNS  will
     typically  be  able  to  avoid  use of PPP encryption and compression,
     negotiating IPSEC Confidentiality, Authentication, and Integrity  pro-
     tection  services  instead,  as  well  as  IP  Compression  if  avail-
     able.

     This may result in duplicate encryption if the dial-in user is  commu-
     nicating with an IPSEC-capable endstation. In order to avoid duplicate
     encryption/compression, the dial-in user may  negotiate  two  Security
     Associations  with  the  LNS,  one with AH, and one with confidential-
     ity/compression. Packets going to an  IPSEC-capable  endstation  would
     run over the AH security association, and packets to a non-IPSEC capa-
     ble endstation would run over the  other  security  association.  Note
     that  many  IPSEC implementations cannot support this without allowing
     L2TP packets on the same tunnel to be  originated  from  multiple  UDP
     ports. This requires modifications to the L2TP specification.

     Also  note  that the dial-in user may wish to put confidentiality ser-
     vices in place for non-tunneled packets travelling between itself  and
     the  NAS.  This will protect the dial-in user against eavesdropping on
     the wire between itself and the NAS. As a result, it may wish to nego-
     tiate  PPP  encryption  and compression with the NAS. As in compulsory
     tunneling, this will result in duplicate encryption and possibly  com-
     pression unless PPP compression/encryption can be turned off on a per-
     packet basis.


     8.  Security considerations

     This draft defines a security protocol.





     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 8]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     9.  Acknowledgements

     Thanks to Gurdeep Singh Pall, David Eitelbach,  William  Dixon,  Peter
     Ford,  and Sanjay Anand of Microsoft, John Richardson of Intel and Rob
     Adams of Cisco for many useful discussions of this problem space.


     10.  References

     [1] K. Hamzeh, A. Rubens, T.  Kolar,  M.  Littlewood,  B.  Palter,  A.
     Valencia,  G. S. Pall, J. Taarud, W. M. Townsley, W. Verthein.  "Layer
     Two Tunneling Protocol -- L2TP." Internet draft  (work  in  progress),
     draft-ietf-pppext-l2tp-09.txt,  Ascend  Communications, Cisco Systems,
     Microsoft, Copper Mountain Networks, IBM, 3Com, February 1998.

     [2] P. R. Calhoun, W. M.  Townsley.   "Layer  Two  Tunneling  Protocol
     "L2TP" Security Extensions for Non-IP Networks."  Internet draft (work
     in progress), draft-ietf-pppext-l2tp-sec-02.txt,  3Com,  IBM,  October
     1997.

     [3]  K.  Hamzeh,  G.  S.  Pall,  J. Taarud, W. Verthein, W. A. Little.
     "Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol -- PPTP." Internet draft  (work  in
     progress),   draft-ietf-pppext-pptp-02.txt,   Ascend   Communications,
     Microsoft, Copper Mountain Networks, U.S. Robotics, July 1997.

     [4] G. Zorn.  "RADIUS Attributes for Tunnel Protocol Support."  Inter-
     net  draft  (work  in progress), draft-ietf-radius-tunnel-auth-05.txt,
     Microsoft, March 1998.

     [5] B. Aboba, G. Zorn.  "Implementation of PPTP/L2TP  Compulsory  Tun-
     neling  via  RADIUS."  Internet  draft (work in progress), draft-ietf-
     radius-tunnel-imp-03.txt, Microsoft, July 1997.

     [6] S. Bradner.  "Key words for use in RFCs  to  Indicate  Requirement
     Levels." RFC 2119, Harvard University, March 1997.

     [7]  S. Kent, R. Atkinson.  "IP Authentication Header." Internet draft
     (work in  progress),  draft-ietf-ipsec-auth-header-04.txt,  BBN  Corp,
     @Home Network, February 1998.

     [8] R. Thayer, N. Doraswamy, R. Glen.  "IP Security Document Roadmap."
     Internet   draft    (work    in    progress),    draft-ietf-ipsec-doc-
     roadmap-02.txt, Sable, Bay Networks, NIST, November 1997.

     [9]  S. Kent, R. Atkinson.  "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)."
     Internet draft (work in progress), draft-ietf-ipsec-esp-v2-03.txt, BBN
     Corp, @Home Network, February 1998.

     [10]  D. Piper.  "The Internet IP Security Domain of Interpretation of
     ISAKMP." Internet draft (work  in  progress),  draft-ietf-ipsec-ipsec-
     doi-07.txt, Cisco Systems, February 1998.

     [11]  D.  Maughan,  M.  Schertler, M. Schneider, J. Turner.  "Internet
     Security Association and Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP)."   Internet



     Patel & Aboba                                                 [Page 9]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     draft  (work in progress), draft-ietf-ipsec-isakmp-08.txt, NSA, Terisa
     Systems, July 1997.

     [12] D. Harkins, D. Carrel.  "The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)." Inter-
     net  draft  (work in progress), draft-ietf-ipsec-isakmp-oakley-06.txt,
     Cisco Systems, February 1998.

     [13] N. Doraswamy.  "Implementation of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
     with  IP  Security."   Internet  draft (work in progress), draft-ietf-
     ipsec-vpn-00.txt, FTP Software, March 1997.

     [14] R. Moskowitz.  "Network Address Translation issues  with  IPsec."
     Internet   draft   (work   in   progress),  draft-moskowitz-ipsec-vpn-
     nat-00.txt, Chrysler, August 1997.

     [15] H. K. Orman.  "The OAKLEY Key Determination  Protocol."  Internet
     draft  (work  in progress), draft-ietf-ipsec-oakley-02.txt, University
     of Arizona, August 1997.

     [16] A. Shacham, R. Monsour, R. Pereira, M. Thomas.  "IP Payload  Com-
     pression  Protocol (IPCOMP)" Internet draft (work in progress), draft-
     ietf-ippcp-protocol-05.txt, Cisco, Hi/fn, TimeStep,  AltaVista  Inter-
     net, January 1998.

     [17]  W. Simpson.  "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)". RFC 1661, Day-
     dreamer, July 1994.

     [18] D. Rand.  "The PPP Compression Control Protocol (CCP)". RFC 1962,
     Novell, June 1996.

     [19] G. Meyer.  "The PPP Encryption Control Protocol (ECP)". RFC 1968,
     Spider Systems, June 1996.

     [20] K. Sklower, G. Meyer.  "The PPP DES Encryption Protocol  (DESE)".
     RFC 1969, UCB, Spider Systems, June 1996.

     [21]  K. Sklower, G. Meyer.  "The PPP DES Encryption Protocol, Version
     2 (DESE-bis)". Internet draft (work in  progress),  draft-ietf-pppext-
     des-encrypt-v2-01.txt, UCB, Shiva, November 1997.

     [22]  H.  Kummert.   "The PPP Triple-DES Encryption Protocol (3DESE)".
     Internet   draft   (work   in    progress),    draft-ietf-pppext-3des-
     encrypt-00.txt, Nentec GmbH, July 1997.

     [23]  R. Friend.  "PPP Stac LZS Compression Protocol".  RFC 1974, Stac
     Electronics, DayDreamer, August 1996.

     [24] R. Friend.  "PPP Stac LZS Compression Protocol". RFC  1974,  Stac
     Electronics, DayDreamer, August 1996.

     [25] D. Schremp, J. Black, J. Weiss.  "PPP Magnalink Variable Resource
     Compression". RFC 1975, Magnalink, August 1996.

     [26] K. Schneider, S. Venters.  "PPP  for  Data  Compression  in  Data



     Patel & Aboba                                                [Page 10]






     INTERNET-DRAFT                                           11 March 1998


     Circuit-Terminating  Equipment (DCE)".  RFC 1976, ADTRAN, Inc., August
     1996.

     [27] V. Schryver.  "PPP BSD  Compression  Protocol".  RFC  1977,  SGI,
     August 1996.

     [28] D. Rand.  "PPP Predictor Compression Protocol". RFC 1978, Novell,
     August 1996.

     [29] J. Woods.  "PPP  Deflate  Protocol".  RFC  1979,  Proteon,  Inc.,
     August 1996.

     [30] G. Pall.  "Microsoft Point-to-Point Compression (MPPC) Protocol".
     RFC 2118, Microsoft, March 1997.

     [31] D. L. McDonald.  "A Simple IP Security API Extension to BSD Sock-
     ets".  Internet draft (work in progress), draft-mcdonald-simple-ipsec-
     api-01.txt, Sun Microsystems, March 1997.


     11.  Authors' Addresses

     Baiju V. Patel
     Intel Corp
     2511 NE 25th Ave
     Hillsboro, OR 97124

     Phone: 503-264-2422
     Email: baiju.v.patel@intel.com

     Bernard Aboba
     Microsoft Corporation
     One Microsoft Way
     Redmond, WA 98052

     Phone: 425-936-6605
     EMail: bernarda@microsoft.com




















     Patel & Aboba                                                [Page 11]



