
                                                                
                                    Jean Philippe Vasseur (Editor) 
                                                      Zafar Ali 
                                                  Siva Sivabalan    Formatted:
                                             Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                               
IETF Internet Draft 
Expires: July, 2005                                                
                                                          January, 2005 
 
 
                                
              draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt 
 
 
              Definition of an RRO node-id subobject 
 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable patent 
or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, and any of 
which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668. 
 
Working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
 
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
 
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 












Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    1 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
Abstract 
 
In the context of MPLS TE Fast Reroute, the Merge Point (MP) address is 
required at the Point of Local Repair (PLR) in order to select a backup 
tunnel intersecting a fast reroutable Traffic Engineering LSP on a 
downstream LSR.  However, existing protocol mechanisms are not 
sufficient to find an MP address in multi-areas or multi-domain routing 
networks. Hence, the current MPLS Fast Reroute mechanism cannot be used 
to protect inter-area or inter-AS TE LSPs from a failure of an ABR 
(Area Border Router) or ASBR (Autonomous System Border Router) 
respectively. Such functionality has been listed as a clear requirement 
in [INTER-AREA-TE-REQS] and [INTER-AS-TE-REQS]. This document specifies 
the use of existing RRO IPv4 and IPv6 subobjects (with a new flag 
defined) to define the node-id subobject in order to solve this issue. 
Note that the MPLS Fast reroute mechanism mentioned in this document 
refers to the "Facility backup" MPLS TE Fast Reroute method. 
 
Table of content 
 
1. Terminology .................................................. 2
2. Introduction ................................................. 3
3. Signaling node-ids in RROs ................................... 5
4. Finding Merge Point .......................................... 6
5. Security Considerations ...................................... 6
6. Intellectual Property Considerations ......................... 6
7. Acknowledgments .............................................. 7
 
 
Conventions used in this document 
 
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
 
 
1.     Terminology 
  
LSR - Label Switch Router 
 
LSP - An MPLS Label Switched Path 
 
PCS - Path Computation Server (may be any kind of LSR (ABR, ...)  
      or a centralized path computation server  
     
PCC - Path Computation Client (any head-end LSR) requesting a path  
      computation of the Path Computation Server.  
     
Local Repair - Techniques used to repair LSP tunnels quickly 
               when a node or link along the LSPs path fails. 
 
Protected LSP - An LSP is said to be protected at a given hop if 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    2 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
                it has one or multiple associated backup tunnels     
                originating at that hop. 
 
Bypass Tunnel - An LSP that is used to protect a set of LSPs 
                passing over a common facility. 
 
Backup Tunnel - The LSP that is used to backup up one of the many 
                LSPs in many-to-one backup. 
 
PLR - Point of Local Repair. The head-end of a backup tunnel or 
      a detour LSP. 
 
MP - Merge Point. The LSR where detour or backup tunnels meet 
     the protected LSP. In case of one-to-one backup, this is where 
     multiple detours converge. A MP may also be a PLR. 
 
Reroutable LSP - Any LSP for with the "Local protection desired" 
                 bit is set in the Flag field of the   
                 SESSION_ATTRIBUTE object of its Path messages. 
 
Inter-AS MPLS TE LSP: TE LSP whose Head-end LSR and Tail-end LSR do  
not reside within the same Autonomous System (AS) or both Head-end  
LSR and Tail-end LSR are in the same AS but the TE tunnel  
transiting path may be across different ASes 
 
Interconnect or ASBR Routers:  Routers used to connect to another AS of 
a different or the same Service Provider via one or more Inter-AS 
links.  
 
2.     Introduction 
 
MPLS Fast Reroute (FRR) ([FAST-REROUTE]) is a fast recovery local 
protection technique used to protect Traffic Engineering LSPs from 
link/SRLG/node failure.  One or more backup tunnels are pre-established 
to protect against the failure of a link/node/SRLG. In case of failure, 
every protected TE LSP traversing the failed resource is rerouted onto 
the appropriate backup tunnels in 10s of msecs. 
 
There are a couple of requirements on the backup tunnel path. At least, 
a backup tunnel should not pass through the element it protects. 
Additionally, a primary tunnel and its associated backup tunnel should 
intersect at least at two points (nodes): Point of Local Repair (PLR) 
and Merge Point (MP). The former should be the head-end LSR of the 
backup tunnel, and the latter should be the tail-end LSR of the backup 
tunnel. The PLR is where FRR is triggered when link/node/SRLG failure 
happens.  
 
There are different methods for computing paths for backup tunnels at a 
given PLR. Specifically, a user can statically configure one or more 
backup tunnels at the PLR, with explicit path or the PLR can be 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    3 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
configured to automatically compute a backup path or to send a path 
computation request to a PCS (which can be an LSR or an off-line tool). 
 
Consider the following scenario (figure 1) 
 
Assumptions: 
- A multi-area network made of three areas: 0, 1 and 2. 
- A fast reroutable TE LSP T1 (TE LSP signaled with the "local 
Protection desired" bit set in the SESSION-ATTRIBUTE object or the FRR 
object) from R0 to R3 
- A backup tunnel B1 from R1 to R2, not traversing ABR1, and following 
the R1-ABR3-R2 path. R1 reroutes any protected TE LSP traversing ABR1 
onto the backup tunnel B1 in case of ABR1's failure. 
 
           <--- area 1 --><---area 0---><---area 2---> 
              R0-----R1-ABR1--R2------ABR2--------R3                     Formatted:
                     \        / 
                      \ ABR3 / 
 
Figure 1: Use of Fast Reroute to protect against an ABR failure with 
MPLS Traffic Engineering Fast Reroute 
 
When T1 is first signaled, the PLR R1 needs to dynamically select an 
appropriate backup tunnel intersecting T1 on a downstream LSR. However, 
existing protocol mechanisms are not sufficient to unambiguously find 
the MP address in a network with inter-area or inter-AS traffic 
engineering (although the example above was given in the context of 
multi-area networks, a similar reasoning applies to TE LSP spanning 
multiple ASes). This document addresses these limitations.  
 
R1 needs to ensure the following:  
 
  1. Backup tunnel intersects with the primary tunnel at the MP (and 
     thus has a valid MP address), e.g., in Figure 1, R1 needs to 
     determine that T1 and B1 share the same MP node R2, 
 
  2. Backup tunnel satisfies the primary LSP's request with respect to 
     the bandwidth protection request (i.e., bandwidth guaranteed for 
     the primary tunnel during failure), and the type of protection 
     (preferably, protecting against a node failure versus a link 
     failure), as specified in [FAST-REROUTE]. 
 
A PLR can make sure that condition (1) is met by examining the Record 
Route Object (RRO) of the primary tunnel to see if any of the addresses 
specified in the RRO is attached to the tail-end of the backup tunnel. 
As per [RSVP-TE], the addresses specified in the RRO IPv4 or IPv6 
subobjects sent in Resv messages can be node-ids and/or interface 
addresses. Hence, in Figure 1, router R2 may specify interface 
addresses in the RROs for T1 and B1. Note that these interface 
addresses are different in this example.  
 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    4 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
The problem of finding the MP using the interface addresses or node-ids 
can be easily solved in a single area (OSPF_)/level (IS-IS). 
Specifically, in the case of single area/level, the PLR has the 
knowledge of all the interfaces attached to the tail-end of the backup 
tunnel. This information is available in PLR's IGP topology database. 
Thus, the PLR can determine whether a backup tunnel intersecting a 
protected TE LSP on a downstream node exists and can also find the MP 
address regardless of how the addresses contained in the RRO IPv4 or 
IPv6 subobjects are specified (i.e., whether using the interface 
addresses or the node IDs). However, such routing information is not 
available in multi-area and inter-AS traffic engineering environments. 
Hence, unambiguously making sure that condition (1) above is met with 
inter-area TE and inter-AS traffic-engineering TE LSPs is not possible 
with existing mechanisms.  
 
In this document, we define extensions to and describe the use of RSVP 
[RSVP, RSVP-TE] to solve the above-mentioned problem.  
 
3.     Signaling node-ids in RROs 
 
As mentioned above, the limitation that we need to address is the 
generality of the contents of the RRO IPv4 and IPv6 subobjects, as 
defined in [RSVP-TE].[RSVP-TE] defines the IPv4 and IPv6 RRO subobjects 
along with two flags (namely the ôLocal Protection Availableö and 
ôLocal protection in useö bits). Moreover, other bits have been 
specified in [FAST-REROUTE] and [SOFT-PREEMPTION]. 
 
In this document, we define the following new flag: 
 
Node-id: 0x20 
 
      When set, this indicates that the address specified in the 
      RRO's IPv4 or IPv6 subobject is a node-id address, which refers 
      to the "Router Address" as defined in [OSPF-TE], or "Traffic 
      Engineering Router ID" as defined in [ISIS-TE]. A node MUST use 
      the same address consistently. In other words, once an address 
      is used in RRO's IPv4 or IPv6 subobject, it should always be 
      used for the lifetime of the LSP. 
 
An IPv4 or IPv6 RRO subobject with the node-id flag set is also called 
a node-id subobject. The problem of finding a MP address in a network 
with inter-area or inter-AS traffic engineering is solved by inserting 
a node-id subobject (an RRO "IPv4" and "IPv6" sub-object with the 0x20 
flag set).  
       
An implementation may either decide to:  
 
1) Add the node-id subobject in an RSVP Resv message and, when 
required, also add another IPv4/IPv6 subobject to record interface 
address. 
 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    5 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
Example: a fast reroutable TE LSP would have in the RRO object carried 
in Resv message two subobjects: a node-id subobject and a label 
subobject. If recording the interface address is required, then an 
additional IPv4/IPv6 subobject is added.  
 
2) Add an IPv4/IPv6 subobject recording the interface address and, when 
required, add a node-id subobject in the RRO object. 
 
Example: an inter-area/inter-AS fast reroutable TE LSP would have in 
the RRO object carried in Resv message three subobjects: an IPv4/IPv6 
subobject recording interface address, a label subobject and a node-id 
subobject. 
 
Note also, that the node-id subobject may have other application than 
Fast Reroute backup tunnel selection. Moreover, it is RECOMMENDED that 
an LSR recording a node-id address in an IPv4/IPv6 RRO sub-object also 
set the Node-id flag. 
 
4.     Finding Merge Point  
 
Two cases should be considered: 
 
- case 1: the backup tunnel destination is the MP's node-id. Then a PLR 
can find the MP and suitable backup tunnel by simply comparing the 
backup tunnel's destination address with the node-id included in the 
RRO of the primary tunnel.  
- case 2: the backup tunnel terminates at an address different than the 
MP's node-id. Then a node-id subobject MUST also be included in the RRO 
object of the backup tunnel. A PLR can find the MP and suitable backup 
tunnel by simply comparing the node-ids present in the RRO objects of 
both the primary and backup tunnels. 
 
When both IPv4 node-id and IPv6 node-id sub-objects are present, a PLR 
may use any or both of them in finding the MP address.  
 
5.     Security Considerations 
 
This document does not introduce new security issues. The security 
considerations pertaining to [RSVP] and [RSVP-TE] remain relevant. 
 
6.     Intellectual Property Considerations 
 
The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain 
to the implementation or use of the technology described in this 
document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or 
might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any 
effort to identify any such rights. Information on the IETF's 
procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and standards-
related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of claims of 
rights made available for publication and any assurances of licenses to 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    6 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general 
license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by 
implementors or users of this specification can be obtained from the 
IETF Secretariat. 
 
The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights 
which may cover technology that may be required to practice this 
standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
Director. 
 
The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in 
regard to some or all of the specification contained in this document.  
For more information consult the online list of claimed rights. 
 
7.     Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to acknowledge input and helpful comments from Carol 
Iturralde, Anca Zamfir, Reshad Rahman, Rob Goguen, Philip Matthews and 
Adrian Farrel. 
 
Normative References 
 
[RFC2119]Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
 
[RFC3667]Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 3667, 
February 2004. 
 
[RFC3668]Bradner, S., Ed., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004. 
 
[RSVP] Braden, et al, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) - Version 
1, Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 
 
[RSVP-TE] Awduche, et al, "Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 
3209, December 2001. 
 
Informative references 
 
[FAST-REROUTE] Ping Pan, et al, "Fast Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for 
LSP Tunnels", draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-07.txt. Work in 
progress. 
 
[OSPF-TE] Katz et al., ôTraffic Engineering (TE) Extensions to OSPF  
Version 2ö, RFC3630.  
    
[ISIS-TE] Smit et al., ôIntermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-
IS) - Extensions for Traffic Engineering (TE)IS-IS extensions for 
Traffic Engineeringö, RFC3784.  
 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    7 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
[INTER-AREA-TE-REQS] Le Roux, Vasseur, Boyle et al., ôRequirements for 
Inter-Area MPLS Traffic Engineeringö, draft-ietf-tewg-interarea-mpls-te-
req-03.txt. Work in progress. 
 
[INTER-AS-TE-REQS] Zhang, Vasseur et al, "MPLS Inter-AS Traffic 
Engineering requirements", draft-tewg-interas-te-req-09.txt. Work in 
progress. 
 
[INTER-DOMAIN-SIG] Ayyangar and Vasseur, "Inter domain GMPLS Traffic 
Engineering - RSVP-TE extensionsö, draft-ayyangar-ccamp-inter-domain-
rsvp-te-01.txt. Work in progress. 
 
[LOOSE-PATH-REOPT] Vasseur et al. "Reoptimization of MPLS 
Traffic Engineering loosely routed LSP", <draft-ietf-ccamp-loose-path-
reopt-00.txt>. Work in progress. 
 
[SOFT-PREEMPTION] Meyer, Maddux, Vasseur, Villamizar and Birjandi. ôMPLS 
Traffic Engineering Soft preemptionö, draft-ietf-mpls-soft-preemption-
03.txt. Work in progress. 
 
Authors' Addresses: 
 
Jean Philippe Vasseur 
Cisco Systems, Inc. 
300 Beaver Brook Road 
Boxborough , MA - 01719                                              
USA 
Email: jpv@cisco.com                                                 
                                                                  
Zafar Ali                                                         
Cisco Systems, Inc.                                               
100 South Main St. #200 
Ann Arbor, MI 48104 
USA 
zali@cisco.com 
 
Siva Sivabalan  
Cisco Systems, Inc.  
2000 Innovation Drive                                             
Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8                                          
Canada  
msiva@cisco.com                                                   
                  
                                                                  
Full Copyright Statement                                          
 
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject     
to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    8 
 

 
draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-03.txt                    January 2005 
 
 
                                                               
                                                               
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 






































 
Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan                                    9 
 

