


SIPPING Working Group                                       S. Niccolini
Internet-Draft                                                       NEC
Intended status: Informational                                S. Salsano
Expires: January 9, 2009                       Univ. of Rome Tor Vergata
                                                            H. Izumikawa
                                                               KDDI Labs
                                                               R. Lillie
                                                           Motorola Labs
                                                               L. Veltri
                                                          Univ. of Parma
                                                                Y. Kishi
                                                               KDDI Labs
                                                            July 8, 2008


  Requirements for vertical handover of multimedia sessions using SIP
                 draft-niccolini-sipping-siphandover-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 9, 2009.

Abstract

   A vertical handover occurs in heterogeneous networks when a session
   media is moved among different access network technologies within the
   same device.  This document analyses the issue of handling the



Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


   vertical handover using the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [1].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Scenario for vertical handover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Requirements for Vertical Handovers  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Taxonomy of possible approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12

































Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


1.  Introduction

   Let us consider a terminal (hereafter named "Mobile Host" or MH),
   possibly equipped with different network interfaces (i.e. a subset of
   WiFi, Bluetooth, GPRS, 3G, fixed Ethernet, WiMax).  A user will be
   able to access the Internet using the same MH.  This seems to be the
   trend for the foreseeable future, i.e. we will be surrounded by a
   heterogeneous network where several access networks (ANs) supplement
   each other.  Each interface of the MH will receive an IP address from
   the corresponding AN.  Therefore the mobile host will have a set of
   different IP addresses and will have to select which one to use when
   running multimedia sessions with correspondent terminals.  While the
   mobile host moves, the "selected" interface may become not available
   due to loss of signal, or could suffer high packet loss or packet
   delay.  Under these circumstances, the MH would like to switch to
   another interface (using a different IP address) keeping the running
   sessions active, and might adjust the service quality to be optimal
   depending on circumstances.  Even with a single interface the
   connected access network can become not available anymore and the
   terminal could connect to another Access Network (in this case on the
   same technology), which provides a different IP address.  If the
   switch to the new AN is fast enough, the MH could also be interested
   in keeping the running session active.

   This problem has been addressed with different approaches.  One
   approach is based on "network level" mobility solutions like Mobile
   IP or MobileIPv6.  Another approach is based on "application level"
   mobility solution.  The main advantage of application level mobility
   solutions is that they do not require any support at the network
   level from the different access networks, which only needs to provide
   plain IP connectivity.  Application level mobility can conduct
   flexible mobility management, which is another advantage.  This
   document details the issues and the requirements regarding an
   "application level" mobility solution, in particular considering the
   solution that exploits the SIP protocol.  The aim of SIP based
   application level mobility is to keep active a multimedia session
   that has been established with SIP, while the terminal switches from
   one network interface to another or it changes IP address on the same
   interface.


2.  Terminology

   This section presents a few terms used throughout the document.

   o  Vertical handover: A vertical handover refers to changing a MH's
      point of attachment between different types of access networks,
      e.g.  GPRS and WiFi.  The feature of a vertical handover is that



Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


      the transmission rate and latency may well differ significantly
      before and after handover, respectively.

   o  Network level mobility: Network level mobility refers to managing
      an MH's mobility at the network layer.  Mobile IP (MIP) [2] and
      Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [3] are well-known as network level mobility.
      One of the merits of network level mobility is making the the
      mobility of an MH transparent to an application by keeping the
      same IP address.  This type of mobility management is useful to
      run existing applications.  However, an ubiquitous deployment of
      MIP/MIPv6 is needed if an MH's mobility is globally supported.  In
      addition, it is difficult for an application to recognize an
      available bandwidth and delay before or during handoff and to
      adjust a transmitting rate or buffer space to a target network
      since network level mobility makes the MH's mobility transparent
      to the upper layer.

   o  Application level mobility: Application level mobility refers to
      managing an MH's mobility at the application layer.  SIP mobility
      [7] is well-known as application level mobility.  Application
      lavel mobility has its merits in terms of its ease of deployment.
      This does not require whole networks to be changed.  Therefore,
      the mobility support can be more and more rapidly deployable using
      application level mobility.  Furthermore, SIP has an affinity for
      applications, which can make handoff more flexible.  The feature
      can fit heterogeneous networks where an available bandwidth and
      delay may well differ significantly among access networks.


3.  Scenario for vertical handover

   The figure below shows a Mobile Host that wants to communicate with a
   "Correspondent Host" (CH).  The Mobile Host can connect to different
   Access Networks (AN1, AN2, AN3 are represented in the figure).  The
   different ANs could have different wireless or wired techologies and
   difference bandwidth/delay, and the Mobile Host could be connected to
   more than one Access Network at the same time if it has more than one
   physical network interface.  Note that the Access Networks can
   provide public or private addresses to the mobile host (in most
   typical scenarios the Access Networks are likely to provide private
   IP addresses).  For example in the figure below AN 1 and AN 3 provide
   a private address (as shown by the NAT box), while AN2 provides a
   public address.  Similarly, the Correspondent Host can have a public
   address (like CH 1 in the figure) or a private IP address (like CH 2
   in the figure).






Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


                            +-------+
                            |  AN1  |-----+
                        ----|       | NAT |                +--------+
                       /    +-------+-----+                |Corresp.|
          +-------+                         __________     | Host 1 |
          | Mobile|         +-------+      /          \    +--------+
          | Host  |         |  AN2  |     /            \
          +-------+     ----|       |    |   INTERNET   |
                            + - - - +     \            /
                                           \__________/
                       \    +-------+                      +--------+
                        ----|  AN3  |-----+          +-----|Corresp.|
                            |       | NAT |          | NAT | Host 2 |
                            +-------+-----+          +-----+--------+


           Figure 1 - Network architecture for vertical handover

   The goal of the handover mechanism is to let the MH roam among
   different Access Networks in a seamless way.  The mobility management
   mechanism should consider the roaming of the MH both "off call" and
   during an active call.  The MH should be able to dynamically choose
   among the available ANs the one that better suits its needs (e.g.
   perceived quality of media flows and cost) in a given moment.  It is
   important to notice that this draft does not address the criteria and
   tools for selection of the "best" access network, it only details the
   issues and the requirements regarding the mobility management and
   handover execution mechanims.


4.  Requirements for Vertical Handovers

   In this session we discuss a set of requirements that a mobility
   management solution based on SIP should have.  The requirements are
   divided into two types, i.e., mandatory requirements and optional
   requirements.

   Mandatory Requirements

   o  The solution should be as fast as possible.  The goal is to
      provide a "seamless" handover with no perception from the user
      point of view.  If it is not possible to provide a truly seamless
      solution, the impairment should be minimized.

   o  The handover solution should not require a support in the
      different access network.  The access networks are only required
      to provide IP connectivity (either with public or private
      addresses) for the forwarding of signalling SIP packets and media



Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


      RTP packets.

   o  Correspondent Host (CH) (which in general are not moving, but they
      are communicating with a moving terminal) should be an basic User
      Agent (UA) which only has basic SIP capabilities.  If this
      requirement is not fulfilled there is the need to change all SIP
      terminals to support the handovers of Mobile Host.

   o  The handover solution should be compatible with NATted networks,
      i.e. it should interoperate gracefully with NAT traversal
      mechanisms for SIP signaling and for session media flows.

   Optional Desirable Requirements

   o  The solution may support a "forward handover" (i.e. in which all
      the procedure is performed on the new target Access Network).
      This is important if the connection on the old Access Network is
      suddenly broken.  If possible (i.e. if the connection with the old
      access network does not break suddenly) the solution could exploit
      the communication on the old access network in order to better
      control the handover procedure.  Soft handovers (i.e. where the
      two active connections can be exploited in the same moment to send
      the session data) could be exploited.

   o  The switch of the "active" interface during a SIP transaction may
      be supported.  As an example the terminal should be able to send
      (receive) an INVITE on the currenlty active interface, switch to
      another interface and receive (send) the 200 OK on the other
      interface.

   o  Decoupling of "user level" registration and mobility and "terminal
      level" mobility may be allowed.  As an example a user with AOR
      "sip:user@domain.com" should be allowed to use different terminals
      (i.e.  Mobile Hosts supporting the handover solutions as well as
      normal SIP terminals).  These terminals can be used in sequence or
      at the same time depending on the capability of his own "home"
      registrar/proxy server, and this is independent of the vertical
      handover solution which takes care of the mobility of only one
      specific Mobile Host.  A concrete example for this requirement is
      to support a user "sip:user@domain.com" who owns three Mobile
      Hosts (one could be his phone, one his PDA, one his laptop) and
      two fixed terminals (his desktop and his home VoIP phone).  The
      vertical handover solution takes care of the mobility of the
      phone, PDA and laptop as three separate Mobile Hosts (which can
      also be all active in the same time).

   o  Providing privacy with respect to user location and user movements
      would be preferable.



Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


   o  Existing user agents for the Mobile Host may inter-work with the
      handover procedure without the need to be updated.  It would be
      desirable to reuse existing SIP clients (User Agents) without
      updating them to support the terminal mobility.

   o  It is desirable that the service quality is adjusted to optimal
      levels according to the access network after every handover.

   o  Non-RTP media such as IM or file transfer using MSRP may be
      supported.


5.  Taxonomy of possible approaches

   The application level terminal mobility solutions based on SIP can be
   classified in "Correspondent host based" or "Intermediate Element
   based".  In addition, a session (service) mobility is introduced just
   for reference.

   o  Correspondent Host based terminal mobility solutions

   RFC 3261 [1] has a built in mechanism for mobility management.  The
   "off-call" mobility management consists in the Registration process.
   The "on-call" handover is performed using RE-INVITE messages towards
   the Corresponding Node [7].  No intermediate entities are directly
   involved in the handover process.  This has the advantage that no
   additional procedure for the handover needs to be implemented in
   network elements, and that there is no additional load in the
   networks due to the handovers.  On the other hand, the procedure
   requirese that the Corresponding Node (which in general is not a
   mobile host) supports the RE-INVITE mechanism.  A second drawback is
   that the handover delay is directly proportional to the end-to-end
   delay, and this could be higher with respect to the delay occurring
   between a mobile node and an intermediate entity.

   o  Intermediate Element based terminal mobility solutions

   In order to overcome the drawbacks of the Correspondent Host based
   solutions, "intermediate" entities that take an active role in the
   handover can be introduced.  Several proposals can be found in the
   literature, but to our knowledge no internet draft has been proposed
   in this respect.  Hereafter we mention some of the existing
   proposals.  In [6], intermediate entities are used only to speed up
   the handover process, but the handover procedure still involves the
   Corresponding Node as well.  A similar approach is followed in [11],
   which also deals with location based selection of the "optimal"
   intermediate entity and of wireless access points.  In [10] the
   intermediate entities fully handle the user mobility, hiding the



Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


   mobility to the Corresponding Nodes.  In [12], the intermediate
   entities are used to support MH's mobility as well as adjusting
   service quality to the MH's target access network.

   o  Session (service) mobility solutions

   Concerning session (service) mobility using SIP, [7] has examined
   through the use of both Third-Party Call Control (3PCC) [4] as well
   as SIP's REFER [5] method as possible solutions.  In addition, more
   recently, [8] has expanded upon this work and demonstrated the
   suitability of employing either 3PCC or SIP's REFER request as
   suitable mechanisms for session (service) mobility between mobile
   devices.

   Although such session (service) mobility [7] [8] can maintain a media
   session even while changing terminal through the use of 3PCC [4] or
   SIP's REFER [5] method, there can be a service interruption during
   the hard swithing (handover).  Therefore, it is necessary to look
   into a fast/seamless handover for SIP-based terminal mobility where
   the existing media session seamlessly continues on the same device
   after a handover.


6.  Conclusions

   As a concluding remark, we believe that it is important to consider a
   new solution for vertical handover that meets the set of requirements
   that has been analysed.  This solution will help providing seamless
   handover to SIP based application with a better performance and
   overcoming some shortcomings of the current solution based on [1].


7.  Security considerations

   The security considerations should be taken into account in the
   design of the handover solution, so that no new additional security
   issues will be introduced.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


9.  References






Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


9.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]   Perkins, C., "Mobility Support in IPv6", RFC 3344, August 2002.

   [3]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "IP Mobility Support
         for IPv4", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [4]   Rosenberg, J., Peterson, J., Schulzrinne, H., and G. Camarillo,
         "Best Current Practices for Third Party Call Control (3pcc) in
         the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", BCP 85, RFC 3725,
         April 2004.

   [5]   Sparks, R., "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Refer
         Method", RFC 3515, April 2003.

9.2.  Informative References

   [6]   Banerjee, N. and et. al, "Seamless SIP-Based Mobility for
         Multimedia Applications", IEEE Network , March/April 2006.

   [7]   Schulzrinne, H. and E. Wedlund, "Application-Layer Mobility
         Using SIP", ACM Mobile Computing and Communications
         Review Vol.4, No.3, July 2000.

   [8]   Shacham, R., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Session
         Mobility", draft-shacham-sipping-session-mobility-05 (work in
         progress), November 2007.

   [9]   Salsano, S., "Architecture and testbed implementation of
         vertical handovers based on SIP Session Border Controllers",
         Wireless Personal Communications, Springer , November 2007.

   [10]  Salsano, S., "SIP-based Mobility Management in Next Generation
         Networks", IEEE Wireless Communication , April 2008.

   [11]  Tsiakkouris, S. and I. Tsiakkouris, "PROFITIS: architecture for
         location-based vertical handovers supporting real-time
         applications", 25th IEEE International Performance, Computing,
         and Communications Conference (IPCCC 2006), April 2006.

   [12]  Izumikawa, H., Fukuhara, T., Matsunaka, T., and K. Sugiyama,
         "User-centric Seamless Handover Scheme for Realtime
         Applications", IEEE Internation Symposium on Personal, Indoor
         and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC'07), September 2007.



Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Saverio Niccolini
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 43 42 118
   Email: saverio.niccolini@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Stefano Salsano
   DIE, University of Rome "TorVergata"
   Via Politecnico, 1
   Rome  00156
   Italy

   Phone: +39 06 7259 7770
   Email: stefano.salsano@uniroma2.it
   URI:   http://netgroup.uniroma2.it/Stefano_Salsano


   Haruki Izumikawa
   KDDI Labs
   2-1-15 Ohara
   Fujimino  356-8502
   Japan

   Phone: +81-49-278-7866
   Email: izumikawa@kddilabs.jp


   Ross Lillie
   Motorola Labs
   1301 East Algonquin Road, IL02/2240
   Schaumburg, IL  60196
   US

   Phone: +1 847 576 0012
   Email: ross.lillie@motorola.com









Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


   Luca Veltri
   DII, University of Parma
   Parco Area delle Scienze 181/A
   Parma  43100
   Italy

   Phone: +39 0521 90 5768
   Email: luca.veltri@unipr.it
   URI:   http://www.tlc.unipr.it/veltri


   Yoji Kishi
   KDDI Labs
   2-1-15 Ohara
   Fujimino  356-8502
   Japan

   Email: kishi@kddilabs.jp

































Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         SIP-based vertical handover             July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Niccolini, et al.        Expires January 9, 2009               [Page 12]


