Network Working Group                                            L. Zhou
Internet-Draft                                                  J. Huang
Expires: November 29, 2014                          SouthEast University
                                                            May 28, 2014


     The Location Privacy of Wireless Sensor Networks: Attacks and
                            Countermeasures
                        draft-zhou-rrg-lp-wsn-00

Abstract

   With the related applications of wireless sensor networks getting
   into our lives quickly, the research of WSN is growing more and more
   necessary.  The most significant problem which threatens the
   successful deployment of sensor systems is privacy, there are many
   protocols providing the security of news content for the WSNs.
   However, due to the open feature of sensor networks, context
   information is still in an exposed state, which makes the network be
   vulnerable to traffic analysis attack and hop by hop tracing back
   packet attack.  Thus location privacy protection programs have been
   proposed.  In this paper, we analyze and compare the existing major
   schemes comprehensively, meanwhile illustrate their theoretical
   models, principles and the advantages and disadvantages in detail.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 29, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  The Attack Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  The Model of Source Attackers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  The Model of Sink Attackers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Location Privacy Protection Agreements  . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.   Source Location Privacy Protection Protocols . . . . . .   5
       3.1.1.   Phantom Routing (PhR)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       3.1.2.   Protocol Using Source-based Restricted Flooding
               (PUSBRF)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.   Sink Location Privacy Protection Protocols . . . . . . .   7
       3.2.1.   Location-privacy Routing Protocol (LPR)  . . . . . .   8
       3.2.2.  Differential Enforced Fractal Propagation (DEFP)  . .   8
     3.3.  Both Location Privacy Protection Protocols  . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Performance Comparison  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Security Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  IANA Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   With the rise of Internet of things, wireless sensor network (WSN)
   which is an integral part of Internet of things have a very broad
   application prospects.

   WSNs consist of a large number of micro sensor nodes, those nodes are
   capable of sensing information, computing and communicating.
   However, due to the low cost of these nodes, the storage capacity of
   battery is small, the computing capability of node processors is low,
   and the communication of wireless communication device is limited.
   Overall wireless sensor networks have the following characteristics:
   large-scale, self-organizing, multi-hop routing, dynamic, resource-
   constrained and applications related.  These features make the
   wireless sensor networks have broad application prospects in
   military, environment, medical treatment, smart home.




Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   Wireless sensor networks could be used to collect sensitive
   information or deployed in hostile or unprotected environment, which
   make protecting the privacy of sensor nodes be crucial in the current
   WSNs, the privacy issues in WSNs are divided into two categories:
   content privacy and context privacy.  In order to solve the problem
   of content privacy, for now, many encryption and authentication
   mechanisms[RFC4948][RFC4949]have been proposed and used, and can
   basically meet the corresponding requirements.  But due to the open
   feature of WSNs, the exposure of context information can cause the
   user's secret leak to the attacker, especially attacker can locate
   the source node or destination node (base station) through traffic
   analysis and hop track packet stream.  The location of source node
   and base station are very sensitive in many WSN applications such as
   in precious animals detection system, the position of animals (source
   node) can't be exposed to illegal hunters; in battlefield information
   collection system, the position of soldier (sink node) who accepts a
   variety of information can't be exposed to the enemy.  Because of the
   importance and necessity of location privacy, this paper has a
   research on principles, advantages and disadvantages of current main
   location privacy protection agreement (PhR[PhR](GROW[GROW], PRLA
   [PRLA]), PUSBRF[PUSBRF], LPR [LPR], LPSS[LPSS], DEFP[DEFP]).

   Based on the property of object which needs to be protected, this
   paper divides the possible attackers into two categories: the
   attackers who attack source node and the attackers who attack sink
   node, and establishes corresponding models according to their
   individual features.  According to the attacker models we propose
   appropriate protection agreements and discuss their advantages and
   disadvantages.

   The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

   (1) We divide possible attackers into two categories based on the
   property of object which needs to be protected for the first time,
   and establish the corresponding attack models;

   (2) We put forward the corresponding settlement agreements in
   accordance with attack models on the basis of scientific ideas that
   discovering problems then solving them, meanwhile we conduct
   comprehensive analyses and comparisons on the main location privacy
   protection agreements systematically for the first time;

   (3) We summarize the maximum intensity attacker that each privacy
   protection agreement can handle by analyzing and comparing, then
   conclude the respective applicable scenario of each agreement.






Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


2.  The Attack Models

   The objects protected in WSNs are usually the source node (such as in
   precious animals detection system, the position of the node which has
   monitored animals can't be exposed to illegal hunters) and the sink
   node (such as in battlefield information collection system, the
   location of the last node which is responsible for transferring a
   variety of information to the soldiers can't be exposed to the
   enemy).  According to the property of object which needs to be
   protected we divide possible attackers into two categories: the
   attackers who attack source node (source attackers) and the attackers
   who attack sink node (sink attackers).  This article assumes that two
   types of attackers both have the following characteristics: &#9312;
   attackers have excellent hardware, sufficient storage space and
   powerful computation ability; &#9313; attackers can detect traffic
   only in one region, but are not capable of decrypting data packets
   [PRLA]; &#9314; attackers can only trace the nodes sending data
   packets but the nodes receiving data packets.

2.1.  The Model of Source Attackers

   The process of attacker tracing back source node's location is
   described as follows: the attacker starts monitoring at the sink
   node, when monitored a message, he can deduce that the signal is
   issued by node A through wireless signal positioning device, then
   moves immediately to node A to continue to wait, when a new message
   received he determines that it was issued by node B and then quickly
   moves to node B, repeat this process can trace to the location of the
   source node.

   This paper divides the source attackers into two categories based on
   the sources attackers' tracking method: the patient source attacker
   and the careful source attacker.

   The model of patient source attacker is described as follows: the
   attacker follows a simple and natural attack strategy: he starts on
   the position of sink node (base station) to wait until a new message
   is heard, and then immediately move to the node that generated the
   message, repeat this process until the location of the source node is
   traced.

   The model of cautious source attacker is described as follows:
   because some privacy protection technology [3] could lead an attacker
   to strand at a location remote from the real source node, the
   strategy of cautious source attacker is limiting the eavesdropping
   time in one position, if he has not received any new messages within
   a specified time interval, he thinks that he was misled to current




Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   position, and then hops back to the previous position to continue
   listening.

2.2.  The Model of Sink Attackers

   Sink attackers determine which nodes are on the transmission path
   according to the time sequence of date packet transmission, then
   mobile hop by hop, and finally get to the sink node.  The process of
   attacker tracking sink node's position is described as follows:
   assuming the attacker listening for message transmitting within the
   range of one hop at node C, he monitors that node C sends a data
   packet at first, then node B transmits a data packet subsequently,
   the attacker moves to the node B immediately and infers that the
   transmission path at this time is C to B, according to this method,
   the attacker tracks the location of the nodes which are one hop from
   the base station as having captured the sink node.

   Similarly sink attackers are also divided into two categories: the
   patient sink attacker and the cautious sink attacker.  The principle
   of their attacker model is similar to the principle of corresponding
   source attacker model, not repeat them.

3.  Location Privacy Protection Agreements

   In order to prevent these attackers from destroying the location
   privacy security of wireless sensor networks, a series of security
   protocols are proposed, such as: phantom routing (PhR), source
   location privacy preservation protocol in wireless sensor networks
   using source-based restricted flooding (PUSBRF), location-privacy
   routing protocol (LPR), location privacy support scheme (LPSS),
   differential enforced fractal propagation (DEFP).  This section will
   classify these main protocols and describe the principle of each
   protocol in detail.

   In this paper, we divide the main privacy and security protocols
   which are mentioned above into three categories: source location
   privacy protection protocols, sink location privacy protection
   protocols and both location privacy protection protocol.  Source
   location privacy protection protocols include: PhR, PUSBRF; sink
   location privacy protection protocols include: LPR, DEFP; and both
   location privacy protection protocol includes LPSS.

3.1.  Source Location Privacy Protection Protocols








Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


3.1.1.  Phantom Routing (PhR)

   Take the panda-hunter model[PhR] for example, the description of
   phantom routing is decribed as follows: in PhR , the transmission of
   each information goes through two phases:&#9312; the random walk
   phase , may be a pure random walk or a directional walk (based on
   sector or hop count between the node and the sink node[PhR]);&#9313;
   subsequent flooding/single-path routing phase, which will send the
   information to the sink.  When the source node sends a message, the
   message is unicasted Hwalk hops randomly, then pass it to the base
   station based on the baseline (probability) flooding[SECH]or single-
   path routing[PhR].  Because of PhR, after an attacker intercepted
   messages i he will wait a long time before receiving the next message
   i+1, when he finally receives the message i+1, the instant sender of
   this message may lead the attacker to the position which is away from
   the true source node.

   On the basis of phantom routing (PhR) also proposed the phantom
   routing with location angle (PRLA)[SECE], PRLA is consist of three
   phases:&#9312; the sink node floods a query message in the whole
   network, so that each node can creates the shortest path to the sink
   and divides its neighboring nodes into two direction collections
   according to the distance between neighboring nodes and the
   sink;&#9313; the source node produces a limited flooding with the
   range of random walk, this process makes each node can get the
   inclination angle of respective neighboring nodes and calculate the
   transmitting messages possibility of each neighboring node;&#9314;
   the source node sends date packets to the sink node, each data packet
   will be transmitted Hw hops in a random walk way based on the
   inclination angle, then along the shortest route path goes to the
   sink node from the phantom source node.

   PRLA is essentially an improvement of PhR's random walk phase, to a
   degree it avoids the generation of the offset path[PUSBRF], on the
   basis of PhR it further improves the safety time.

   Greedy random walk (GROW) is essentially an improvement of PhR's
   random walk phase too, in GROW, the sensor node each time selects a
   neighboring node from those who did not participate in the random
   walk phase, in this way, random walking is always trying to cover a
   area where hasn't accessed to by greedy strategy[GROW], thereby
   improving the ability of sensor networks against attackers.

3.1.2.  Protocol Using Source-based Restricted Flooding (PUSBRF)

   PUSBRF protocol is consist of four phases:&#9312; network security
   initialization phase;&#9313; source node h hops limited flooding
   phase;&#9314; h hops directional routing phase, the direction of each



Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   hop is selected by the current node based on the minimum hop value
   that its neighboring apart from the source node;&#9315; the shortest
   path routing phase.

   The process of network initialization phase is described as follows:
   complete the establishment of the key, discover the neighboring nodes
   to achieve the information of minimum hop value that each ordinary
   nodes apart from the base station, and each node pre-loads the
   following parameters: the public key (Kpub) used for message
   encryption, the list of neighboring nodes (Tu), hop value h, then
   generate a base-station broadcast in the whole network, the base
   station broadcasts the initialization message BM={BRO_BASE,ID,hop_bs}
   in the entire network, in which BRO_BASE indicates the type of
   messages, ID indicates the identity of the node that sent the
   message, hop_bs indicates the hop count of the message which is
   initially 0., PRLA is consist of three phases:&#9312; the sink node
   floods a query message in the whole network, so that each node can
   creates the shortest path to the sink and divides its neighboring
   nodes into two direction collections according to the distance
   between neighboring nodes and the sink;&#9313; the source node
   produces a limited flooding with the range of random walk, this
   process makes each node can get the inclination angle of respective
   neighboring nodes and calculate the transmitting messages possibility
   of each neighboring node;&#9314; the source node sends date packets
   to the sink node, each data packet will be transmitted Hw hops in a
   random walk way based on the inclination angle, then along the
   shortest route path goes to the sink node from the phantom source
   node.

   The process of the source node h hops limited flooding phase is
   described as follows: it makes the source node realize the broadcast
   in whole network within h hops, each node which is in the rage of h
   hops from the source node gets the minimal distance between itself
   and the source, then in list Tu adds the minimal hop value that the
   neighboring nodes away from the source node and records the value.

   The phantom source nodes generated in h hops directional routing
   phase are far enough away from the real source node and their
   location is diverse.  The shortest path routing achieves transmitting
   packets from the phantom source node to the base station in a
   shortest period of time.

3.2.  Sink Location Privacy Protection Protocols








Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


3.2.1.  Location-privacy Routing Protocol (LPR)

   Because the goal of routing protocols is to transmit a packet along
   the shortest possible path to the destination, the packets'
   forwarding direction is always pointing to the receiver.  Then the
   attacker will determine the wright node which the real package goes
   to according to the general trend of path.  In order to resist this
   kind of problem LPR protocol has been proposed.

   LPR randomizes routing path, so that the forward direction of
   packages does not always point to the receiver.  The route consists
   of two phases: &#9312; each sensor node divides his neighboring nodes
   into two lists: a closer list which is consist of the neighboring
   nodes whose distance to the destination is shorter than its own; a
   further list which is consist of the neighboring nodes whose distance
   to the destination is longer than equal to its own, the specific
   classification criteria refer to the literature [LPR]. &#9313;When a
   sensor node forwards a date packet, he chooses a neighbor node in one
   of the two lists randomly as the next hop node of the package, and
   the selection probability from the further list as the next hop node
   is Pf, so the selection probability from the closer list as the next
   hop node is 1-Pf.

3.2.2.  Differential Enforced Fractal Propagation (DEFP)

   DEFP is a simple distributed algorithm based on DFP[DEFP].  The key
   idea of the program is to leave early packet forwarding nodes have a
   higher chance of false packet transmission in the next phase, at the
   beginning DEFP allocates one vote to every neighboring node.  When a
   node selects one of his neighboring nodes as the next node which is
   false packets forwarded to, the votes of the node increase k.
   According to this approach, after using lottery scheduling algorithm
   [SECH], when a node has forwarded a fake packet to one of its
   neighboring nodes, it will continue to forward other fake packets to
   the same neighboring node with rising probability.

3.3.  Both Location Privacy Protection Protocols

   The program consists of two phases:&#9312; Each sensor node divides
   his neighboring nodes into three sets: a small gradient [SECT]set
   comprised of the neighboring nodes with smaller gradient value; an
   equivalent gradient set comprised of the neighboring nodes with the
   same gradient value; a large gradient comprised of the neighboring
   nodes with larger gradient value. &#9313; When a neighboring node
   transmits a packet, he selects the next hop node from the equivalent
   gradient set with the probability Pi, or selects the next hop node
   from the small gradient set with the probability 1-Pi.  LPSS also can
   be used combine with the fake package strategy.



Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


4.  Performance Comparison

   This section compares the performance of the location privacy
   security protocols mainly by three parameters: security strength
   (safety time), transmission delay, communication overhead.

   (1) Safety time (privacy protection strength): the number of packages
   sent by the source node before the target node exposed to the enemy
   (before hunters capturing the panda or enemy discovering soldiers who
   receive information), the more of packages be sent the longer of
   safety period, conversely the shorter of safety period;

   (2) Energy loss (communication overhead): the average hop value
   through which the data packet sent by the source node eventually
   arrives at the sink node (base station), and the lager of the hop
   value the greeter of communication overhead, conversely the smaller
   of communication overhead;

   (3) Propagation delay (transmission delay): the period in which the
   data packet sent by the source node eventually arrives at the sink
   node (base station), obviously lager of the average hop value the
   longer of transmission delay, conversely the shorter of transmission
   delay.  Combining with the consequence in (2) can easily conclude
   that the communication overhead is proportional to transmission
   delay.

   In order to facilitate the comparison, source location privacy
   protection protocols all use the same simulation configuration: in
   the OMNet[SECT]simulation environment, we distribute 10000 sensor
   nodes uniformly in the network with area of 6000*6000 m2, in which
   the communication radius of each node is 110m.  So the average number
   of neighboring nodes of each node is 8.64, weakly connected nodes
   (node number of neighboring nodes is less than or equal to 3) account
   for only about 1%, the attackers begin tracking from the base
   station.

   The communication overhead is closely related to two parameters: the
   hop value of random walks and the distance between the source node
   and the base station.  When research the changing trend with one
   parameter, we need to assume the other parameter as a fixed value.
   Assume that the distance between the source node and the base station
   are 60 hops, the relationship between communication overhead and hop
   count of random directional walks shows that:&#9312; With the number
   of random directional hops increasing, the communication overhead
   (average transmission delay) of PhR and PUSBRF both increase.  This
   is because with the number of random directional hops increasing,
   date packets need forward more times during random routing phase to
   reach phantom source nodes, however, this phase doesn't make



Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   contribution to pass packets to the base station, thus their
   communication overhead improves.&#9313; When the random directed hop
   value is fixed, the communication overhead of PUSBRF is slightly
   higher, because the directed walk of PhR is based on the number of
   hops between the node to the base station, so PhR only need the base
   station broadcast in the whole network, but from the above mentioned
   phases of PUSBRF protocol we can see, PUSBRF requires not only the
   base station broadcast in the whole network but also needs the source
   node broadcast in the whole network within h hops.

   Make the value of random directional hops as h=15, then the trend of
   the two protocols between the communication overhead and hops from
   the source node to the base station shows that: &#9312; the
   communication overhead (average transmission delay) of PhR and PUSBRF
   both increase with the distance between the source node and the base
   station increasing.  This is because with increasing distance between
   the source node and the base station, the data needs to go through
   more hops to reach the base station.&#9313; when the hop value of two
   protocols between the source node and the base station are the same,
   the communication overhead of them are about the same.

   (3) The security period is closely related to two parameters: the
   value of random directional hops and the distance from the source
   node to the base station.  Assume that the distance between the
   source node and the base station are 60 hops, then the trend of the
   security period and the random directional hop value shows that:
   &#9312; The security period of PhR and PUSBRF both increase with h
   increasing.  This is because the increasing h makes the distance
   between the phantom source nodes generated by two protocols and the
   real source node further, then generates more random paths which make
   the source attackers more difficult to trace. &#9313; When the random
   directional hop value are the same, the security period of PUSBRF is
   much longer than PhR's, this indicates that the safety performance of
   PUSBRF is better than PhR's.  This is because phantom source nodes
   generated by PUSBRF are more diverse geographically than which are
   generated by PhR[PRLA].

   Make the value of random directional hops as h=15, the trend of the
   security period and the distance from the source node to the base
   station shows that: &#9312; With the increasing of the hop count
   between the source node and the base station, the security period of
   PhR and PUSBRF also increases.  This is because when the hop count is
   larger, the more hops that source attackers need to trace back to the
   real source node. &#9313; When the hop count between the source node
   and the base station of two protocols are the same, the safety
   performance of PUSBRF is better than PhR's, indicating that the
   safety performance of PUSBRF better than PhR, the reason is the same
   as above.



Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   The performance comparison of above two protocols and LPSS used with
   fake packets shows that: the safety performance of pure LPSS is
   between PhR and PUSBRF, so are communication overhead and
   transmission delay, when LPSS is used with the false packet strategy,
   the safety time increased substantially and the communication
   overhead becomes larger, but the transmission delay is still close to
   pure LPSS protocol, which is because the transmission paths of true
   packets are the same with pure LPSS, fake packets just used to
   confuse attackers, and don't affect the transmission of true packets.

   In summary, compared to the pure flooding and single- path routing,
   PhR can resist the attacker's packet tracing attack to some extent,
   but the phantom source nodes generated by PhR concentrate in one area
   with high probability; PUSBRF protocol makes up this deficiency, it
   can generate phantom source nodes which are geographical diversity
   with equal probability, and enhance the security of the source node's
   location privacy effectively, however the improvement of security
   period at the cost of increasing of communication overhead, so the
   communication overhead of PUSBRF is more than PhR's, the transmission
   delay is longer too, and can't weigh between the security period and
   the communication overhead; gets the weigh between security period
   and transmission delay by adjusting the value of the parameters Pi.
   When LPSS is used combines with false packet strategy, it can achieve
   impressive safety performance, but at the cost of communication
   overhead increasing.

   The above three protocols can withstand source attackers (including
   patient source attackers and cautious source attackers), and are more
   resistant to cautious source attackers[SECW], their pros and cons
   make we should select the appropriate protocol according to specific
   application requirements.

   The simulation results of location privacy protocols which can
   protect the sink node (base station) are shown as follows:

   In order to facilitate the comparison, sink location privacy
   protection protocols all use the same simulation configuration: in
   the OMNet simulation environment, we distribute 2500 sensor nodes
   uniformly in a sensor network, make the average number of neighboring
   nodes of each node be 8, and attackers began tracking from the source
   node.

   (1) At the packet forwarding phase LPR protocol selects the next hop
   node from the further list with probability Pf, and get the trend
   between the transmission delay and hop count from the source node to
   the sink node of pure LPR when Pf is 0.0%, 25%, 37.5%, meanwhile
   compare with DEFP.  The resulet showa that: &#9312; with the
   increasing of distance between the source node and the base station,



Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   the transmission delay of two protocols both increase.  This is
   because when the source node is far away from the base station, sink
   attackers at the source node need to track more hops to reach the
   base station;&#9313; when the distance from the source node to the
   base station are the same in LPR, the transmission delay increases
   with the increasing of Pf.  This is because Pf is the probability
   with which we select the next hop from the further list, the larger
   of Pf the more likely to choose the next hop from the further list,
   which extends the transmission path;&#9314; when the distance between
   the source node and the base station are the same, the transmission
   delay of LPR is longer than DEFP's.

   (2) The trend between security period and Pf of pure LPR protocol and
   compare with DEFP shows that: &#9312; with the increasing of Pf, the
   security period of LPR increases.  This is because Pf is the
   probability with which we select the next hop from the further list,
   the larger of Pf the more likely to choose the next hop from the
   further list, which extends the transmission path, so sink attackers
   need trace a longer time to reach the base station;&#9313; the
   security period of LPR is longer than DEFP's, and the larger of Pf,
   the higher amplitude of LPR's security period longer than DEFP's.

   The performance comparison of above two protocols with fake packets
   strategy, pure LPSS and LPSS with fake packets strategy indicates
   that: when DEFP, LPR, LPSS all used with fake packets strategy, the
   security period of three protocols all improving, the transmission
   delay remain constant, but the energy consumption increasing.

   In summary, LPR can get the balance between privacy protection
   strength (security period) and energy consumption by adjusting Pf,
   LPR with fake packets strategy can effectively improve the safety
   performance of the program compared with DEFP, but its transmission
   delay and communication overhead are far greater than DEFP's, LPSS
   get the trade-off between transmission delay and security period by
   adjusting Pi, and with the increasing of hop counts between the
   source node and the sink node, the safety strength (security
   period)of LPSS increases evidently dramatically than LPR, but LPSS
   can only play full advantage when it is used with fake packets
   strategy, otherwise it isn't superior than LPR and DEFP
   comprehensively.

   The above three protocols can resist sink attackers (including of
   patience sink attackers and cautious sink attackers), and they all
   have their pros and cons, we need select the appropriate protocol
   according to specific application requirements.






Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


5.  Security Consideration

   This paper divides attackers into two types based on the properties
   of the objects which need be protected: source attackers and sink
   attackers, then establishes corresponding attack models, after that
   we propose appropriate protocol in accordance with attack models,
   including phantom routing (PhR), source location privacy preservation
   protocol in wireless sensor networks using source-based restricted
   flooding (PUSBRF), location-privacy routing protocol (LPR), location
   privacy support scheme (LPSS), differential enforced fractal
   propagation (DEFP).  At last we have comprehensive analysis and
   comparison of these location privacy protection protocols
   systematically, mean while sum up the advantages and disadvantages of
   each protocol.

6.  IANA Consideration

   To be completed.

7.  References

   [RFC4948]  Perring, A., Szewczyk, R., Tygar, D., Wen, V., and D.
              Culle, "Spins: security protocols for sensor networks",
              May 2007.

   [RFC4949]  Eschenaur, L. and V. Gligor, "A key-management scheme for
              distributed sensor networks", August 2007.

   [PhR]      Kamat, P., Zhang, Y., Trappe, W., and C. Ozturk,
              "Enhancing source location privacy in sensor network
              routing", August 2005.

   [GROW]     Xi, Y., Shi, W., and L. Andersson, "Preserving source
              location privacy in monitoring-based wireless sensor
              networks", August 2006.

   [PRLA]     W P, Wang., Chen, L., and Wang. J X, "A source--location
              privacy protocol in WSN based on locational angle", August
              2008.

   [PUSBRF]   Juan, C., Binxing, F., and Y. Lihua, "A Source--Location
              Privacy Preservation Protocol in Wireless Sensor Networks
              Using Source--Based Restricted Flooding", August 2010.

   [LPR]      Jian, Y. and S. Chen, "Protecting Receiver-Location
              privacy in Wireless Sensor networks", August 2007.





Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                     CTA                          May 2014


   [LPSS]     Kang, L., "Protecting location privacy in large--scale
              wireless sensor networks", August 2009.

   [DEFP]     Deng, J., Han, R., and S. Mishra, "Countermeasures against
              traffic analysis attacks in wireless sensor networks",
              October 2005.

   [SECH]     Cheng, Z. and W. Heinzelman, "Flooding Strategy for Target
              Discovery in Wireless Networks", April 2003.

   [SECE]     Waldspurger, C. and W. Weihl, "Lottery scheduling:
              Flexible proportional-share resource management", November
              1994.

   [SECW]     Ouyang, Y., Le, Z., Chen, G., Ford, J., and F. Makedon,
              "Entrapping adversaries for source protection in sensor
              networks", Jone 2006.

   [SECT]     Mallanda, C., "Simulating Wireless Sensor Networks with
              OMNeT++[EB/OL]", Jone 2000.

Authors' Addresses

   Lin Zhou
   SouthEast University
   SouthEast University,Nanjing,210012

   Email: 573823136@qq.com


   Jie Huang
   SouthEast University
   SouthEast University,Nanjing,210012

   Email: jhuang@seu.edu.cn
















Zhou & Huang            Expires November 29, 2014              [Page 14]