

Network Working Group                                           A. Niemi
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: April 14, 2004                                 October 15, 2003


      Requirements for Instant Messaging in 3GPP Wireless Systems
                 draft-niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 14, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document lists the requirements specific to 3GPP wireless
   Instant Messaging systems.














Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 System Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2 Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  General Characteristics of Wireless Systems  . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.1 Addressing Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.2 Message Content Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.3 Message Delivery and Handling Requirements . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.4 Message Session Management and Operation Requirements  . . . .  5
   4.  User Privacy Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Charging Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Proposal for Next Steps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   A.  Changes from draft-niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs-01  . . . . .  9
   B.  Changes from draft-niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs-00  . . . . .  9
   C.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 11





























Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


1. Introduction

   This document lists the requirements for instant messaging based on
   3GPP specifications and the special characteristics of a wireless
   environment. The requirements presented in this document complement
   the requirements in [1], and relate to already ongoing work in the
   SIMPLE WG. These requirements are proposed to be evaluated by the
   working group, and incorporated in the relevant work items.

1.1 System Overview

   Within the 3GPP IP Multimedia Core Network Subsystem (IMS) Messaging
   work, two types of messaging services [4] have been identified:

   Immediate Messaging
      A sender expects near real time message delivery. Typically, the
      sender is aware of the availability of the recipient a priori,
      possibly through the use of the presence service.

   Session Based Messaging
      A sender and a recipient have to join a messaging session before
      messages can be exchanged as part of the session. The participants
      of the session expect near real time delivery of messages. Mainly,
      the intended application for session based messaging are
      multiparty messaging sessions, i.e., chat rooms, where a group of
      participants exhange instant messages with each others.

   Both of these two messaging service types have properties which make
   the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [5] very suitable for
   addressing their requirements. Hence, the charter items in the SIMPLE
   working group for defining instant messaging and message sessions
   using SIP are considered as targets for the requirements presented in
   this memo.

      Note that some of the requirements herein may be more related to
      the data manipulation requirements of SIMPLE systems [6], the SIP
      conferencing requirements [7], and the conference policy data
      requirements [8] work in the SIPPING WG.


1.2 Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [2].

   In this document, terms "immediate messaging" and "instant messaging"
   are interchangeable. Also, "message sessions" are used in place of



Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   "session based messaging" to better align the terminology used in the
   3GPP and IETF.

      Note that the term "session based messaging" used by the 3GPP IMS
      messaging often includes the notion of a multiparty message
      session, which includes both conferencing and message sessions as
      components.


2. General Characteristics of Wireless Systems

   The radio interface of wireless systems is often a scarce resource.
   As such, the message exchange over the radio interface should be
   efficiently compact and kept to a minimum. All the mechanisms
   developed should make efficient use of the radio interface.

   As terminals can be rather small devices, the memory and power
   consumption requirements, requirements for processing power, and for
   screen size and rendering capabilities should be kept to a minimum.
   Mandating support for additional protocols and mechanisms in the
   wireless terminal must meet these criteria.

3. Requirements

   This section lists the requirements for Instant Messaging in the 3GPP
   IMS wireless environment. Generally, these protocol requirements stem
   from the special characteristics of wireless systems, and the
   specific set of capabilities specified by the 3GPP. More information
   on these aspects can be found in 3GPP TS 23.228 [9].

3.1 Addressing Requirements

   ADDR-REQ1:  It MUST be possible to use a single address to identify
               the recipient or sender of an instant message or a member
               in a message session, irrespective of the messaging
               system.

   ADDR-REQ2:  Use of E.164 numbers [3] in addressing instant messages
               and message session requests MUST be supported.


3.2 Message Content Requirements

   CONT-REQ1:  It MUST be possible to carry any MIME encoded data in
               Instant Messages and message sessions.






Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   CONT-REQ2:  The content size MUST NOT be limited by the Instant
               Messaging, or message session protocols.

   CONT-REQ3:  It MUST be possible for the UA to announce its device
               capabilities for messaging.

   CONT-REQ4:  It MUST also be possible to base handling of instant
               messages on these capabilities and user preferences.


3.3 Message Delivery and Handling Requirements

   DELIV-REQ1:  It MUST be possible for the UA to store sent instant
                messages, or messages pertaining to a particular message
                session to a network-based repository.

   DELIV-REQ2:  It MUST be possible to redirect, block (and unblock), or
                store to a network-based repository incoming instant
                messages as part of a user configurable option.

   DELIV-REQ3:  This incoming message treatment MUST support instant
                message selection based on sender address, message size,
                message priority, message subject, message class,
                message content type and availability of the recipient.
                The mechanism MUST support instant message selection
                based on other criteria.

   DELIV-REQ4:  It MUST also be possible to subsequently retrieve, list,
                delete and forward the stored messages. It MUST also be
                possible to upload messages to a network-based
                repository for storage.

   DELIV-REQ5:  It MUST be possible for the sender of an instant message
                to receive either positive or negative acknowledgements
                of delivery for all sent messages.


3.4 Message Session Management and Operation Requirements

   SESS-REQ1:   It MUST be possible to create new Address-of-Records
                (AOR) for message session based conferences, i.e., chat
                rooms. These AORs are either ad-hoc style for short
                lived conferences, or persistent, if the identification
                of a conference focus is long lived.

   SESS-REQ2:   There MUST be a standardized mechanism by which such
                ad-hoc or persistent AORs can be created, applied, and
                discarded by the user.



Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   SESS-REQ3:   It MUST be possible for an administrator (or any user
                with appropriate rights) of a chat room to control the
                list of allowed participants.

   SESS-REQ4:   There MUST be a standardized mechanism by which such
                authorization policy is inserted, manipulated and
                removed.

   SESS-REQ5:   There MUST be a standard mechanism for an end device to
                learn the address of the data manipulation interface
                used for performing the aforementioned control functions
                of a chat room.

   SESS-REQ6:   There MUST be standardized mechanisms by which an
                administrator (or any user with appropriate rights) of a
                chat room can invite new participants to an ongoing chat
                room, and kick out existing participants.

   SESS-REQ7:   It MUST also be possible to send semi-permanent
                invitations to a chat room to new participants.
                Semi-permanent invitations do not require the invitee to
                respond immediately. Also, the inviter MUST be able to
                cancel the invitation, and/or set a validity period for
                the invitation.

   SESS-REQ8:   It MUST be possible for the administrator of a chat room
                to set the properties of a chat room, e.g., name, topic,
                and maximum number of active participants. There MUST be
                a standardized mechanism by which such properties are
                set, manipulated, and removed.

   SESS-REQ9:   It MUST be possible for participant to request the
                properties of a chat room, including the list of active
                members. It MUST be possible to also receive automatic
                updates of these properties.

   SESS-REQ10:  It MUST be possible to request and receive an indication
                when a particular participant or participants in a chat
                room are in the process of entering a message. It MUST
                also be possible to disable sending such an activity
                indication.

   SESS-REQ11:  It MUST be possible for the sender of a message to
                receive either positive or negative acknowledgements of
                delivery for all sent messages in a message session.






Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   SESS-REQ12:  It MUST be possible to send private messages between the
                participants of a multiparty message session.

   SESS-REQ13:  It MUST be possible to send private messages to
                participants who are using pseudonym identities or
                nicknames.

   SESS-REQ14:  A private message MUST be delivered in the context of
                the ongoing multiparty message session, and messages
                intended for private consumption MUST NOT be delivered
                to other than the intended recipient.


4. User Privacy Requirements

   PRIV-REQ1:  It MUST be possible for a recipient of an instant message
               or a message session to see the identity of the
               originator, unless the originator is anonymous or its
               address is hidden.

   PRIV-REQ2:  It MUST be possible to originate anonymous instant
               messages and message sessions.

   PRIV-REQ3:  It MUST be possible to originate instant messages and
               message sessions using pseudonyms, or nicknames.

   PRIV-REQ4:  It MUST be possible to send private messages in a chat
               room using a nickname or an anonymous identity.

      OPEN ISSUE: To some extent, these requirements are already covered
      in RFC 3324 [10] and RFC 3325 [10]. However, privacy requirements
      for identities in message sessions and especially in multiparty
      sessions remain open, and are for further study.


5. Charging Requirements

   This document refers to the charging requirements of [1], and in
   addition defines an additional, messaging specific requirement:

   CHARG-REQ1:  The instant messaging and message session protocols MUST
                be able to support different charging models, including
                ones where:

                *  only the sender of a message pays

                *  both the sender and the receiver of a message pay




Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


                *  only the recipient of a message pays


6. Security Requirements

   This document adopts the security requirements listed in [1], and
   does not introduce any additional security requirements at this time.

7. Proposal for Next Steps

   It is proposed that the SIMPLE Working Group evaluates the
   requirements presented in this document and incorporates the relevant
   ones in its current work items. Those requirements possibly falling
   out of the scope of the SIMPLE WG should find a more suitable home,
   possibly also in other standardization bodies.

   It is not expected that this document be published as an RFC by the
   IETF, but rather serve as a reference to various working group
   requirements documents. It is also expected that this document is
   used as a check list as requirements get included to other documents.

Normative References

   [1]  Garcia-Martin, M., "3rd-Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)
        Release 5 requirements on the  Session Initiation Protocol
        (SIP)", draft-ietf-sipping-3gpp-r5-requirements-00 (work in
        progress), October 2002.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [3]  International Telecommunications Union, "The International
        Public Telecommunication Numbering Plan", ITU-T Recommendation
        E.164, 1991.

Informative References

   [4]   3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) messaging; Stage 1", 3GPP
         TS 22.340, March 2003.

   [5]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [6]   Rosenberg, J. and M. Isomaki, "Requirements for Manipulation of
         Data Elements in Session Initiation  Protocol (SIP) for Instant
         Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions (SIMPLE) Systems",
         draft-ietf-simple-data-req-03 (work in progress), June 2003.



Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   [7]   Levin, O. and R. Even, "High Level Requirements for Tightly
         Coupled SIP Conferencing",
         draft-levin-sipping-conferencing-requirements-03 (work in
         progress), March 2003.

   [8]   Koskelainen, P., "Requirements for conference policy data",
         draft-koskelainen-sipping-conf-policy-req-00 (work in
         progress), February 2003.

   [9]   3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2", 3GPP TS 23.228,
         October 2003.

   [10]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J. and M. Watson, "Private Extensions
         to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity
         within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002.

   [11]  Watson, M., "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted
         Identity", RFC 3324, November 2002.


Author's Address

   Aki Niemi
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 321
   NOKIA GROUP, FIN  00045
   Finland

   Phone: +358 50 389 1644
   EMail: aki.niemi@nokia.com

Appendix A. Changes from draft-niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs-01

   o  This is a keep-alive revision. References updated.


Appendix B. Changes from draft-niemi-simple-im-wireless-reqs-00

   o  Updated the references

   o  Clarified the format of the requirements by adding labels and
      reorganizing the requirements

   o  Removed a requirement for indirect content in IMS messaging

   o  Removed OPEN ISSUE on media sequencing

   o  Added the requirement for semi-permanent chat room invitations



Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   o  Added the requirement for chat room properties fetching/
      notification

   o  Added the requirement for "isTyping"

   o  Added storage requirements, and clarified the message treatment
      requirements

   o  Added the requirement for delivery acknowledgements to message
      sessions

   o  Reordered some requirements between chapters 4 and 3

   o  Added an open issue on privacy requirements

   o  Added a general charging requirement

   o  Minor editorial fixes


Appendix C. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank the following people for their
   interest, support and efforts in the IMS messaging work:

      Andrew Allen (dynamicsoft), Gabor Bajko (Nokia), Balazs Bertenyi
      (Nokia), Keith Drage (Lucent Technologies), Alexandre Harmand
      (mmO2), Juha Kalliokulju (Nokia), Krisztian Kiss (Nokia), Duncan
      Mills (Vodafone), Milo Orsic (Lucent Technologies), and Milt
      Roselinsky (Openwave).

   Although not an official communication of the 3GPP, this document has
   been discussed and commented by a number of delegates in the relevant
   3GPP working groups.

















Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              3GPP Reqs for IM                October 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Niemi                    Expires April 14, 2004                [Page 12]

