



ECRIT                                                     H. Schulzrinne
Internet-Draft                                               Columbia U.
Expires: March 11, 2006                                     M. Shanmugam
                                                                    TUHH
                                                          P. Taylor, Ed.
                                                                  Nortel
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                                 Siemens
                                                       September 7, 2005


        Security Threats and Requirements for Emergency Calling
               draft-taylor-ecrit-security-threats-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 11, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document reviews the security threats to routing of emergency
   calls through the Internet Protocol network to Public Safety
   Answering Points, including a discussion of potential countermeasures



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   and associated tradeoffs.  This document places particular emphasis
   on threats to the successful mapping from caller location to a route
   to the appropriate Public Safety Answering Point.  Broader issues of
   security of the emergency services system will be dealt with in a
   separate document.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Motivations of Attackers of ECRIT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Integrity and Privacy Threats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Attacks on PSAP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.2.1.  DoS on PSAP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.2.2.  Impersonating a PSAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Attacks on mapping server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.3.1.  DoS on mapping server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.3.2.  Impersonating a mapping server . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.1.  Denial of Service Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  Impersonating a PSAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  Limiting Bogus Calls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.4.  Corrupting Database Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.5.  Distributed Directory Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.6.  Query-Response Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.7.  Asserted Location  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Threat's Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 21















Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


1.  Introduction

   Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) users can summon help for
   emergency services such as ambulance, fire and police using a well-
   known unique number (e.g., 911 in North America, 112 in in Europe).
   A key factor in the handling of such calls is the ability of the
   system to determine caller location and route to the appropriate
   Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) based on that location.  With
   the introduction of IP-based telephony and multimedia services,
   support for emergency calling via the Internet also has to be
   provided.  To achieve this, a number of protocols and protocol
   extensions need to interwork successfully.

   Since the Internet is hostile place, it is important to understand
   the security threats for emergency services.  Otherwise, an adversary
   can use the infrastructure to place fraudulent calls, mount denial of
   service attacks, etc.  However, this is a broad topic and needs to be
   subdivided into manageable parts.  Hence the present document
   restricts itself to threats to the successful routing of emergency
   calls, especially the operation of mapping from caller location to a
   route to the PSAP responsible for that location.

   This document focuses on the security threats and security
   requirements for the IP-based emergency service infrastructure only
   without interaction with PSTN infrastructure elements.  The specific
   issues associated with the derivation and secure delivery of caller
   location are dealt in the IETF GEOPRIV working group, and are out of
   scope of the present document.  As a corollary, the present document
   does not distinguish between the case where location is provided by
   reference and the case where it is provided by value within session
   signalling.

   This document is organized as follows: Section 2 describes basic
   terminology, Section 3 describes some motivation of attackers in the
   context of ECRIT, Section 4 illustrates security threats and possible
   countermeasures associated with them and Section 5 lists the implied
   security-related requirements relating to the mapping sub-system.














Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Emergency Caller, Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP), Access
   Infrastructure Provider, Application (Voice) Service Provider,
   Emergency Call Taker, Mapping server etc. is taken from [I-D.ietf-
   ecrit-requirements].

   Additionally, we use the following terms throughout the document:

   Emergency Call Routing Chain (Support): This term refers to entities
      that route the emergency call to the appropriate PSAP based on
      information like location information, language, etc.  If SIP is
      used as a protocol for session setup and call routing, for
      example, then this entity would correspond to a SIP proxy.

   Directory: This entity refers to a distributed directory protocol.
      DNS is one example of such as distributed directory but there are
      other protocols that might fulfill the requirements listed in
      [I-D.ietf-ecrit-requirements] for such a protocol.

   Mapping database:  The database used by the mapping server in
      formulating a response to a directory query.

   Asserted Location Information: The term asserted location information
      refers to the property that the recipient of such an object is
      able to verify that it was generated by a particular party that is
      authorized todo so.




















Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


3.  Motivations of Attackers of ECRIT

   The motivation for an attacker, in the context of emergency, is to
   hinder user(s) not to avail the emergency service.  This can be done
   by variety of means such as impersonating a PSAP, directory server,
   forging or spoofing location, identity etc., However,there are
   several other potential motivations that cause concern.  Attackers
   might also wish to learn the nature emergency information by
   eavesdropping an emergency call in order to reuse or extract the
   relevant information that might cause potential problems to the end
   hosts such as replay attacks, revealing the identity of the user.

   Attackers may want to prevent or delay an emergency caller by
   modifying some information in the message typically modifying the
   loation of the caller, while placing the emergency call.  In some
   cases, this will lead the emergency repsonders to dispatch the
   services to the spoofed area and might not be available to the other
   callers.  It might also be possible for an attacker to impede the
   users not to reach an appropriate PSAP by corrupting or modifying the
   location of an end host or the information returned from the mapping
   protocol.  Since the regulatory aspects of the emergency call often
   does not manadate authentication of the caller, it is easy for an
   attacker to forge some data(location information) to an PSAP, thereby
   forcing the emergency responders to dispatch the services, which
   might cause denial of service to its legitimate users.

   Finally, some attackers may simply want to halt the operation of an
   entire emergency architecture through denial-of-service attacks.























Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


4.  Security Threats

   This section discusses various security threats related to emergency
   call handling.  We distinguish between three major types of security
   threats (in the context of emergency calls), namely threats to the
   integrity and privacy of the signaling and media, attacks on PSAP and
   mapping relevant attacks.

4.1.  Integrity and Privacy Threats

   Within an emergency call, the threats to the integrity and privacy of
   the signaling (session setup) and media transmission are similar to
   those for other applications and thus not discussed further.

4.2.  Attacks on PSAP

   This section discusses various security threats related to public
   safety answering point.

4.2.1.  DoS on PSAP

   In an emergency services context, denial-of-service attacks on PSAP
   can impact the availability of three types of resources, namely

      (1) PSAP network facilities, both at the network layer and for
      call signaling,

      (2) call taker resources and

      (3) first responders.

   DoS attacks on PSAP and its network facilities can be deflected using
   standard denial-of-service detection and mitigation techniques.

   Call taker resources are scarce, but other PSAPs may be able to
   assist with call filtering if an attack is localized.  Both of these
   types of attacks can be automated and correspond to the more DOS
   attacks more typically discussed in security considerations for
   protocols.

   Denial-of-service attacks on first responders are launched by having
   human callers send these first responders to bogus emergencies, by
   providing false location or incident information.  There are two
   cases: namely, a single attacker pretending to be in multiple
   locations and multiple, coordinated attackers.  For the case of a
   single attacker, the attack can only succeed if either a single false
   report exhausts first-responder resources or this attacker is able to
   provide both a fake identity and a fake location.  (If either is



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   genuine or the same, it is relatively easy to detect and prevent such
   attacks.)

   If multiple attackers are coordinating their DoS attack on first-
   responder resources, they do not need to remain anonymous or provide
   false location information, although doing so allows such attacks to
   be launched from a much wider geographic area.

4.2.1.1.  Countermeasures

   There is no single measure that is likely to prevent all denial-of-
   service attacks, but a combination of measures can be used to reduce
   the possible number of perpetrators and increase the chances that the
   attacker can be identified and apprehended, discouraging future
   attacks.  We enumerate possible countermeasures and their limitations
   below.  These countermeasures can be divided into real-time measures
   that allow to flag or reject calls, as well as forensic measures that
   increase the chances of apprehending the crank caller.

   It should be noted that crank emergency calls are quite possible in
   the existing PSTN-based system, where often location information is
   not available and the identity of the caller is not known.  However,
   the attacker is generally limited in its ability to reach random
   PSAPs, as calls are routed based on the caller's wireline or wireless
   location.  Thus, it is difficult for a caller to launch such attacks
   from afar.

   Turing test: Distributed denial-of-service attacks launched by
      botnets can be prevented by having the system require some
      indication of a human caller before forwarding the call to a human
      call taker.  In practice, this may not be easy during an emergency
      call where callers may speak many different languages or be too
      scared to respond to prompts to enter or say certain information
      or in some cases, they might not be able to respond.

   IP address checking: Some types of attacks can be limited to a single
      instance per attacker by tracing the signaling request of the
      caller.  This may well be effective in preventing some kinds of
      DDOS attacks as well as the attempt of a single attacker to place
      multiple emergency calls in succession.  This remedy may be
      limited if the attacker is able to "launder" signaling or media
      packets through a variety of intermediaries.  IP address tracing
      may also be helpful in apprehending a malcreant later.  Thus,
      signaling protocols should try to capture as much of the request
      history, including the source of the mapping request, as possible.






Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   IP address mapping: In some cases, the IP address of the caller,
      captured in SIP Via headers or the source address of RTP packets,
      can be used to roughly determine the geographic location of the
      caller [RFC1876], using IP geomapping techniques.  This may
      provide hints that the geographic location reported may be
      suspicious, but VPNs and other tunneling mechanisms do not allow
      to make an absolute determination.

   Verified application service provider: Identifying the application
      service provider may provide clues to the PSAP as to whether the
      call might merit additional scrutiny.

   Verified identity: If the identity of the caller can be verified in
      some way, it becomes more difficult for a single attacker to place
      a series of emergency calls.  For this, it is not necessary that
      the identity be tied to a real person, just that it is difficult
      to rapidly mint new identities or if the (authenticated) identity
      can be traced back to a real-world person.

   Verified location: In some cases, a trusted third party may be able
      to ascertain the location of the caller, but care has to be taken
      that the identity and the location are indeed closely coupled.  In
      many systems, even a signed identity can be used by a third party.
      Having the location provider cryptographically tie the location
      object to a network address may make it more difficult to succeed
      in a cut-and-paste attack.

   In some cases, PSAPs under attack will only be able to make
   probabilistic judgements as to which calls are more likely to be
   fraudulent and may use such indications to, for example, query the
   caller more closely for incident details.

4.2.2.  Impersonating a PSAP

   An adversary might pretend to operate a PSAP.  When either an end
   host or an intermediate device wants to determine the PSAP that is
   responsible for a particular geographical area by sending a query to
   the directory an adversary might return a faked response.  Returning
   an incorrect response message does not require the adversary to be
   somewhere along the path.  It is sufficient for an adversary to be
   located in a broadcast medium and the adversary has to reply as soon
   as a query is observed (if no security protection is utilized).  If
   the response indicates a legitimate but inappropriate (i.e., a PSAP
   that is authoritive for a different geographical area) then the
   emergency call interaction will be able to continue but will suffer
   from delays until the emergency call can be forwarded to the correct
   PSAP, potentially involving human interaction (by the Emergency Call
   Taker).



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


4.3.  Attacks on mapping server

   This section discusses various security threats related to directory
   protocols.

4.3.1.  DoS on mapping server

   An adversary might mount a DoS/DDoS attack against one or multiple
   mapping server to prevent an emergency caller from obtaining
   emergency service contact URIs.

4.3.1.1.  Countermeasures

   Generic DoS attacks, such as SYN flooding, can be handled by using
   best current practices and hence it is not discussed here.  To avoid
   launching DoS, the mapping server should be capable of limiting the
   queries from a single IP, especially when an anonymous mapping is
   requested, at a particular time.  This limit should consider the
   proxy case.  It may also log the relevant information like IP
   address, query information from the requests in order to indicate the
   query flooding.

   Dealing with all sorts of denial of service attacks against the
   emergency infrastructure and at directory servers is difficult.
   Protection needs to be provided at different protocol layers and also
   at different locations in the network.  Additionally, it is essential
   to ensure that directory queries submitted by adversary towards the
   directory server do not cause a major performance impact for the
   server with the consequence that potentially genuine requests may
   need to be rejected due to overload and a timely response is not
   possible.

4.3.2.  Impersonating a mapping server

   An adversary might run a faked mapping server aiming to pretend that
   it is a legitimate server.  This would lead an emergency caller to
   get bogus URI(s) that hinder a caller not to avail the emergency
   service.  It is necessary for the client to authenticate and possibly
   to authorize the mapping server as part of the emergency call
   procedure.

4.3.2.1.  Countermeasures

   In order to provide authentication of the mapping server to the
   client, the following methods can be used:






Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   Channel Security: It is possible to establish a secure channel e.g.,
      TLS to ensure the authenticity of the given mapped information.
      Additionally, there are several advantages in establishing a
      secure channel such as confidentiality protection, replay
      protection and in case if the mapping server realizes that it is
      under flooding attack (query) it might also request the
      certificate, if available, to verify the identity of the
      requesting client.  Consequently, this step might decrease the
      performance of the mapping service since the certificate
      processing and key exchange mechanism pose serious performance
      degradation for the mapping server.

   Object Security: It is possible to use object security e.g., S/MIME
      to sign the individual information in the query/response message
      of the mapping service.  This mechanism with various settings also
      provides authentication, a degree of confidentiality protection of
      the sender and prevents from the replay attacks.

   Assuming that there is no prior relationship between the emergency
   caller and the mapping server (in the worst case) public key based
   authentication seems to be the best choice.  Additional approaches
   for bootstrapping the security associations by exploiting existing
   relationships (such as between the network access infrastructure
   provider and an directory server) might simplify the key management.
   The authorization can be provided using certificates and this aspect
   left for further study.

























Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


5.  Security Requirements

   Compiling security requirements to address the threats listed in the
   previous section might is impacted by several constraints:

      Security mechanisms may lead to a certain performance overhead
      (e.g., several roundtrips).

      A certain security infrastructure is required that might lead to
      deployment problems.  For example, end user certificates,
      certificates for networks, usage of authorization certificate,
      etc. might need to be deployed before any of these mechanisms are
      useful.

      Many of these aspects are related to regulatory and legal
      requirements that may vary from country to country.  Typically,
      these mechanisms cannot be mandated by an IETF specification.

      Some of the requirements impose solutions that are out-of-scope of
      this working group.

   Given the above-listed constraints the requirements that have to be
   addressed by work that is done within ECRIT have to be highlighted.
   Other requirements have to be read as 'if you would like to address
   this threat, then you might want to consider this requirement' rather
   than 'any solution must address fulfill this requirement'.

5.1.  Denial of Service Attacks

   Care must be taken when desigining an architecture in order to reduce
   chance for a denial of service attack.  Also, it is important to
   understand that the ability to mount DoS attacks must also be
   considered as part of the architecture work when legal and regulatory
   requirements are known and need to be fulfilled.

5.2.  Impersonating a PSAP

   The Emergency Caller SHOULD be able to determine conclusively that he
   has reached an accredited emergency call center.  This requirement is
   meant to address the threat that a rogue, possibly criminal, entity
   pretends to accept emergency calls and disrupts the emergency
   infrastructure.

   o  Countermeasure: A user agent MUST be able to authenticate a PSAP.

   Unlike in the PSTN case IP based networks provide a better
   opportunity to spoof a PSAP since physical access to the cable plant
   is required in the PSTN case, while this may not true for the IP



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   case.

5.3.  Limiting Bogus Calls

   In order to discourage bogus calls to the PSAP, authentication of
   caller could be helpful.  To provision the authentication of the
   caller , Network Access Authentication could be useful since it will
   provide a certain degree of authentication.  But the emergency
   architecture itself does not mandate any authentication for the
   emergency call.  The reason for this is that the authentication
   procedure may introduce delays that might break the integrity of the
   emergency call procedure, since the emergency call is a time
   sensitive operation or the caller may do not have permissions in the
   visited network or he might be in panic at that time.

   So it will be helpful to consider the options like attaching the
   certificate of the caller, device that will be helpful in the
   procedure to trace back the caller.  This certificate could be a VSP,
   ISP or a device certificate (pay phone) which can be exclusively used
   to find bogus callers and prosecute them later.  This verification
   could be done after the failure of emergency dispatching procedure
   and we can use this information for house-keeping and also to avoid
   future attacks.

5.4.  Corrupting Database Information

   If the mapping client i.e., the entity that requests location
   information using a mapping protocol accepts the emergency contact
   information from an unauthenticated mapping server i.e., the entity
   that provides location information, it is highly possible to receive
   bogus or prank emergency contact URIs.  Particularly the caching
   properties of a distributed directory might be exploited.  To ensure
   the secure retrieval of information, the following properties are
   assumed:

   o  The maping client MUST be able to authenticate the mapping server.

   o  The interaction between the mapping client and the mapping server
      MUST be integrity and replay protected.

   o  The mapping server MUST be provide data origin authentication
      thereby ensuring that the provided data items are indeed from the
      claimed source.

   o  The mapping server SHOULD provide information to ensure that it is
      authoritive for the provided information.





Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


5.5.  Distributed Directory Security

   To fasten the location to URI look up mechanism, the mapping service
   might cache relevant information from other mapping servers.  In this
   case, the mapping server which caches information SHOULD make sure
   that the information provided by the remote mapping server is
   authoritative i.e., provided by the owner(server) of that region and
   it is authorized to do so.  Also, the database must be periodically
   synchronized with the original copy in order to provision the
   freshness of the information.  Any synchronization or update in the
   caching database must be secure and it is left to the best current
   practice methods.

5.6.  Query-Response Verification

   The peer which issues the mapping request must verify the
   authenticity of the data.

      When the query is issued on behalf of the mapping client then the
      mapping server must take necessary steps to determine conclusively
      that the data came from a genuine mapping server or an
      authoritative mapping server (remote).

      If the query procedure is done by the client then the client must
      authenticate both the home mapping server and remote mapping
      servers before accepting the response information.

   Also the data sender must prove the freshness of the given
   information in order to avoid cut-and-paste attacks, this type of
   attacks can be mitigated by using time stamps.

5.7.  Asserted Location

   location validation ensures that an address exists and is mappable to
   a PSAP.  A valid address, however, does not imply that the call
   actually originated from that location.  We refer to location
   verification as the assurance that the call was placed at the
   location claimed, including any error margins provided.

   Verifying location is generally more difficult than location
   validation as there is currently no generally trusted service that
   can vouch for the location of the caller.  In some cases, AIPs or
   ISPs may be able to indicate the location of the caller with high
   confidence and they may possess cryptographic certificates that are
   trusted by the PSAP.  This may not require a global certification
   authority (CA), as a regional PSAP typically only deals with a modest
   number of larger enterprises and thus could obtain their public keys
   even if self-signed.



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   However, even if the AIP or ISP provides a signed location, it is
   difficult to ensure that such a signed location object is only used
   for calls from that location, as it will have to be copied from a
   location delivery protocol to the call signaling protocol.  For
   example, a third party could obtain such a signed location object and
   use it elsewhere.  Naturally, timestamps will restrict such useage to
   the order of minutes or hours, depending on how often location
   information is updated.  A PSAP may want to be able to answer the
   following questions:

   o  Who originally provided this particular location information?

   o  Did the call originate from that particular geospatial or civic
      address and who says so and how do they know?





































Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


6.  Threat's Table

   This section provides a matrix/table or tree which is helpful to
   capture the basic list of threats and data items.  [Editor's Note:
   Further work is needed here.]

      single user threats vs. large-scale threats

      real-time vs. after-the-fact

      items that can be used for identification (spatial, network,
      identity, carrier)


   1. Single-target threats

   a. Attacker wishes to prevent the emergency caller from
   reaching help.

   i. DOS attack against emergency caller's access link.
   ii. DOS attack against entity in the emergency call routing chain.
   iii. Impersonation of entity in the emergency call routing chain.
   iv. DOS attack against the mapping responder.
   v. Impersonation of the mapping responder.
   vi. Corruption of the mapping database.
   vii. DOS attack against the PSAP.
   viii.Impersonation of the PSAP.

   b. Attacker wishes to cause malicious dispatch of emergency
   resources to a target individual.

   i. Impersonation of target individual.
   ii. Replay of valid signalling, possibly with modification to point
   to target.

   c. Attacker wishes to capture information about an emergency,
   to the attacker's profit (e.g., "ambulance chaser") or
   to use against the emergency caller.

   i. Disclosure of signalling information.
   ii. Disclosure of session content.

   2. Mass-target threats

   a. Attacker wishes to deny service to a particular large-scale
   emergency.

   i. DOS attack against entity in the emergency call routing chain.



Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


   ii. Impersonation of entity in the emergency call routing chain.
   iii. DOS attack against the mapping responder.
   iv. Impersonation of the mapping responder.
   v. Corruption of the mapping database.
   vi. DOS attack against the PSAP.
   vii. Impersonation of the PSAP.

   (a). Real-time Information used to identify the emergency caller

   i. Network Access (user) Identity, (Device identity, e.g., if the
   user places the call by his PDA in a 3G environment)
   ii. Identify using IP addresses based on the region. (e.g., calls
   from france may not be attended in germany)

   (b). Off-line Information used to identify the emergency caller

   i. Certificate of the Voice Service provider
   ii. Certificate of the Internet Service Provider
   iii. Identity of the Access network
   iv. Logging the signaling path to trace back the caller
   v. Logging the call information (such as location, IP etc.,)






























Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


7.  Security Considerations

   This document addresses security threats and security requirements.
   Therefore, security is considered throughout this document.















































Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by the IANA.
















































Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-requirements]
              Schulzrinne, H. and R. Marshall, "Requirements for
              Emergency Context Resolution with Internet Technologies",
              May 2005.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1876]  Davis, C., Vixie, P., Goodwin, T., and I. Dickinson, "A
              Means for Expressing Location Information in the Domain
              Name System", January 1996.


































Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   USA

   Phone: +1 212 939 7042
   Email: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs


   Murugaraj Shanmugam
   Technische Universitaet Hamburg-Harburg
   Department of Security in Distributed applications
   Harburger Schlossstrasse 20
   Hamburg-Harburg  21079
   Germany

   Email: murugaraj.shanmugam@tuhh.de


   Tom Taylor (editor)
   Nortel
   1852 Lorraine Ave.
   Ottawa, Ontario  K1H 6Z8
   Canada

   Email: taylor@nortel.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   otto-Hahn ring 6
   Munich, Bayern  81739
   Germany

   Email: hannes.tschofenig@siemens.com











Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       Threats and Req. for Emergency       September 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Schulzrinne, et al.      Expires March 11, 2006                [Page 21]


