





PKIX Working Group                                        Baehyo Park
Internet Draft                                             Jaeho Yoon
Document: draft-choi-pkix-ui-02.txt                     Inkyoung Jeon
Expires: August 21, 2005                                 Hyangjin Lee
Target category : Non-Standard Track                        Jaeil Lee
                                                                 KISA
                                                    February 21, 2005


                  Required functions of User Interface
            for the Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
                      <draft-choi-pkix-ui-02.txt>


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be
   disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document provides guidance to PKI client software developers on
   what functions are needed on user interface of PKI client software to
   address requirements of security, compatibility and usability within



Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


   PKI client software.

1. Introduction

   Even though PKI is one of the most secure and influential
   technologies to offer the information security, most people say that
   it is difficult to understand and utilize PKI technology due to its
   complexity.

   General users of PKI technology make their digital signature and
   encrypted digital information at the application level. At this time,
   the users are usually directed by PKI client software that provides
   modules containing PKI technology. Actually, they do not have to know
   the whole mechanism of how PKI client software works, but they are
   supposed to follow user interface of the client software. The reason
   of people¡¯s giving up accepting PKI technology is difficulty of the
   very PKI technology, but unkind user interface of PKI client
   software.

   Consequently, user interface of PKI client software shall consider
   assisting users to know the effort of PKI client software concerning
   security, compatibility, and usability in order that more users can
   utilize PKI technology. For this purpose, this document provides
   trust anchor verification function, certificate floating function,
   and certificate handling function for the user  interface of PKI
   client software.

2. Requirements

   This section defines required functions for developing user interface
   in terms of security, compatibility, and usability aspect for PKI
   client software.

2.1 Security

   Trust anchor is directly trusted by users. They must securely acquire
   the value of a trust anchor¡¯s public key, which requires some out-of-
   band steps.[CMP] This document describes the trust anchor
   verification function using PKI client software as one of out-of-band
   steps. Here, security means integrity of a trust anchor¡¯s certificate
   when the PKI client software downloads the certificate.

   First of all, PKI client software must be installed and upgraded with
   a reliable and secure manner. This document does not refer to this
   manner for PKI client software. Just after secure installation of PKI
   Client software, the client software will download the trust anchor¡¯s
   certificate. At this point, the user interface of the client software
   should offer trust anchor verification function in order that users



Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


   accept the trust anchor¡¯s certificate with reliability. And also the
   user interface shall assist the users to make the decision on whether
   or not the downloaded trust anchor¡¯s certificate can be trusted. The
   user must accept the trust anchor¡¯s certificate only if the trust
   anchor¡¯s certificate is verified through the direction from the user
   interface.

   The user interface shall help users to receive the trust anchor¡¯s
   information for verifying out of band channel. The information must
   not be received via a channel that can be attacked.

   For example, when PKI client software acquires the trust anchor¡¯s
   certificate after installation of client software, the user interface
   can show the hash value of acquired the trust anchor¡¯s certificate
   and also direct how to acquire the trust anchor¡¯s information. The
   user will acquire the hash value of the trust anchor¡¯s certificate
   through face-to-face contacting or trust anchor¡¯s CA web site by the
   direction of the user interface.

   In case that the trust anchor¡¯s certificate is updated, the client
   software also must acquire updated trust anchor¡¯s certificate. At
   this point, the client software can use its automatic upgrading
   function of the trust anchor¡¯s certificate. And then user interface
   must provide the same verification function with an initial
   installation of trust anchor¡¯s certificate.

   In addition, the user interface should support integrity of trust
   anchor¡¯s certificate with trust anchor verification function because
   there can be malicious attack to the trust anchor¡¯s certificate after
   reliably accepting the trust anchor¡¯s certificate when installing the
   client software.

2.2 Compatibility

   Compatibility can be accomplished by using one certificate to many
   PKI applications. Generally, PKI application such as the Internet
   Banking or E-mail application defines the user¡¯s certificate and
   private key location by their own way. Thereby, when using those
   applications, users are at a loss whenever receiving a question where
   their certificates are. Most users do not know the answer, and they
   want to use different PKI programs with their own certificate without
   answering the question. It comes true as a certificate sharing
   mechanism and transfer function that mainly aim for increasing
   certificate compatibility, which benefits the user¡¯s convenience.
   This section will introduce these functions.






Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


2.2.1 Certificate sharing mechanism

   To increase compatibility in different client software, user
   interface defines to make a common location for storing certificate
   and private key according to the user¡¯s operating system and storage
   media. It can be an attack point, but any PKI client software can
   find the user¡¯s certificate and private key without any user¡¯s
   involvement.

   For example, a common storage location of a user¡¯s certificate and
   private key in HARD DISK driver of different operating systems can be
   assigned to be:

       - MS Windows : C:Program Files/IETF/PKIX
       - Linux/Unix : (User Account)/IETF/PKIX
       - Mac OS X   : (Hard disk label):Library/IETF/PKIX

   In this case, OS dependent or independent PKI client software can
   access to the user¡¯s certificate for using it to take actions of
   digital signature or encryption without questioning to the user where
   his or her certificate is. It is supposed that digital signature and
   encryption are processed independently and securely in the user¡¯s
   system.

   Regarding as the user¡¯s certificate and private key, it may be stored
   as a form of xxx.der or xxx.key, after creating a directory named by
   DN. xxx naming is identically used for distinguishing between digital
   signature and certificate distribution purpose.

   In addition, the client software should define application
   programming interface for accessing to various storage media such as
   HARD DISK driver, SMARTCARD, FLOPPY disk, etc.

   Format of the user¡¯s certificate in storage media may be encoded as
   DER or PEM in order that the user interface can list all the
   certificates in any storage media. For storage format of the private
   key, it should use [PKCS5], which is a password based cryptographic
   method. Afterward, it should be stored to a storage medium according
   to [PKCS8].

2.2.2 Import and export function

   The user interface shall provide import and export function to
   support certificate¡¯s mobility according to [PKCS12]. This function
   makes certificate and private key transfer to other PKI applications
   so that the user can utilize his or her certificate and private key
   in other PKI applications on the Internet X.509 Public Key
   Infrastructure.



Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 4]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


2.3 Usability

   User interface shall consider usability on implementing PKI
   functions, so that a user who does not know about any PKI knowledge
   can easily and safely use PKI services. In this section, it specifies
   certificate handling function of storage media and automatic updating
   function at the user interface of PKI client software.

2.3.1 Certificate handling function

   User interface shall have at least three responsibilities for
   handling the user¡¯s certificates;

       - Certificate information notice
       - Storage type selection
       - Certificate management

   Firstly, Certificate information notice at user interface is to
   display certificate that was searched by client software so that user
   can select the certificate to use it. At this point, important
   information of certificate including subject name, expiration date,
   and issuer name about certificate may be listed. In addition user
   interface shall provide certificate information in detail if the
   users want to receive the more information on their certificates.

   Secondly, for selecting various storage types, storage type selection
   in client software shall be made appropriately to display its storage
   medium by categorization, which can be changed according to the
   application¡¯s purpose.

   On the certificate representation, a choice for storage media should
   effectively provide for user to select the desired choice. In order
   to do so, storage media are independently categorized by the nature
   of storage media, which helps users to differentiate their own
   storage easily from all the storage media. User interface may
   consider including the followings:

       - Hard disk
       - Floppy disk
       - USB
       - Smartcard
       - CD ROM

   Lastly, the user interface shall contain certificate management
   commands as followings;

     - Trust anchor verification : defined in [2.1]
     - Import and export : defined in [2.2.2]



Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 5]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


     - Certificate verification : when a user wants to know whether his
       or her certificate is valid or not
     - Private Key password change : when a user wants to change the
       password of his or her private key
     - Certificate deletion : when a user wants to delete his or her
       certificate

2.3.2 Automatic update function

   The PKI client software must provide a secure method to update PKI
   client software and trust anchor¡¯s certificate. This document defines
   it as automatic update function, which makes user involvement
   minimized. Note that there must be the verification function defined
   in 2.1 when the trust anchor¡¯s certificate is updated automatically.

3. Security Considerations

   Malicious attackers can access to a user¡¯s certificate and private
   key because there is a common location for storing a certificate and
   a private key according to a user¡¯s operating system and storage
   media. However, it is supposed that there must be appropriate access
   control for the user¡¯s system and storage media in this document.

4. Reference

4.1. Normative References

   [PKCS5]     RSA Laboratories, PKCS#5 v2.0 "Password-Based Cryptography
               Standard", RSA Data Security Inc., 1993
   [PKCS8]     RSA Laboratories, PKCS#8 v1.2 "Private  Key Information
               Syntax Standard", RSA Data Security Inc., 1993
   [PKCS12]    RSA Laboratories, PKCS#12 v1.0 "Personal  Key Information
               Exchange Syntax Standard", RSA Data Security Inc., 1993
   [CMP]       Adams, C. and Farrell, S., "Internet X.509 Public Key
               Infrastructure Certificate Management Protocols", RFC 2510,
               March 1999.


4.2 Informative References

   [RFC2119]   S.Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels",RFC3467, March 1997


5. Authors¡¯ Address

    Baehyo Park
    Korea Information Security Agency



Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 6]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


    Phone: 2-405-5443
    FAX  : 2-405-5219
    Email: parkbh@kisa.or.kr

    Jaeho Yoon
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: 2-405-5434
    FAX  : 2-405-5219
    Email: jhyoon@kisa.or.kr

    Inkyoung Jeon
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: 2-405-5432
    FAX  : 2-405-5219
    Email: inkyoung@kisa.or.kr

    Hyangjin Lee
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: 2-405-5448
    FAX  : 2-405-5499
    Email: jiinii@kisa.or.kr

    Jaeil Lee
    Korea Information Security Agency
    Phone: 2-405-5200
    FAX  : 2-405-5219
    Email: jilee@kisa.or.kr
























Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 7]





INTERNET-DRAFT    Required functions of User Interface     February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.







Park, et. al.             Expires - August 2005         	[Page 8]


