Network Working Group                                          Y. Jiang
                                                                 X. Liu
Internet-Draft                                                   Huawei
                                                                L. Geng
Intended status: Informational                             China Mobile
                                                          D. P. Venmani
                                                            Orange Labs
Expires: September 2016                                  March 21, 2016


             Gap Analysis of Scalable Synchronization Networks
                    draft-jiang-scsn-gap-analysis-00.txt


Abstract

   This draft provides a gap analysis for the Scalable Synchronization
   Networks (SCSN). The document provides an overview of the existing
   standardization work on synchronization solutions, and outlines some
   of the important features with regard to scalability that are still
   missing in current synchronization networks.



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.



Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction .............................................. 2
      1.1. Conventions used in this document ...................... 3
      1.2. Terminology ............................................ 3
   2.   Related Standardization Work on Synchronization Network ... 4
      2.1. A Survey of ITU-T work ................................. 4
      2.2. A Survey of IEEE work .................................. 5
      2.3. A Survey of IETF work .................................. 6
   3.   Discussions ............................................... 6
   4.   Security Considerations ................................... 7
   5.   IANA Considerations ....................................... 7
   6.   References ................................................ 7
      6.1. Informative References ................................. 7
   7.   Acknowledgments ........................................... 9



1. Introduction

   Traditionally, telecommunication systems rely heavily on accurate
   frequency and/or time synchronization for their proper working. This
   is especially true for the case of cellular networks (3G, 4G/LTE,
   etc.), where base stations need accurate and stable frequency clocks
   in order to obtain their carrier radio frequencies, arbitrate the
   frequency-shared and time-shared access of terminals, coordinate the
   handover of terminals between adjacent cells, and etc.

   Over the years, time-division multiplexing (TDM) transmission
   technologies such as SDH are used to provide frequency distribution,
   typically by provisioning a tree-based hierarchy of clocks over the
   transport network beforehand. Due to the advantages of higher
   flexibility, lower operation costs, economies of scale and better
   integration with higher layer IP-based services, telecommunication
   operators are migrating their networks from TDM technology to packet-


Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   switching technology, and evolving to "all-IP" architecture. As a
   result, Synchronous Ethernet (SyncE) is proposed to integrate
   synchronization distribution capabilities into packet switching
   systems. Similar to SDH nodes, a SyncE node can acquire the reference
   clock from the signal received from a specific input port, use it to
   correct the local clock, and regenerate frequency in the signals
   transmitted over the output ports.

   Following this, IEEE 1588-2008/PTPv2 has been specified which
   provides time synchronization capabilities.

   This draft analyzes the existing works on synchronization solutions
   and provides a non-exhaustive list of them. This includes the
   synchronization solutions developed for telecom networks and other
   industries as well including but not limited to power generation and
   transmission industries, finance and trading, scientific computing,
   road traffic control, and etc., It outlines some of the missing
   features with regard to scalability that are important for
   synchronization networks. The aim of this document is to provide
   guidance for some further synchronization work in the IETF.



1.1. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].



1.2. Terminology

   AVB    audio/video bridging

   BMCA    Best Master Clock Algorithm

   MIB    Management Information Base

   NTP    Network Time Protocol

   OAM    Operation Administration and Maintenance

   PTP    Precision Time Protocol

   PTPv2   Precision Time Protocol Version 2



Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   SDH    Synchronous Digital Hierarchy

   SMIv2    Structure of Management Information Version 2

   SNTP    Simple Network Time Protocol

   SSM    Synchronization Status Message

   TDM    Time Division Multiplex

   UDP    User Datagram Protocol

2. Related Standardization Work on Synchronization Network

2.1. A Survey of ITU-T work

   ITU-T has approved a series of Recommendations to transport and
   distribute synchronization over telecom networks. It describes
   different aspects of synchronization in a TDM network. [G.803]
   specifies the SDH-based synchronization network architecture. Based
   on the architecture, [G.781] specifies synchronization principles and
   defines synchronization layer functions which obey the combination
   rules given in [G.783] to specify synchronization functionality of
   network elements. [G.823], [G.824] and [G.825] specify the maximum
   network limits of jitter and wander and the minimum equipment
   tolerance to jitter and wander respectively for networks based on the
   2048 Kbit/s hierarchy, 1544 Kbit/s hierarchy and SDH.

   Moving forward, ITU-T approved SyncE, a physical layer method, which
   uses synchronous physical layer for the transport and distribution of
   frequency over a packet network. [G.8261], [G.8262] and [G.8264]
   describe the physical layer frequency distribution in packet-based
   networks. [G.8261] focuses on the distribution of synchronization
   network clock signals (PNT domain) and of service clock signals (CES
   domain) over a packet network. It also defines network limits of
   jitter and wander for the synchronous Ethernet interface. Its latest
   amendment 1 adds the network jitter limits for several kinds of
   multilane interfaces consisting of 10G lanes and of 25G lanes.
   [G.8262] defines the synchronous Ethernet Equipment Clock as well as
   its requirements for clocks, e.g., bandwidth, frequency accuracy,
   holdover and noise generation. [G.8264] defines the SSM protocol and
   formats for SyncE as well as the Ethernet Synchronization Messaging
   Channel (ESMC). Its latest amendment 1 adds text to describe the ESMC
   operation with link aggregation.

   On the other hand, [G.8263] and [G.8265] describe the packet-based
   mechanisms based on IEEE 1588 to transport frequency over a packet


Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   network in the absence of physical layer timing. [G.8265] describes
   the master-slave architecture and requirements for packet-based
   frequency distribution in telecom networks. According to the
   architecture, [G.8263] outlines minimum requirements, e.g., frequency
   accuracy, noise generation, packet delay variation noise tolerance
   and holdover, for the packet slave clocks. [G.8265.1] further defines
   a PTP telecom profile for frequency distribution using only unicast
   mode leaving the use of mixed unicast/multicast operation for further
   study.

   PTPv2 was developed based on IEEE 1588-2008 for the transport of
   phase and time. [G.8271] presents the need for time and phase
   synchronization in a carrier environment and specifies the time-phase
   synchronization methods and interfaces as well as its related
   performance. The architecture and requirements for packet-based time
   and phase distribution using PTP is described in [G.8275]. According
   to the architecture, [G.8275.1] defines the PTP profile for telecom
   networks for time and phase distribution.

2.2. A Survey of IEEE work

   [IEEE 1588] defines the PTP protocol to synchronize Wide Area
   Networks. It includes synchronization methodology, datasets and state
   machine maintained by each clock, to synchronize clocks of
   distributed nodes in a system using packet-based networks and the
   Best Master Clock Algorithm (BMCA). It allows all nodes to
   synchronize system-wide in the sub-microsecond range. Its second
   version [IEEE 1588-2008] enhances the usability and precision for
   large networks by defining shorter synchronization frames, mappings
   to UDP/IP and other protocols, options for redundancy and fault
   tolerance, and by specifying message extensions using TLV, asymmetry
   corrections and optional unicast messaging in addition to multicast.
   It provides flexible configuration by means of configuration sets
   known as "profiles" used by specific devices to guarantee the proper
   behavior and performance. Its latest revision [IEEE 1588-20XX]
   currently under development defines optional data sets required by
   PTP options, complements the description about granting port
   operations and about using an alternate timescale, and introduces an
   optional mechanism for external configuration for a node's port state.
   It permits synchronization accuracies better than 1 ns. Definitions
   of a common MIB enabling the use of 1588 in a heterogeneous
   environment and a link state protocol used to establish redundant
   synchronization path are currently under study.

   [IEEE 802.1AS] specifies synchronization based on [IEEE 1588-2008] in
   Audio/Video Bridging (AVB) networks. It defines a PTP profile with
   the time-aware bridge acting as boundary clock and time-aware end


Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   station acting as ordinary clock. The BMCA specified in this standard
   is an alternate BMCA which is similar but not identical to that
   specified in [IEEE 1588-2008]. This standard also defines a complete
   SMIv2 Management Information Base (MIB) set for all features it
   specifies. Its revision [IEEE 802.1ASbt/D0.7] enhances support for
   redundant grandmasters and/or paths using multiple gPTP domains, link
   aggregation and new media types with additional parameter sets for
   non-Audio/Video applications. Its latest revision [IEEE 802.1AS-Rev]
   enhances the way needed for a port to determine whether its neighbor
   is asCapable in a particular domain by adding the per-port global
   variable tmFtmSupport. Details about redundancy-related definitions,
   functions and algorithms are currently under study.

2.3. A Survey of IETF work

   [RFC5905] defines the Network Time Protocol version 4 (NTPv4), which
   is widely used to synchronize system clocks among a set of
   distributed time servers and clients with potential accuracies in the
   low microseconds range. NTPv4 obsoletes both [RFC1305] (NTPv3) and
   [RFC4330] (SNTP)) and describes the core architecture, protocol,
   state machines, data structures and algorithms.

   [draft-ietf-tictoc-ptp-mib-06] defines some managed objects used for
   managing PTP devices of IEEE 1588 including the ordinary clock,
   transparent clock, boundary clocks. But this MIB is read-only and not
   intended to provide the ability to configure PTP clocks.

3. Discussions

   With the worldwide deployment of 4G/LTE networks, we have already
   seen tens of thousands of network nodes deployed in a single metro
   network. In the future, 5G mobile networks will have a greater number
   of cells and it is expected that the backhaul network will grow even
   larger. Therefore, the computation of distribution path and
   configuration for such a large synchronization network will pose a
   great challenge.

   Until now, little work has been done on the scalability of
   synchronization. SyncE work is focused on the general synchronization
   requirements and architecture (TDM and packet network), it is assumed
   that a loop-free distribution path will be computed for each end node
   externally and configured beforehand. Though Synchronization Status
   Message (SSM) message provides some indication on the quality of the
   synchronization signal, it cannot locate a fault in synchronization
   path. Thus, it mainly resorts to onerous, error-prone and time-
   consuming manual operations at present.



Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   In IEEE 1588, each node can automatically compute and select
   synchronization source based on knowledge of the network topology in
   a domain, but it is difficult to compute and configure a large
   network in such a distributed manner. Furthermore, it is also assumed
   that the network operator has assigned specific ports for
   synchronization. IEEE 1588 does not provide fault diagnosis
   capability, and resilience is realized by automatic re-computation of
   a new distribution path based on the new converged network.

   Therefore, it is crucial to provide a synchronization path
   computation, configuration and restoration tools for a large
   synchronization network, and provide necessary OAM tools for its
   diagnosis. These tools must be generic, vendor-independent and
   protocol-neutral.

4. Security Considerations

   This document analyzes the standardization work on synchronization in
   different SDOs. As no solution is proposed in this document, no
   security concerns are raised.



5. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA actions required by this document.



6. References


6.1. Informative References

   [RFC1305] Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol (Version 3) Specification,
             Implementation and Analysis", RFC 1305, March 1992

   [RFC4330] Mills, D., "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP) Version 4
             for IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 4330, January 2006

   [RFC5905] Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and
             Algorithms Specification", RFC 5905, June 2010

   [G.803] ITU-T, Architecture of transport networks based on the
             synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH), March, 2000.




Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   [G.823] ITU-T, The control of jitter and wander within digital
             networks which are based on the 2048 Kbit/s hierarchy,
             March, 2000.

   [G.824] ITU-T, The control of jitter and wander within digital
             networks which are based on the 1544 Kbit/s hierarchy,
             March, 2000.

   [G.825] ITU-T, The control of jitter and wander within digital
             networks which are based on the synchronous digital
             hierarchy (SDH), March, 2000.

   [G.781] ITU-T, Synchronization layer functions, September, 2008.

   [G.783] ITU-T, Characteristics of synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH)
             equipment functional blocks, March, 2006.

   [G.8261] ITU-T, Timing and synchronization aspects in packet networks,
             August, 2013.

   [G.8262] ITU-T, Timing characteristics of synchronous Ethernet
             equipment slave clock (EEC), January, 2015.

   [G.8263] ITU-T, Timing characteristics of packet based equipment
             clocks, February, 2012.

   [G.8264] ITU-T, Distribution of timing information through packet
             networks, May, 2014.

   [G.8265] ITU-T, Architecture and requirements for packet-based
             frequency delivery, October, 2010.

   [G.8265.1] ITU-T, Precision time protocol telecom profile for
             frequency synchronization, July, 2014.

   [G.8271] ITU-T, Time and phase synchronization aspects of packet
             networks, February, 2012.

   [G.8275] ITU-T, Architecture and requirements for packet-based time
             and phase distribution, November, 2013.

   [G.8275.1] ITU-T, Precision time protocol telecom profile for
             phase/time synchronization with full timing support from
             the network, July, 2014.

   [IEEE-1588] IEEE, Precision Clock Synchronization Protocol for
             Networked Measurement and Control Systems, July, 2008.


Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              SCSN Gap Analysis               March 2016


   [IEEE 802.1AS] IEEE, Timing and Synchronization for Time-Sensitive
             Applications in Bridged Local Area Networks, March, 2011.

   [IEEE 802.1ASbt/D0.7] IEEE, Timing and Synchronization for Time-
             sensitive Applications, November, 2014.

   [IEEE 802.1AS-Rev/D2.0] IEEE, Timing and Synchronization for Time-
             Sensitive Applications, October, 2015.

   [draft-ietf-tictoc-ptp-mib-06] IETF, Precision Time Protocol Version
             2 (PTPv2) Management Information Base, work in progress.



7. Acknowledgments

   TBD



Authors' Addresses

   Yuanlong Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Bantian, Longgang district
   Shenzhen 518129, China
   Email: jiangyuanlong@huawei.com

   Xian Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Bantian, Longgang district
   Shenzhen 518129, China
   Email: lene.liuxian@huawei.com

   Liang Geng
   China Mobile
   Xuanwumenxi Ave, Xuanwu District
   Beijing 100053, China
   Email: gengliang@chinamobile.com

   Daniel Philip Venmani
   Orange Labs
   2, avenue Pierre Marzin,
   Lannion 22307, France
   Email: danielphilip.venmani@orange.com




Jiang and et al      Expires September 21, 2016               [Page 9]

