Network Working Group                                    Kenya Takashima
Internet Draft
Expiration Date                                           Koji Nakamichi
                                                          
                                                          Toshio Soumiya


                                               Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.

                                                            October 1999


                   Concept of IP Traffic Engineering

                   draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt




Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   There is an strong demand from IP network operators to obtain a
   method to control the network resource and enhance network
   performance. The answer for this is Traffic Engineering. It is
   derived through the effort in MPLS wg. But current, the concept of
   Traffic Engineering seems to be limited to a few keywords, namely
   load balancing and restoration.

   The aim of this document is to enhance the concept of traffic
   engineering and point out some aspects of what it is capable of. The


Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 1]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   goal of this document is accomplished if this document could
   enlighten the perspective of IP Traffic Engineering and show a
   possible direction. 

1. Introduction

   World has paid great attention to the Internet for accommodating not
   only data communication service like web service, but also real time
   streaming service like voice and video. With the increasing
   importance of Internet as the commercial communication
   infrastructure, many requirements has been imposed to the network.

   Growth of the traffic forces the operational network to make efficient
   use of the network resource. And the newer applications request the
   network to provide some kind of QoS.

   This situation has triggered the need for Traffic Engineering. Making
   use of Traffic Engineering, network is able to achieve higher
   utilization of the resource in a intelligent manner.

   However, at this point in time, the word of Traffic Engineering points
   two limited keywords, network load balancing and network restoration.

   The aim of this document is to enhance the concept of traffic
   engineering and point out some aspects of what it is capable of.
   As described in section 3., the concept of IP Traffic Engineering is
   to optimize the network performance by controlling the network.
   In other words, IP Traffic Engineering should provides the
   functionality to realize the optimized solution for how the operation
   be done when serving QoS service and best effort service in a single
   network.

   The remainder of this draft is organized as follows. Section 2
   discusses background. Section 3 discusses the concept of traffic
   engineering. Section 4 discusses the performance objective of the
   Traffic Engineering. And Section 5 describes what the requirements
   from the applications would be and discusses what IP Traffic
   Engineering should focus on.

2. Background

   Internet has been paid a great attention for accommodating not only
   data communication service like web, but also real time streaming
   service like voice and video. Now Internet has becoming a common
   infrastructure for multimedia communications. When building
   communication infrastructure over the Internet, method for
   engineering the network will be the important factor. Network
   engineering has been studied using the telecommunication traffic
   theory for many years, and it has supported the evolution and the


Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 2]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   knowledge of maintaining the current telecommunication networks. It
   is necessary for the Internet as a commercial infrastructure to adopt
   such engineering method. 

   Essentially, some control function is needed when delivering data
   from source to destination in the network. There are two types of
   control method, micro-level control and macro-level control. The
   micro-level control is a function of equipment in network and is a
   control at the flow level. The flow level control includes admission
   control, policing control, quality control and congestion control.
   These set of control is also known as traffic control. On the other
   hand, the macro-level control is the network wide control, and it
   resolves a problem that micro-level control can not. For both micro
   and macro-level controls, it could be either static control or
   dynamic control, and the operation could be either concentrated or
   distributed.

   In the current Internet, complicated traffic control functions were
   moved from network to terminal side in order to simplify the network.
   This is TCP. TCP is categorized in the window-based congestion
   control of the micro-level control and works at end-to-end.
   Basically, it was considered that network should not interfere with
   TCP. What the network could do in the Internet was to just provide
   fat pipes. In other words, ISPs could only depended on a primitive
   method as follows; manually construct new physical link when the
   operator detects with his eyes that the utilization of an active link
   exceeded a threshold.

   However, as the importance of Internet as the communication
   infrastructure increases, many problems which can not be solved using
   conventional methods have appeared. Especially, the following issues
   are important;

   -  QoS assurance
   -  Traffic Engineering

   The former is caused by the increase of services like video
   streaming. Some control function is needed for network to assure the
   end-to-end QoS because TCP can only assure the packet delivery. The
   latter is the issue of the following; (1) congestion can not be
   controlled even if the physical links are added, (2) network resource
   can not use effectively even if the number of multipath or route
   increases. Due to the paradigm of the conventional IP routing, the
   resource can not be allocated efficiently. Current network can not be
   engineered as operators wishes.

   The concept of Traffic Engineering is described in section 3. Traffic
   engineering has the objective to optimize all of the network
   resource. To be more direct, Traffic Engineering optimizes the
   network performance by balancing QoS and network utilization of
   non-QoS resource, where two elements are controversial to each other.


Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 3]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   It is done by taking into account the link utilization and/or QoS.
   General view is that the cause of the above issue is originated in IP
   routing protocol. So it is likely that Traffic Engineering should
   take into account of some kind of QoS aware routing protocol as a
   tool. Sorting out general functions of Traffic Engineering is a
   future issue. 

   Traffic Engineering is macro-level control, but it is different from
   network engineering which uses telecommunication traffic theory.

   Traffic Engineering does not depend on a specific layer 2 technology.
   However, from the viewpoint of implementation, currently MPLS is the
   most suitable tool. MPLS has provided some core concepts for Traffic
   Engineering, i.e. FEC and traffic trunk, and developed protocols to
   set up explicit routes. In a sense, it can be said that MPLS has
   opened a new paradigm, a technology category called IP Traffic
   Engineering.

3. Concept of Traffic Engineering

   Traffic Engineering provides automatic optimization of network
   resource in order to satisfy performance objective of application
   service, and it is done by taking into account the performance and/or
   QoS that can be provided by the network.

   Deciding the number of equipments and the configuration of the
   network that would satisfy the given performance, when developing,
   designing, and maintaining a network. The network engineering of
   conventional telecommunication has been done based on communication
   traffic theory, which has been used for expanding and maintaining
   current telecommunication networks.

   Internet is completely different from the telecommunication network,
   but some engineering method is necessary in order to use the Internet
   as the common communication infrastructure. 

   IP Traffic Engineering will play an important role in the operational
   IP network. Traffic Engineering provides a flexible way of responding
   to the demand which changes day by day, and it optimizes the network
   to satisfy the required performance from the network operator. The
   aim of Traffic Engineering is to achieve a network that is "Network
   Engineering Free".

   Up until this time, IP network was intended to provide only
   reachability. But recent applications show demands for higher
   quality. For example, when a path for QoS service is set up between
   ingress and egress in a domain, load balancing with optimization
   function is applied. When the QoS guaranteed path become active in a
   link that both best effort traffic and QoS service traffic is
   present, Traffic Engineering enables the best effort service without
   degrading service availability, say, using a function that reroute


Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 4]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   the best effort path to the other link.

   This is a control which satisfy a request for guaranteeing QoS and
   high link utilization, which are controversial to each other. The
   balancing parameter is the operator's policy. The ultimate view of
   how the Traffic Engineering would operate might be as follows:
   network operator sets the parameters for defined per service profile,
   and Traffic Engineering function interpret it to achieve the network
   optimization in a totally automatic manner.

4. Traffic Engineering Performance Objectives

   As stated in previous section, the goal of traffic engineering is to
   avoid the congestion problem and the degradation of QoS caused by
   those congestion, and to do it automatically in a so called "network
   engineering free" manner. From the viewpoint of traffic in the
   network, the function of the Traffic Engineering could be taken as to
   optimize the distribution of the traffic in the network.

   When considering the performance objectives of traffic engineering,
   we can classified them into following two points according to from
   which side the traffic is viewed in the network:

   -  Application Oriented Performance Objective,

   -  Network Oriented Performance Objective

4.1 Application Oriented Performance Objective

   Application oriented performance objective is an objective related to
   traffic characteristics of the individual flow corresponds to each
   application or service. This is QoS related objective and attempt to
   improve following characteristics:

   -  end-to-end packet transmission delay,

   -  packet delay variation,

   -  server response time,

   etc.

   End-to-end packet transmission delay is transferring time between end
   users or edge nodes. Packet delay variation is the variation of
   packet inter-arrival time at a given node. These parameters have
   great impact for real-time base application such as VoIP. Server
   response time is the round trip delay until user sending packet
   returns back to the user again. These parameters related to the
   performances of client-server type application such as web hosting.




Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 5]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   Below explains application oriented performance objective by taking
   load balancing as an example. Load balancing is one of the key
   function of traffic engineering. Generally, IGP(Interior Gateway
   Protocol) routing in the Internet determines only a single route
   bound to an given destination. In this case, we can easily imagine
   that such a single route causes congestion because a number of flows
   concentrate on this route and packets of the flows rush into the same
   route. As a result, this degrades above characteristics. Delay
   sensitive applications are fatal under such congestion. Load
   balancing, however,
   which splits traffic flows which bound to same egress router into
   multiple routes and distributes traffic loads, release congestion for
   such flows and reduce the probability that encounters any other
   congestion. As a result, packets can be transferred without any
   degradation of traffic characteristics and requirements from
   application can be satisfied.

4.2 Network Oriented Performance Objective

   Network oriented performance objective is an objective related to the
   network resources. This attempt to improve following characteristics:

   -  network resource utilization,

   -  throughput,

   etc.

   Network resource utilization is a ratio of total traffic amount to
   the network total bandwidth. This indicates an efficiency of network
   resource usage. Throughput is a traffic transfer rate for whole
   network at an given time. This indicates a traffic transferring
   capacity in whole network.

   Traffic engineering expects high efficiency of network resource.
   Consider the previous load balancing. As already pointed out above,
   as long as followed the single route determined by IGP routing, the
   flows passes the route with high probability. In this sense, IGP's
   single route makes traffic in the network localize in this route.
   Conversely, this means that there are some available resources other
   than the route in the network. Actually, if there is no flows other
   than that between said ingress and egress, the route except the
   route with flow are empty. Load balancing mechanism splits incoming
   flows at ingress and into multiple routes so that localized traffic
   can be distributed into whole network. This could lead to high
   network efficiency and high throughput.

4.3 Traffic Engineering Performance Optimization

   Traffic engineering have effects on both traffic oriented and
   resource oriented performance objectives. In the above examples,


Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 6]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   load balancing mechanism can provide improvement of QoS of each flow
   and network resource efficiency, but not both at same time. To keep
   the QoS characteristic, such as end-to-end packet transfer delay,
   some amount of bandwidth must be prepare and result in low bandwidth
   utilization.

   In a network, it is not possible to satisfy both application oriented
   performance objective and network oriented performance objective
   simultaneously. They are of a trade-off relation. The goal of traffic
   engineering is to optimize the both performance objectives and
   balance them. In the viewpoint of traffic in the network, traffic
   engineering balances QoS traffic and best effort traffic in the
   network. The decision which objective has higher priority should
   depend on each network operator's policy. Framework which reflects
   such an policy would be needed in the future.

5. traffic engineering requirements

   At this point in time, the word Traffic Engineering only points two
   things, network load balancing and network restoration. Load balancing
   averages the load between links and as a result the network resource
   is optimized. Network restoration provides network robustness and
   stability. This draft enhances the concept of traffic engineering and
   give a new view of what IP Traffic Engineering could do. As described
   in section 3., the concept of IP Traffic Engineering is to optimize
   the network performance by controlling the network. In other words IP
   Traffic Engineering provides the functionality to realize the
   policies which deals with network performance.

   QoS routing could almost be taken as a example of IP Traffic
   Engineering. Only thing is that it is poorly engineered. QoS routing
   hunts for a route to match the requested QoS. But it does not take
   into account the optimization of the network performance. This
   document defines that the behavior of optimizing these two factors,
   providing QoS and sustaining total network performance, is the goal
   of Traffic Engineering. For example, suppose that QoS is provided by
   pre-empting the resource from the best effort network, when
   end-to-end QoS request is induced to the network, IP Traffic
   Engineering function hunts for a route that meets the QoS which give
   the least impact to the best effort traffic. By optimizing the
   network as such, it provides QoS and at the same time keeps the
   performance of the best effort network.

   The meaning of optimization of the network performance varies, since
   the performance objective depends on IP application. Thus, the
   development of IP Traffic Engineering would start by providing
   solutions per IP application and gradually merging each result to
   reach generalized form of IP Traffic Engineering. In subsection 5.1,
   example requirements from the existing IP application is shown. In
   subsection 5.2, a form of future IP traffic engineering is observed.


Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 7]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999



5.1 requirements from applications

   At the beginning of section 5, is was described that the objective of
   IP Traffic Engineering should be set from the requirements which
   derives from each IP application. That is, the goal of IP Traffic
   Engineering differs depending on IP applications. Recent IP
   applications apt to require at least some form of quality. This
   quality might be QoS parameters, or could be user sensed quality.

   In this section, a few example of requirements from IP application is
   shown. In addition, some indication of how IP Traffic Engineering
   would function with the requirements is briefly described.

   traffic engineered web service

   Web hosting provides WWW contents service and is one of the most
   important IP service. Part of the requirements Web hosting requests
   is shown below.

   -  high accessability to the server

   -  quick response time

   -  assuring QoS parameter(bandwidth reservation, 100% connectivity)
      for streaming data

   -  fast database synchronization between mirror servers without
      inducing impact to the network

   QoS(bandwidth reservation, delay bound) could be achieved by means of
   layer2 technology, and as for more loose quality request such as
   accessability, improved response time, robustness of the service
   could be achieved by explicit routing with algorithms which is a
   technology to optimize the performance of the network.

   Another perspective of web hosting with Traffic Engineering could be
   found from the database point of view. The key factors for WWW
   contents service are where to put the database and how to transfer
   them. By taking into account the geographical placement of servers,
   usage of the cache system, this would help optimize the web server
   infrastructure and could result in improved web service.

   Currently, server load balancing product is in the market. This
   provides local load balancing between servers. Network wide load
   balancing is done by using NAT. Introducing IP Traffic Engineering
   would enhance the effect of load balancing and provides method to
   achieve other requirements from the application. 





Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 8]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999



   traffic engineered multicast service

   Requirements from multicast service includes delay guaranty, jitter
   guaranty, controlling constraint in number of channels, constraint in
   network utilization. When multicast service is engineered, one of the
   key factor would be optimization between multicast traffic and
   unicast traffic. This optimization may be done by rerouting unicast
   traffic from the links which mulitcast tree is using.

   traffic engineered VoIP

   Requirements from IP telephony includes low call denial probability,
   delay assurance, jitter assurance, assurance to preserve connection.
   Also ISP would serve voice traffic with high priority because of its
   high income rate. Important factor in VoIP Traffic Engineering is to
   control the effect of call acceptance to best effort service and
   optimize the performance.

5.2 future requirements

   What we understand from section 5.1 is that the performance objective
   of the Traffic Engineering is application specific. The objective for
   one application may be providing least hop paths and for other
   application the objective may be reserving bandwidth. 

   When the knowledge of operating the service is sufficiently provided,
   the relationship between service quality and the cost will become
   clear. Since IP network is undoubtedly becoming the infrastructure
   for every communication system, the knowledge of simultaneous
   operation of various applications or services. In other words, the
   technique to know how an operation of one service affects others and
   to control the behavior in order to optimize the network performance.
   This aspect implies that optimization of the network resource as a
   whole is required.

   An example could be taken from operation of VoIP service. When the
   network is serving VoIP at busy hours, a service provider would
   likely use extra network resource for this particular service so as
   to sustain the quality(call acceptance ratio, bandwidth per call).
   Under this condition, it is likely that the quality of the web
   hosting will deteriorate. In this case, to find out which link to be
   pre-empted for providing extra resource to VoIP is the most
   effectless in performance to Web hosting is the objective.
   Optimization of the operational network in this fashion is a high
   importance and IP Traffic Engineering is the function to accomplish
   this need.

   Note that it may be efficient to make use of the policy framework to
   articulate all of these IP Traffic Engineering objectives.



Takashima, et al.                                               [Page 9]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


   Great portion of the current IP application takes form of
   server-client model. Client receives a service by accessing the
   database at the server. From IP Traffic Engineering point of view,
   the two important factors of this model are where to place the
   database and how to transport the data. Once this general
   optimization solution is obtained, network operation is given a step
   to be released from the geographical constraints. To put this
   broadly, IP Traffic Engineering will lead to a engineering free
   operational network.

6. routing consideration

   For further study.

7. network scope of traffic engineering

   The scope of the network which traffic engineering is applied depends
   on the application. It could be intra-domain or could be among
   several ISPs. The effect of traffic engineering is fully obtained
   only when the method for inter-domain engineering is established.

8. conclusion

   This draft presents a concept of what IP Traffic Engineering should
   take into account. The elements emphasized are as follows:

   -  the objective of the IP Traffic Engineering is to optimize the
      network performance

   -  network performance optimization is obtained by providing QoS and
      sustaining total network performance of non QoS environment.

   -  the objective of the IP Traffic Engineering should meet the
      requirements from various applications

9. references

   [1]  D.Awduche et al., Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS,
        RFC 2702, September 1999

   [2]  D.Awduche et al., Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels,
        draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-tunnel-04.txt, September 1999

   [3]  B.Jamoussi et al., Constraint-Based LSP Setup using LDP,
        draft-ietf-mpls-cr-ldp-03.txt, September 1999

   [4]  R. Callon et al., A Framework for Multiprotocol Label Switching, 
        draft-ietf-mpls-framework-05.txt, September 1999



Takashima, et al.                                              [Page 10]

Internet Draft      draft-takashima-te-concept-00.txt        October1999


10. authors' addresses

   Kenya Takashima
   Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
   4-1-1 Kamikodanaka, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki
   211-8588, Japan
   E-mail: kenya@flab.fujitsu.co.jp

   Koji Nakamichi
   Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
   4-1-1 Kamikodanaka, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki
   211-8588, Japan
   E-mail: nakamichi@flab.fujitsu.co.jp

   Toshio Soumiya
   Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
   4-1-1 Kamikodanaka, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki
   211-8588, Japan
   E-mail: soumiya@flab.fujitsu.co.jp


































Takashima, et al.                                              [Page 11]
