Internet Engineering Task Force                                  M. Kojo
INTERNET-DRAFT                                    University of Helsinki
draft-kojo-tcpm-frto-eval-01.txt                             K. Yamamoto
Expires: May 2008                                                M. Hata
                                                              NTT Docomo
                                                            P. Sarolahti
                                                   Nokia Research Center

                                                        19 November 2007



                         Evaluation of RFC 4138


Status of this Memo

    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on May 2008.

Abstract

    Forward-RTO recovery (F-RTO) specified in RFC 4138 is an algorithm
    for detecting a spurious retransmission timeout with TCP and SCTP.
    This document describes the advantages of F-RTO and summarizes the



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                                    [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    experience in its implementations and the experiments conducted with
    it. By analyzing the implications of the spurious retransmission
    timeouts on the regular RTO recovery and Forward-RTO recovery
    algorithm, including a detailed corner case analysis, it shows that
    F-RTO does not have negative impact on the network when used with an
    appropriate response algorithm even in the rare cases where F-RTO
    falsely declares a retransmission timeout spurious. It concludes
    with a recommendation that F-RTO is to be advanced to the standards
    track.










































Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                                    [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


                             Table of Contents

    1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       1.1. Conventions and Terminology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
    2. Problems with the Regular RTO Recovery. . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.1. Unnecessary Retransmissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.2. Dishonoring the Packet Conservation Princi-
       ple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.3. Unnecessary Reduction of the Congestion Win-
       dow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.4. Other Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
    3. Advantages and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.1. Avoiding Unnecessary Retransmissions . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.2. Adhering to the Packet Conservation Princi-
       ple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.3. Selecting an Appropriate Congestion Control
       Response. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.4. Other Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       3.5. Non-spurious RTOs and Undetected Spurious
       RTOs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    4. Experimental Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.1. Initial trials in an emulated network. . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.2. F-RTO Performance over Commercial W-CDMA
       Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.3. Impact of Malicious Receiver on Network and
       Regular TCP Connection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    5. Hidden Packet Losses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       5.1. Loss of Retransmitted Segments . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.2. Reordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.3. Malicious Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    6. Conclusions and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
    References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
    AUTHORS' ADDRESSES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
    Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
    Intellectual Property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

1.  Introduction

    A temporary delay spike or a more permanent but sudden delay
    increase in the TCP data or ACK path may result in a spurious
    retransmission timeout (RTO) that triggers a premature
    retransmission of the first unacknowledged data segment followed by
    an unnecessary loss recovery in slow-start. This creates severe
    problems with the regular RTO recovery algorithm as the late
    acknowledgments of the original segments trigger unnecessary
    retransmissions at a high rate. This introduces useless load into
    the network in the form of a (large) packet burst. In addition, the
    TCP sender will reduce its transmission rate quite unnecessarily



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                        Section 1.  [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    because the congestion control algorithms are falsely triggered,
    resulting in decreased TCP performance.

    When a spurious RTO occurs, a TCP sender employing the Forward RTO-
    Recovery (F-RTO) algorithm [RFC4138] is able to avoid the problems
    encountered with the regular RTO recovery by detecting that the TCP
    retransmission timer expired spuriously and by avoiding additional
    unnecessary retransmissions. In addition, the F-RTO sender may elude
    the unnecessary performance degradation by restoring the congestion
    control state and/or reduce the risk of falsely triggering TCP's
    loss recovery and congestion control again in the later phases of
    the connection by adapting the RTT estimators.

    This document discusses the problems with the regular TCP RTO
    recovery when spurious RTOs are encountered and evaluates the F-RTO
    algorithm as a standards track alternative for the regular RTO
    recovery.


1.1.  Conventions and Terminology

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Problems with the Regular RTO Recovery

    When a spurious retransmission timeout occurs, the regular RTO
    recovery is incapable of avoiding unnecessary retransmissions and
    also fails in adhering to the packet conservation principle [Jac88]
    by injecting the unnecessary retransmissions into the network at a
    rate that is higher than the rate at which packets are leaving the
    network. In addition, after bursting the unnecessary retransmissions
    into the network the transmission is continued at an unnecessarily
    low rate.


2.1.  Unnecessary Retransmissions

    After the first unacknowledged segment triggered by a spurious
    retransmission timeout has been transmitted, the late
    acknowledgments of the original segments arrive at the sender and
    trigger further unnecessary retransmissions in slow start. The first
    late ACK triggers unnecessary retransmission of the next segment(s)
    which, in turn, will get acknowledged by the next late ACK quite
    immediately, injecting the next segments from the retransmission
    queue into the network. Assuming that none of the original segments



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                      Section 2.1.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    and none of the corresponding late ACKs were lost, this chain
    reaction results in unnecessary retransmission of all outstanding
    segments.

    Depending on the flight size at the time when the spurious RTO
    occurred, a large number of unnecessary retransmissions may get
    injected into the network as useless load. This often creates a
    significant problem in network environments where sudden delay
    spikes tend to appear because such networks often offer a low or
    moderate transmission capacity and any excess load significantly
    reduces the available network capacity for delivering useful
    traffic. In addition, unnecessary transmissions waste the battery
    power of wireless devices and introduce extra costs when the access
    link usage is billed per transmission volume.


2.2.  Dishonoring the Packet Conservation Principle

    The purpose of the TCP slow-start algorithm is to (re)start the ACK
    clock and probe the network for available capacity. However, when
    the retransmission timeout expires spuriously the TCP sender fails
    to restart the ACK clock at a correct rate and is not able to probe
    the available network capacity correctly. This is because the
    acknowledgements acknowledging the retransmissions do not arrive one
    round-trip time (RTT) after the retransmission as supposed. Instead,
    the retransmissions are acknowledged by the late acknowledgements
    that arrive at the line rate of the bottleneck link on the end-to-
    end path or, in some cases, at much higher rate. Therefore, the late
    acknowledgements clock out the unnecessary retransmissions within
    one RTT using slow start and potentially 50 percent more data
    segments are transmitted to the network in one RTT than what the TCP
    sender in steady state would have transmitted if the spurious RTO
    had not occurred. This violates the packet conservation principle
    [Jac88].

    Assuming no packets are lost and delayed ACKs are in use, each late
    acknowledgement (except the first one) arriving after a spurious RTO
    triggers three unnecessary retransmissions into the network until
    all segments in the retransmission queue have been retransmitted.
    After this, the TCP sender continues by transmitting three new
    segments on each late acknowledgement. The number of the new
    segments triggered by the late acknowledgements equals to the half
    of the flight size at the time when spurious RTO occurred. This
    injects 50 percent more segments into the network within one RTT
    compared to the number of segments injected in one RTT by a TCP
    sender in steady state, i.e., three segments per ACK instead of two
    segments per ACK.




Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                      Section 2.2.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    Assuming no packets are lost and delayed ACKs are not in use, each
    late acknowledgement corresponding to the first half of the original
    flight triggers two unnecessary retransmissions into the network.
    The late acknowledgements belonging the second half of the original
    flight trigger a transmission of one new segment each. This means
    that during the first half of the RTT, the sending rate is doubled
    compared to the rate at which a TCP sender in steady state would
    have transmitted if the spurious RTO had not occurred.

    The new data segments transmitted after the unnecessary
    retransmissions during the same RTT are likely to experience
    congestion as the preceding unnecessary retransmission of the whole
    window of segments is likely to occupy the bottleneck link queue.
    This may result in serious a performance penalty as the TCP sender
    is often forced to wait for a backed-off retransmission timer to
    expire in order to recover the lost segments. A figure depicting an
    example of such a behavior is available at
    [http://www.iki.fi/pasi.sarolahti/frto/].



2.3.  Unnecessary Reduction of the Congestion Window

    When a spurious RTO occurs, the TCP sender enters loss recovery and
    reduces the congestion window and slow-start threshold. If the RTO
    was spurious, the reduction is likely to be unnecessary and results
    in sacrificed TCP performance. The impact of this unnecessary
    congestion control action is particularly notable in high latency
    environments where restoring the previous congestion window takes a
    long time.


2.4.  Other Problems

    Updating the RTO estimate on retransmitted segments is not possible
    due to the retransmission ambiguity problem [Zh86, KP87]. Therefore,
    the RTO estimate is not updated for segments that experience the
    unusually long delay and cause the spurious RTOs. This means that
    the delayed segments are ignored in updating the RTO estimate and,
    in the worst case, the temporary delay spikes are never reflected to
    the RTO estimate, allowing a later delay spike to trigger a new
    spurious RTO as easily as the previous spurious RTO was triggered.









Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                      Section 2.4.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


3.  Advantages and Motivation


3.1.  Avoiding Unnecessary Retransmissions

    If the TCP sender employs F-RTO, it is able to detect spurious RTOs.
    When F-RTO detects a spurious RTO, it retransmits only one segment
    unnecessarily (the first unacknowledged segment) and continues by
    transmitting new segments.


3.2.  Adhering to the Packet Conservation Principle

    If the TCP sender employs F-RTO, it is able to detect spurious RTOs
    and avoid the unnecessary retransmission of the whole window of
    data. The amount of data that the TCP sender employing F-RTO
    transmits during the next RTT after detecting a spurious RTO depends
    on the congestion control response that the TCP sender follows.
    Whichever response algorithm is selected, the segments clocked out
    by the late acknowledgements must not be transmitted in slow start,
    unless the TCP sender was in slow start right before the spurious
    RTO occurred and the RTO recovery was entered. Otherwise, the late
    acknowledgements would clock out the segments at higher than
    accepted rate as discussed in Section 2.2 and the TCP sender would
    not adhere to the packet conservation principle.


3.3.  Selecting an Appropriate Congestion Control Response

    If the F-RTO algorithm detects that the RTO was spurious, the TCP
    sender may revert the congestion control state back to the same
    state as it was right before the RTO occurred. One possible option
    is to restore the congestion window and slow-start threshold [LG04].
    This would result in transmitting at the same rate as before the
    RTO, avoiding the performance penalty of unnecessarily reducing the
    congestion window and slow-start threshold. However, reverting the
    congestion control parameters might not be a safe response in all
    occasions. For example, a spurious RTO may occur due to a make-
    before-break vertical handover [MK04] from a low latency path to a
    high latency path [HC05, DK06]. If the handover results in a
    spurious RTO and the bottleneck link bandwidth-delay product with
    the new path after the handover is smaller than with the old path,
    restoring the congestion window is likely to result in congestion on
    the new bottleneck link.

    The TCP sender may select to take a conservative congestion control
    response after detecting a spurious RTO. The original F-RTO
    algorithm employed a conservative response algorithm after a



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                      Section 3.3.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    spurious RTO was detected [SKR03]. That is, the TCP sender sets the
    congestion window and slow-start threshold to half of the flight
    size right before the spurious RTO occurred and continues
    transmitting new data in congestion avoidance. This approach is
    always a safe response as the TCP sender halves its transmission
    rate, thereby taking the spurious RTO as a congestion signal.


3.4.  Other Advantages

    If the F-RTO algorithm declares that an RTO was spuriously
    triggered, it may take the RTT for the delayed segments into account
    when calculating the RTO estimate, except for the segment that was
    retransmitted upon the retransmission timer expiration. This alone
    may help in avoiding further spurious RTOs. However, with the
    capability of detecting spurious RTOs the TCP sender may adjust the
    RTO estimate explicitly in order to avoid entering loss recovery
    unnecessarily in the later phases of the connection [BBA06].


3.5.  Non-spurious RTOs and Undetected Spurious RTOs

    If the retransmission timeout is not spurious or the F-RTO algorithm
    is not able to detect the spurious timeout, it reverts back to the
    conventional RTO recovery and continues retransmitting segments in
    slow-start. Two different cases with slightly different behavior can
    be observed: (i) if the first ACK arriving after the retransmission
    timer expired is a duplicate acknowledgement, the F-RTO sender
    declares the RTO genuine and reverts back to the conventional RTO
    recovery. (ii) if the first ACK arriving after the retransmission
    timer expired acknowledges new data, the F-RTO sender sends two
    previously unsent segments. Now, if the next ACK is a duplicate ACK,
    the F-RTO sender declares the RTO genuine and reverts to the
    conventional RTO recovery.

    In the first case, the behavior is identical to the behavior of the
    conventional RTO recovery. In the second case, the behavior is
    similar to the conventional RTO recovery with the only difference
    that the 2nd and 3rd segment sent after the RTO are new segments.
    When compared to a regular TCP implementation, the use of the F-RTO
    algorithm does not change the transmission rate of segments in the
    cases where the RTO is not declared spurious. Therefore, from the
    congestion control point of view the F-RTO algorithm can be seen to
    be safe also in these cases.







Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                      Section 3.5.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


4.  Experimental Results

    Additional material, such as the cited papers with the F-RTO
    experimentation results, can be found at
    [http://www.iki.fi/pasi.sarolahti/frto/].


4.1.  Initial trials in an emulated network

    The basic F-RTO algorithm was first introduced in [SKR03]. F-RTO
    performance was experimented in a simple emulated network
    environment with a slow bottleneck link that was typical to the
    wireless environments at the time of conducting the analysis. The
    original conservative F-RTO congestion control response (see Section
    3.3) was used. The paper analyzed different scenarios that trigger a
    retransmission timeout either spuriously or genuinely. The following
    scenarios were investigated: i) delay spike that triggers a spurious
    timeout, ii) lost retransmission, iii) loss burst of entire window
    of data. The paper also discussed a packet reordering scenario,
    although experiments with packet reordering were not conducted. In
    the delay spike scenario F-RTO significantly reduced the number of
    unnecessary retransmissions and also improved the data throughput.
    In the other cases use of F-RTO did not affect TCP performance
    negatively, and did not cause any additional traffic to be sent into
    the network.

    SACK-enhanced F-RTO with different congestion control response
    algorithms was evaluated in [Sar03]. Because the cases where
    duplicate ACKs interact with spurious timeout detection were
    relatively rare in practice, in many cases the basic F-RTO performed
    equally well with the SACK-enhanced F-RTO.



4.2.  F-RTO Performance over Commercial W-CDMA Networks

    Experimentation on F-RTO performance over commercial W-CDMA networks
    and in a test environment which emulates HSDPA (High Speed Downlink
    Packet Access) networks has been reported in [Yam05, Hok05].

    In the experimentation over the commercial networks, we downloaded
    data objects from a test server in the Internet through the W-CDMA
    mobile communications networks. The F-RTO detection algorithm with
    the Eifel response algorithm was implemented on the test server, HP-
    UX 11i prototype. The commercial W-CDMA networks provide a maximum
    bearer rate of 384 kbps in a downlink and 64 kbps in an uplink.

    A mobile client downloaded data objects of varying size from the



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                      Section 4.2.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    server in five different situations; fixed point (good and bad
    wireless conditions), low speed (pedestrian), medium speed (driving
    by car in an urban area), and high speed (a bullet train). The
    object sizes were set to 6 Kbytes, 18 Kbytes, 300 Kbytes, 2 Mbytes,
    and 518 Mbytes (the object size of 518 Mbytes was used only for a
    bullet train). The experimentation took two weeks collecting
    performance data for 643 connections with F-RTO and 991 connections
    without F-RTO.

    In this experimentation, F-RTO reduced the amount of unnecessarily
    retransmitted data by 82 percent compared to the connections without
    F-RTO. Because the spurious RTOs did not occur very often, a
    relatively large amount of data was sent in total compared to the
    amount of unnecessarily retransmitted data. Therefore, just avoiding
    the unnecessary retransmissions did not improve TCP performance
    significantly. Throughput was improved primarily because F-RTO was
    used with the Eifel response algorithm that fully reverts the
    congestion control state to the state valid prior to the spurious
    retransmission timeout. F-RTO with the Eifel response improved
    throughput by 6 percent for connections that transferred at least 2
    Mbytes and experienced spurious timeout. The network used for the
    experimentation has a small bandwidth-delay product around ten
    segments. A larger improvement in throughput is expected in networks
    with high bandwidth-delay product such as HSDPA networks.

    There are a few situations in which F-RTO cannot detect a spurious
    timeout such as severe reordering or duplication occurring on the
    segment that triggered the spurious timeout, if the sender has no
    new data to send, or the advertised window does not allow to send
    new data that is needed by F-RTO to detect the spurious timeout. In
    the experimentation, F-RTO was able detect 71 percent of spurious
    timeouts successfully. 28 percent of the spurious timeouts could not
    be detected by F-RTO because the sender had already sent the FIN
    segment and had no new data to send when the spurious timeout
    occurred. 0.7 percent of the spurious timeouts could not be detected
    because the advertised window prohibited transmitting new data and
    0.3 percent because the sender received duplicate acknowledgements
    after the spurious timeout.

    The throughput of F-RTO with Eifel response was also evaluated in
    the test environment that emulated HSDPA networks. The test network
    has 14 Mbps bearer rate and 300 ms round-trip time, which yields the
    bandwidth-delay product of about 350 segments with the segment size
    of 1460 bytes. To trigger a spurious timeout, acknowledgements from
    the server to the client were delayed intentionally in the early and
    middle phase of the initial slow start and after the congestion
    window reached the maximum window size (i.e., in the steady state).
    F-RTO with Eifel response improved the throughput by 262 percent, 92



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                     Section 4.2.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    percent, and 37 percent when a spurious timeout occurred in the
    early slow-start phase, in the middle of the slow start phase, and
    after reaching the steady state, respectively. The results show that
    F-RTO with Eifel response improves the throughput significantly in
    networks with large bandwidth-delay product.


4.3.  Impact of Malicious Receiver on Network and Regular TCP Connection

    As discussed later in section 5.3, with F-RTO a receiver could
    mislead the sender to declare an RTO spurious even though it was
    caused due to a lost segment . This  impact on networks  and
    regular  TCP  connections  was  evaluated  using  computer
    simulation. There, two types  of  conservative  response  algorithms
    and  a response algorithm that reverts the congestion control  state
    back  to  the same state as it was  right  before  the  RTO
    occurred  are  examined.  The conservative response algorithms
    examined reduce the  slow  start  threshold to half of the flight
    size right before the spurious RTO  occurred  and  the congestion
    window to one segment like slow start or to the  half  like  fast
    recovery. The simulation results show that with  the  conservative
    response algorithms, the malicious receiver obtains no  higher
    throughput  than  the regular TCP connection  sharing  the  network
    bandwidth,  so  there  is  no incentive for the malicious receivers
    to mislead the  sender  to  declare  a genuine  retransmission
    timeout  spurious.  On  the  other  hand,  when  an aggressive
    response algorithm is used, there are some  situations  that  the
    malicious receiver can obtain more bandwidth compared  to  the
    regular  TCP connection.


5.  Hidden Packet Losses

    There are a few known scenarios where a packet loss could escape F-
    RTO's notice and cause a false positive detection. These scenarios
    could be split into two cases: scenarios with a legitime receiver
    where TCP communication is unaffected, and scenarios with
    misbehaving receiver.  In the first case the hidden packet loss is
    harmless, if the congestion control response to spurious timeout is
    conservative enough. The second case requires receiver misbehavior
    by acknowledging segments that have not been received or by delaying
    the acknowledgements, and it is not beneficial to the receiver
    because, as a result, the TCP connection may become unreliable or
    useless, or the malicious receiver may compromise the performance of
    the TCP loss recovery in order to mislead the F-RTO sender. We also
    note that optimistically acknowledging segments that have not yet
    been received is possible with any regular TCP implementation, and
    if the receiver's motivation was to damage the TCP connection (for



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                       Section 5.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    example, as a part of some kind of denial-of-service effort), the
    standard TCP offers easier ways of doing that. Next we will discuss
    these cases in more detail.


5.1.  Loss of Retransmitted Segments

    RFC 4138 notes that when the timeout is declared spurious, the TCP
    sender cannot detect whether the unnecessary RTO retransmission was
    lost. In principle, the loss of the RTO retransmission should be
    taken as a congestion signal. Thus, there is a small possibility
    that the F-RTO sender will violate the congestion control rules, if
    it chooses to fully revert congestion control parameters after
    detecting a spurious timeout. The Eifel detection algorithm
    [RFC3522] has a similar property, while the DSACK option can be used
    to detect whether the retransmitted segment was successfully
    delivered to the receiver [RFC3708].

    This behavior belongs to the first class of the above-mentioned
    cases; the loss of the RTO retransmission does not harm the TCP
    connection in any way, because the original segment has reached the
    receiver.  With a conservative enough congestion control response
    this behavior is not harmful to the network, either.


5.2.  Reordering

    F-RTO can declare a timeout spurious unintentionally when there is
    reordering between the retransmitted segment and the original
    segments transmitted before the timeout so that the RTO
    retransmission is acknowledged before the full window of original
    transmissions. This could happen, for example, in the case when an
    original segment is lost on a high-latency connection path, and the
    RTO retransmission of that segment traverses through a different
    path that has substantially lower round-trip delay. This might sound
    a pathological scenario, but could occur on a multi-radio device
    that is performing a vertical handover between a high-latency WWAN
    link and a low-latency WLAN link.

    Also this scenario belongs to the first class of the above-mentioned
    cases, as it is not harmful to the network if the congestion control
    response to spurious retransmission timeout is conservative enough.
    We believe that in practice this kind of combination of loss, delay
    and reordering is very rare. In addition, this kind of a reordering
    is less likely to occur with large TCP windows with which the effect
    of a non-conservative response could be detectable.





Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                     Section 5.2.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


5.3.  Malicious Receiver

    RFC 4138 notes in its security considerations that with F-RTO the
    receiver could mislead the sender into falsely declaring the RTO
    spurious. There are two possible ways a malicious receiver could
    trigger a wrong output from the F-RTO algorithm. First, the receiver
    can acknowledge data that it has not received so that the
    acknowledgement arrives at the sender after the retransmission
    timeout. Second, it can delay acknowledgments for segments it has
    received earlier and acknowledge the outstanding segments after the
    retransmission timer has expired and the retransmitted segment has
    arrived, deluding the sender to declare the timeout spurious.

    If the TCP receiver acknowledges a segment it has not really
    received, the sender can be led to declare the timeout spurious in
    the F-RTO algorithm, step 3. However, by doing so the receiver risks
    the correct behavior of the connection. If both the original
    transmission and the retransmission of the segment are dropped, the
    sender incorrectly thinks that the lost segment has been delivered
    to the receiver being not able to retransmit the segment again. As a
    result, the TCP connection is unable to proceed unless the receiver
    delivers the data out-of-order to the application, making the data
    delivery of the connection unreliable.  In addition, this requires
    that the receiver transmits the false ACK timely such that the ACK
    does not arrive at the sender until the retransmission timer has
    expired and that the receiver suppresses any duplicate ACKs in order
    to prevent the sender from entering the fast retransmit and fast
    recovery.  Therefore, we believe that this kind of attack is very
    hard to implement succesfully and a malicious receiver is unlikely
    to get any benefit from this attack, and with an appropriate
    response this attack is not harmful to the network, either.

    If the TCP receiver delays the acknowledgements of the out-of-order
    segments after detecting a hole in the sequence space and waits for
    the retransmission timer to expire and the retransmitted segment to
    arrive before it acknowledges the segments with cumulative
    acknowledgements, it may make the F-RTO sender to walk through the
    algorithm steps so that the timeout seems spurious when it should
    have been genuine. We believe this kind of attack is difficult to
    implement in practice, and it is likely to be of no benefit to the
    receiver as it needs to force the sender to wait for an RTO to
    recover each of the lost segments while loss recovery with fast
    retransmit and fast recovery is likely to be much more efficient. In
    addition, this approach does not work if consecutive segments are
    lost unless the receiver acknowledges data that it has not received.
    If a response algorithm that restores the congestion window and the
    slow start threshold is used, there are some potential situations
    that the malicious receiver obtains the higher throughput than the



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                     Section 5.3.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    regular TCP does.  However, with a conservative response to the
    spurious timeout, this attack is of no benefit to the receiver and
    it is not harmful to the network, either. A study with evaluation
    results of the impact of the malicious receivers can be found at
    [http://www.iki.fi/pasi.sarolahti/frto/]




6.  Conclusions and Recommendations

    This document analyzed the possible benefits and disadvantages of
    using F-RTO enhanced TCP, if it was deployed globally. When a
    spurious retransmission timeout occurs, the regular RTO recovery
    wastes the network resources by retransmitting the whole window of
    data unnecessarily. By doing it, a regular TCP also violates the
    packet conservation principle and is thus harmful for congestion
    control, despite following the letters of the specifications. As a
    result of spurious timeout, the regular RTO recovery transmits 1.5
    times more data than what is allowed by the congestion window at the
    time the spurious timeout occurred and imposes excessive load on the
    network.

    F-RTO is able to avoid these unnecessary retransmissions by
    detecting a spurious timeout and not retransmitting segments
    unnecessarily. When the spurious retransmission timeout has been
    detected by F-RTO, the F-RTO sender with an appropriate response
    algorithm adheres to the packet conservation principle, because it
    does not transmit more segments than what have left the network.
    Therefore, a successful detection of a spurious retransmission
    timeout with F-RTO can result both in reduced load on the network
    and improved TCP throughput. These factors are especially important
    in wireless communication.

    There is one well-known scenario where a spurious timeout hides a
    packet loss with F-RTO: if the RTO retransmission is lost, a F-RTO
    sender cannot detect the segment loss. This is common to all
    currently known mechanisms for detecting spurious retransmission
    timeout immediately after it has occurred. Missing one packet loss
    event is not a problem, if the response algorithm is conservative
    enough. DSACK, that is able to detect spurious timeout after a full
    window of data has been unnecessarily retransmitted, does not have
    this problem, but on the other hand, DSACK is not able to avoid the
    unnecessary retransmissions and the consequent violation of the
    packet conservation principle.

    There are two known ways a misbehaving TCP receiver could cheat the
    F-RTO algorithm: (i) after detecting a packet loss, the receiver



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                       Section 6.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    could delay acknowledging the following segments until a
    retransmission timer expires and the retransmitted segment arrives
    and then acknowledge the outstanding data, making the timeout seem
    spurious to F-RTO. (ii) after F-RTO algorithm has been triggered,
    the receiver could optimistically acknowledge segments that have
    been lost and make the RTO seem spurious to F-RTO. In the latter
    case the penalty to the connection is significant because the
    control data at the TCP sender may go into an invalid state, causing
    the TCP connection to be unusable. Furthermore, also with the
    regular TCP algorithms the receiver can acknowledge unreceived
    segments before they arrive in the hope of gaining more performance,
    with the risk of invalidating the TCP state at the sender and making
    the connection unusable. If the response to a spurious
    retransmission timeout is conservative enough, a misbehaving
    receiver cannot cause extensive congestion to the network in either
    of these cases.

    Given the above presented benefits and disadvantages, we believe F-
    RTO [RFC4138] is a safe algorithm to be moved on to Proposed
    Standard, and to be deployed globally in the Internet with the
    following notes:

    * Because F-RTO performance with SCTP has not been studied to a
      significant extent, we propose that the revised version of RFC
      4138 would not include discussion on SCTP. However, the authors
      would like to encourage future experimentations with F-RTO and
      SCTP, applying RFC 4138.

    * Because it is useful to keep the spurious timeout detection and
      response specifications separate, the authors would like to enable
      an usage of the F-RTO algorithm that allows detecting a spurious
      timeout without applying any specific response algorithm, i.e.,
      allowing the TCP sender to continue transmitting new data with a
      conservative congestion control response. In other words, after
      detecting a spurious retransmission timeout, the TCP sender would
      take the spurious timeout as a congestion signal and reduce the
      congestion window and slow-start threshold.




References

    [BBA06] J. Blanton, E. Blanton, and M. Allman. Using Spurious
    Retransmissions to Adapt the Retransmission Timeout. Internet-Draft
    "draft-allman-rto-backoff-04.txt", December 2006. Work in progress.

    [DK06] L. Daniel and M. Kojo. "Adapting TCP for Vertical Handoffs in



Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                                   [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    Wireless Networks". In Proc. 31st IEEE Conference on Local Computer
    Networks (LCN), Tampa, FL, USA, November 15-16, 2006.

    [Jac88] Jacobson, V., "Congestion Avoidance and Control", In
    Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM 88.

    [HC05] H. Huang and J. Cai. Improving TCP Performance during Soft
    Vertical Handoff. In Proc. 19th International Conference on Advanced
    Information Networking and Applications (AINA'05), volume 2, pages
    329-332, Mar. 2005.

    [Hok05] A. Hokamura, et al. "Performance Evaluation of F-RTO and
    Eifel Response Algorithms over W-CDMA packet network". Wireless
    Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC'05), Sept. 2005.

    [KP87] Karn, P. and C. Partridge, "Improving Round-Trip Time
    Estimates in Reliable Transport Protocols", In Proceedings of ACM
    SIGCOMM 87.

    [LG04] Ludwig, R. and A. Gurtov, "The Eifel Response Algorithm for
    TCP", RFC 4015, February 2005.

    [MK04] J. Manner and M Kojo, Mobility Related Terminology. RFC 3753,
    June 2004.

    [RFC793] J. Postel. Transmission Control Protocol. RFC 793,
    September 1981.

    [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
    Requirement Levels. BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

    [RFC3522] R. Ludwig and M. Meyer, The Eifel Detection Algorithm for
    TCP.  RFC 3522, April 2003.

    [RFC3708] E. Blanton and M. Allman, Using TCP Duplicate Selective
    Acknowledgement (DSACKs) and Stream Control Transmission Protocol
    (SCTP) Duplicate Transmission Sequence Numbers (TSNs) to Detect
    Spurious Retransmissions, RFC 3708, February 2004.

    [RFC4138] P. Sarolahti and M. Kojo. Forward RTO-Recovery (F-RTO): An
    Algorithm for Detecting Spurious Retransmission Timeouts with TCP
    and the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP), RFC 4138,
    August 2005.

    [SKR03] P. Sarolahti, M. Kojo, and K. Raatikainen.  F-RTO: An
    Enhanced Recovery Algorithm for TCP Retransmission Timeouts.  In ACM
    SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 33(2), April 2003




Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                                   [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


    [Sar03] P. Sarolahti. Congestion Control on Spurious TCP
    Retransmission Timeouts. In Proceedings of IEEE Globecom 2003, San
    Francisco, CA, USA, December 2003.

    [Yam05] K. Yamamoto, et al. "Effects of F-RTO and Eifel Response
    Algorithms for W-CDMA and HSDPA networks". Wireless Personal
    Multimedia Communications (WPMC'05), Sept. 2005.

    [Zh86] Zhang, L., "Why TCP Timers Don't Work Well", In Proceedings
    of ACM SIGCOMM 86.


AUTHORS' ADDRESSES


    Markku Kojo
    University of Helsinki
    P.O. Box 68
    FI-00014 UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI
    Finland
    Email: kojo@cs.helsinki.fi

    Kazunori Yamamoto
    NTT Docomo, Inc.
    3-5 Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 239-8536, Japan
    Phone: +81-46-840-3812
    Email: yamamotokaz@nttdocomo.co.jp

    Max Hata
    NTT Docomo, Inc.
    3-5 Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 239-8536, Japan
    Phone: +81-46-840-3812
    Email: hatama@s1.nttdocomo.co.jp

    Pasi Sarolahti
    Nokia Research Center
    P.O. Box 407
    FI-00045 NOKIA GROUP
    Finland
    Phone: +358 50 4876607
    Email: pasi.sarolahti@nokia.com










Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                                   [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT              Expires: May 2008              November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

    This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
    contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
    retain all their rights.

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on
    an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
    REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
    IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
    WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
    WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
    ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
    FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
    to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
    in this document or the extent to which any license under such
    rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
    it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
    Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
    documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
    of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
    at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
    ipr@ietf.org.










Kojo/Yamamoto/Hata/Sarolahti                                   [Page 18]
