


Internet Engineering Task Force                                J. Newton
Internet-Draft                                            Cable&Wireless
Intended status: BCP                                         M. Aissaoui
Expires: December 29, 2008                                Alcatel-Lucent
                                                             JP. Vasseur
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                           June 27, 2008


A Diffserv-TE Implementation Model to dynamically change booking factors
                         during failure events
            draft-newton-mpls-te-dynamic-overbooking-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 29, 2008.

Abstract

   This document discusses the requirements for and describes an
   implementation model of Diffserv-TE that allows the booking factors
   applied to network resources to be dynamically changed during network
   failure events.







Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Application scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Scenario 1: Fair traffic loss during failure . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Scenario 2: Managing out-of-contract traffic . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Detection of failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Bandwidth Constraint Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Preemption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  Booking Factor usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.5.  Admission control behaviour with shared resources  . . . .  5
   4.  Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Normal network operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.1.1.  Traffic Engineering advertisements . . . . . . . . . .  6
       4.1.2.  Head-end behaviour under normal network operation  . .  6
     4.2.  Network failure mode operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.1.  Operation at point of failure  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.2.  Head-end Behaviour under Network Failure Mode  . . . .  7
       4.2.3.  Mid-point behaviour under network failure mode.  . . .  7
     4.3.  Reversion Behaviour  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  New LSPs signalled during failure. . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10
























Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


1.  Introduction

   The IETF has developed RSVP-TE [RFC3209] to provide the capability of
   signalling MPLS Traffic Engineered LSPs that reserve resources from
   the network.  This was further developed with Diffserv-aware MPLS
   Traffic Engineering [RFC4124] that allowed the network to enforce
   different bandwidth constraints for different classes of traffic.

   These developments allow network operators to optimise network
   resource utilisation.  However, there is currently no defined method
   of applying different optimisation schemes to a network when in
   normal operation (with all resources available) and the same network
   when in failure mode (with one or more resources unavailable).

   Although DSTE was developed to allow Traffic engineering at the per
   class level, where a class is generally considered to be a particular
   diff-serv class of service, it is proposed here to advertise
   different DSTE Bandwidth Constraints (BC) for use during normal
   network operation and failure modes.  LSPs would then be signalled
   using one DSTE Class Type (CT) during normal network operation and a
   different CT during failure modes.  This allows individual control
   over the booking factors for normal network operation and network
   failure modes.


2.  Application scenarios

2.1.  Scenario 1: Fair traffic loss during failure

   An IP/MPLS network may be designed such that not all traffic can be
   delivered during a network failure event.  All traffic on this
   network is of a single class of service and is treated as equal.
   Traffic engineering has been implemented in order to best optimise
   the network such that there is no traffic loss during normal
   operation.  In order to do this, LSPs reserve their actual load and
   link booking factors are set to 100%.

   In the current implementation, during a network failure some LSPs
   will not be able to signal their required resources and will
   therefore fail to be placed.  There will consequently be an unfair
   distribution of packet loss with some LSPs having 100% loss and other
   with 0% loss.

   In order to fairly distribute the traffic loss during failure, it is
   necessary to effectively increase the booking factors during a
   failure event to a value greater than 100% so that all LSPs can be
   placed and the excess load is distributed fairly across the network.




Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


2.2.  Scenario 2: Managing out-of-contract traffic

   An IP/MPLS network is designed to carry traffic of different drop-
   precedence.  Traffic with a high drop-precedence is considered as
   out-of-contract and is configured to be dropped first under
   congestion.  Traffic with a low drop-precedence is considered in-
   contract and should always be delivered.

   The network operator wishes to optimise the network such that all
   traffic can be delivered during normal network operation but only in-
   contract traffic is guaranteed during failure events.  LSPs are
   configured to signal only the in-contract load and booking factors
   are set to such that bandwidth is still available to the additional
   out-of-contract load during normal operation; this booking factor
   would normally be based upon the forecasted ratio of in-contract to
   out-of contract traffic.

   During a failure event, there now may not be enough network resources
   to signal all LSPs.  Consequently, the booking factors need to be
   increased in order to guarantee that all in-contract demand can be
   served.  This new booking factor would normally be based upon the
   level of in-contract traffic.  Network resources are likely to be
   congested with total demand, but queuing and scheduling mechanisms
   can be implemented such that only out-of-contract traffic will be
   discarded.


3.  Considerations

3.1.  Detection of failure

   All network elements within the same IGP area will be aware of a link
   failure due to a link-state change notification in OSPF or ISIS if
   they are within the same area as the failure occurred.  However the
   network implementation could be multi-area in which case the link-
   state change will not be propagated to the entire network.

   The Head-end element of an LSP is always made aware of relevant
   network failures as an LSP passing over a remote failed resource will
   receive a RSVP Path Tear message.  Alternatively, if FRR is
   implemented, this notification will be through a RSVP "Tunnel locally
   repaired" Path-Error Message or the "Local protection in use" flag
   within the RRO object of the RESV message.  In the case that the
   failure is local to the HE element, then the failure is detected due
   to local link or control-plane failure.






Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


3.2.  Bandwidth Constraint Model

   The IETF defines different Bandwidth constraint models for use with
   Diffserv TE.  The Russian Dolls Bandwidth Constraint Model [RFC4127]
   (RDM) and the Maximum Allocation Bandwidth Constraints Model
   [RFC4125] (MAM) are examples of these different models for reserving
   bandwidth from network resources.

   RDM defines a model where a reservation from BC1 also reserves
   resources from BC0 where a reservation from BC0 only reserves
   resources from BC0.  For the purposes of using different BCs to
   represent different booking factors, it is clearly important that any
   reservation from the BC in use during normal network operation is
   also reserved from the BC used during network failure mode.

   For the purposes of this implementation, an implementation of the RDM
   model is required with a BC[x] being used during normal network
   operation and BC[less than x] being used during failure mode.

3.3.  Preemption

   DSTE allows that different Preemption priorities can be applied to
   LSPs of different class-types in a flexible manner.  The model of
   operation described here would generally dictate that an LSP would be
   signalled with the same Preemption priority whether the network is in
   normal or failure operation, but other implementations could be
   envisaged.

3.4.  Booking Factor usage

   A booking factor defines the ratio between the actual resource size
   and the resource size as advertised to the network.  Additionally,
   there is no defined mapping between the resources reserved by a
   particular LSP and the resources actually consumed by the same LSP
   and different overbooking implementations are possible: The "LSP Size
   Overbooking" method or the "Link Size Overbooking" method [RFC4124].
   Booking factor implementations consequently vary widely from network
   to network; the model of operation described here effectively applies
   the "Link Size Overbooking" method, but could be used in conjunction
   with the "LSP Size Overbooking" method.

3.5.  Admission control behaviour with shared resources

   Section 4.6.4 of [RFC3209] describes how to setup a tunnel that is
   capable of maintaining resource reservations (without double
   counting) while it is being rerouted.  For this functionality to be
   maintained in the operational model described here, implementations
   must function as described in this reference even though the LSP is



Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


   also changing class type during the process.

   More specifically, if we consider the RDM Bandwidth Constraint Model,
   the admission control implementation must allow:

   An LSP originally signalled with CT1 must be able to share the
   original bandwidth component reserved from BC0 as is re-signalled
   with CT0.  The BC1 reservation will be removed as and when the
   original LSP is torn down.

   An LSP originally signalled with CT0 must be able to share the BC0
   component of the reservation as it is re-signalled with CT1.  There
   will be no change in reservation as and when the original LSP is torn
   down.


4.  Operation

4.1.  Normal network operation

4.1.1.  Traffic Engineering advertisements

   o  We use BC1 to advertise the available bandwidth on all network
      resources for use in normal network operation.

   o  We use BC0 to advertise the available bandwidth on all network
      resources during failure modes.

   o  We use the RDM bandwidth constraint model.

   The overbooking factor during normal operation is therefore equal to:
   BC1 / link_reservable_bandwidth.

   The overbooking factor during failure modes is therefore equal to:
   BC0 / link_reservable_bandwidth.

   Note that any BC could be used so long as the BC number for the
   failure mode is lower than the BC number for normal operation; we are
   using BC0 and BC1 as an example.

4.1.2.  Head-end behaviour under normal network operation

   The Head-End (HE) of an LSP signalled during normal network operation
   runs its CSPF using BC1 and signals the LSP using CT1.  This allows
   the network to optimise itself based upon the booking factor for
   normal network operation.

   BC0 is not used other than the fact that any network resources



Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


   reserved from BC1 is also reserved from BC0 as we are using RDM.

4.2.  Network failure mode operation

4.2.1.  Operation at point of failure

   At the point of failure, all LSPs that pass over the failed resource
   will be torn down - notifying the HE of the failure.  If MPLS Fast
   ReRoute (FRR) is deployed, then the LSPs that pass over the failed
   resource will be subject to FRR procedures and the HE will
   consequently be notified through a path-error message.

4.2.2.  Head-end Behaviour under Network Failure Mode

   The HE of an LSP affected by the network failure will receive
   notification of the LSP failure.  It runs a CSPF algorithm for the
   LSP path using BC1 and, if this fails, it considers the LSP in
   question to be operating under network failure mode.  Additionally,
   if this CSPF finds an available BC1 path through the network, but LSP
   set-up is rejected by a downstream node, the LSP should also then be
   considered to be operating under network failure mode.  In failure
   mode, the HE then runs a new CSPF algorithm for the LSP path using
   BC0, allowing the LSP to use the additional resource made available
   for failure mode operations.  Only the specific LSPs affected by the
   failure are considered to be operating under network failure mode.

   Where FRR has been implemented with Global Reversion, a Make-Before
   Break operation takes place instead of a complete resignal of the LSP
   in question.  In this case, the bandwidth signalled by the new LSP in
   CT0 could be shared with the bandwidth signalled by the original LSP
   in BC1 during the MBB operation as per Section 3.5.

4.2.3.  Mid-point behaviour under network failure mode.

   The LSP mid-points have no specific requirements during failure
   operation, however, they must be capable of allowing bandwidth
   sharing between class types as per Section 3.5.

4.3.  Reversion Behaviour

   Consider that the failed resource has been returned to operation.
   Local implementation defines when and if the HE element will attempt
   to optimise an LSP.  When this optimisation function is performed,
   the HE should run any CSPF based upon the BC and CT signalled for
   normal network operation rather than failure mode (BC1 and CT1
   respectively in our example).  In other words, the CT for failure
   mode operation should only be used directly after a failure event and
   when the LSP is down or undergoing FRR.



Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


   In the case that a second failure event occurs on a failure mode LSP
   before reversion takes place, then the LSP will go through the
   procedures in Section 4.2.2

   In the case that the new CSPF identifies that the optimum path is
   identical to the existing path, the LSP should still be re-signalled
   with the CT for normal network operation.

   The HE element uses standard LSP signalling behaviour for reversion
   whilst allowing bandwidth sharing between class types as per
   Section 3.5.

4.4.  New LSPs signalled during failure.

   Any new LSPs signalled during failure should initially be routed and
   signalled using the CT and BC for normal network operation.  In the
   case that this fails, the LSP setup should fail in the normal way.
   The LSP should not make use of the BC and CT for failure mode
   operation.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   None.


7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC4124]  Le Faucheur, F., "Protocol Extensions for Support of
              Diffserv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4124,
              June 2005.

   [RFC4125]  Le Faucheur, F. and W. Lai, "Maximum Allocation Bandwidth
              Constraints Model for Diffserv-aware MPLS Traffic
              Engineering", RFC 4125, June 2005.




Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


   [RFC4127]  Le Faucheur, F., "Russian Dolls Bandwidth Constraints
              Model for Diffserv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering",
              RFC 4127, June 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Jonathan Newton
   Cable&Wireless

   Email: jonathan.newton@cw.com


   Mustapha Aissaoui
   Alcatel-Lucent

   Email: mustapha.aissaoui@alcatel-lucent.com


   JP Vasseur
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: jvasseur@cisco.com




























Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       DSTE to change booking factors            June 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Newton, et al.          Expires December 29, 2008              [Page 10]


