

IRTF Routing Research                             Avri Doria (co-editor)
Internet Draft                            Lulea University of Technology
                                                Elwyn Davies (co-editor)
                                                         Nortel Networks

Document: draft-irtf-routing-reqs-groupb-00.txt           February, 2002

                     Future Domain Routing Requirements
                           Group B contribution
                  <draft-irtf-routing-reqs-groupb-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested.  This
   document will expire before August, 2002. Distribution of this draft
   is unlimited.

Copyright Notice
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.
Abstract

   This draft is the product of Group B, which is one of, at least, two
   subgroups in the IRTF-Routing Research Group working on requirements
   for routing solutions for the future.  This document sets out a set
   of requirements that we believe are important for the future routing
   architecture and future routing protocols.  It should be noted that
   the IRTF-Routing Research group does not endorse this set of
   requirements or any other set of requirements as the one and only set
   of requirements.







 Group B                                                               1 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

Acknowledgements

   The draft is derived from draft-davies-fdr-reqs-01.txt that was
   produced by Babylon.  Babylon is a loose association of individuals
   from academia, service providers and vendors whose goal is to discuss
   issues in Internet routing with the intention of finding solutions
   for those problems.

   The individual members who contributed materially to this draft are:
   Anders Bergsten, Howard Berkowitz, Malin Carlzon, Lenka Carr
   Motyckova, Elwyn Davies, Avri Doria, Pierre Fransson, Yong Jiang,
   Dmitri Krioukov, Tove Madsen, Olle Pers, and Olov Schelen.

   Thanks also go to the members of Babylon and others who did
   substantial reviews of this material.  Specifically we would like to
   acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions of the following
   individuals:  Loa Andersson, Tomas Ahlstr÷m, Erik Êman, Thomas
   Eriksson, Niklas Borg, Nigel Bragg, Thomas Chmara, Krister Edlund,
   Owe Grafford, Torbj÷rn Lundberg, Jasminko Mulahusic, Florian-Daniel
   Otel, Bernhard Stockman, Tom Worster, Roberto Zamparo.

   In addition, the authors are indebted to the folks who wrote all the
   references we have consulted in putting this paper together. This
   includes not only the references explicitly listed below, but also
   those who contributed to the mailing lists we have been participating
   in for years.

   Finally, it is the editors who are responsible for any lack of
   clarity, any errors, glaring omissions or misunderstandings.

Changes from Draft-davies-fdr-reqs-01.txt

   - The historical background has been separated into another I-D for
     which we plan to seek Informational RFC status.

   - The actual requirements (where they are fully crystallized) have
     been individually numbered and isolated from surrounding
     discussion material.















Group B               Expires: September 2002                        2
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

Contents

   1. Introduction....................................................4
   2. Underlying principles...........................................4
      2.2  Influences on a changing network...........................5
      2.3  High level goals...........................................6
   3. High level user requirements....................................9
      3.1  Organisational users......................................10
      3.2  Individual users..........................................12
   4. Mandated constraints...........................................13
      4.1  The federated environment.................................13
      4.2  Working with different sorts of networks..................13
      4.3  Delivering diversity......................................14
      4.4  When will the new solution be required?...................14
   5. Assumptions....................................................15
   6. Functional requirements........................................16
      6.1  Topology..................................................16
      6.2  Distribution..............................................17
      6.3  Addressing................................................21
      6.4  Statistics support........................................23
      6.5  Management requirements...................................23
      6.6  Provability...............................................24
      6.7  Traffic engineering.......................................25
      6.8  Support for mid-boxes.....................................26
   7. Performance requirements.......................................27
   8. Backwards compatibility (cutover) and maintainability..........27
   9. Security requirements..........................................28
   10. Debatable issues..............................................30
      10.1    Network modeling.......................................30
      10.2    System modeling........................................30
      10.3    One, two or many protocols.............................31
      10.4    Class of protocol to use...............................31
      10.5    Map abstraction........................................31
      10.6    Clear identification for all entities..................32
      10.7    Robustness and redundancy:.............................32
      10.8    Hierarchy..............................................32
      10.9    Will new control mechanisms be needed?.................33
      10.10   Byzantium..............................................33
      10.11   VPN support............................................33
      10.12   End to end reliability.................................33
      10.13   End to end transparency................................34
   11. Bibliography..................................................34
   12. Author's Addresses............................................38










Group B               Expires: September 2002                        3
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

1. Introduction

   It is generally accepted that there are major shortcomings in the
   inter-domain routing of the Internet today and that these may result
   in meltdown within an unspecified period of time.  Remedying these
   shortcomings will require extensive research to tie down the exact
   failure modes that lead to these shortcomings and identify the best
   techniques to remedy the situation.

   Various developments in the nature and quality of the services that
   users want from the Internet are difficult to provide within the
   current framework as they impose requirements never foreseen by the
   original architects of the Internet routing system.

   The potential advent of IPv6 and the application of IP mechanisms to
   private commercial networks offering specific service guarantees as
   an improvement over the best efforts services of the Public Internet
   epitomize the kind of radical changes which have to be accommodated:
   Major changes to the inter-domain routing system are inevitable if it
   is to provide an efficient underpinning for the radically changed and
   increasingly, commercially-based networks which rely on the IP
   protocol suite.

2. Underlying principles

   Although inter-domain routing is seen as the major source of
   problems, the interactions with intra-domain routing and the
   constraints that confining changes to the inter-domain arena would
   impose, means that we should consider the whole area of routing as an
   integrated system. This is done for 2 reasons:

   -  Requirements should not presuppose the solution.  A continued
      commitment to the current definitions and split between inter-
      domain and intra-domain routing would constitute such a
      presupposition.  Therefore the name Future Domain Routing(FDR) is
      being used in this document,

   -  As an acknowledgement of how intertwined inter-domain and intra-
      domain routing are within today's routing architecture.

   We are aware that using the term Domain Routing is already fraught
   with danger because of possible misinterpretation due to prior usage.
   The meaning of Domain Routing will be developed implicitly throughout
   the document, but a little advance explicit definition of the word
   'domain' is required, as well as some expansion on the scope of
   'routing'.

   This document uses domain in a very broad sense to mean any
   collection of systems or domains that come under a common authority
   that determines the attributes defining, and the policies
   controlling, that collection. The use of domain in this context is
   very similar to the concept of Region that was put forth by John

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        4
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   Wroclawski in his Metanet model [10]. The idea includes the notion
   that within a domain certain system attributes will characterize the
   behavior of the systems in the domain and that there will be borders
   between domains.  The idea of domain presented does not inherently
   presuppose that the identifying behaviors between two domains are to
   be the same.  Nor does it presuppose anything about the hierarchical
   nature of domains.  Finally it does not place restrictions on the
   nature of the attributes that might be used to determine membership
   in a domain.  Since today's routing domains are a subset of all
   domains as conceived of in this document, there has been no attempt
   to create a new term.

   Current practice stresses the need to separate the concerns of the
   control plane in a router and the forwarding plane:  This document
   will follow this practice, but we still use the term 'routing' as a
   global portmanteau to cover all aspects of the system.  Specifically
   however routing will be used to mean the process of discovering,
   interpreting and distributing information about the logical and
   topological structure of the network.

2.1.1 Inter-domain and intra-domain

   Throughout this document the terms intra-domain and inter-domain will
   be used.  These terms SHOULD NOT be understood to imply that there is
   one intra-domain and one inter-domain.  Rather these SHOULD be
   understood as relative terms.  In all case of domains there will be a
   set of network systems that are within that domain and routing
   between these systems will be termed intra-domain.  In some cases
   there will be routing between domains, which will be termed inter-
   domain.  It is possible that the same routing activities can be
   viewed as intra-domain from one perspective and inter-domain from
   another perspective.

2.2 Influences on a changing network

   The development of the Internet is likely to be driven by a number of
   changes that will affect the organization and the usage of the
   network, including:
   - Ongoing evolution of the commercial relationships between
     (connectivity) service providers, leading to changes in the way in
     which peering between providers is organised and the way in which
     transit traffic is routed
   - Requirements for traffic engineering within and between domains
     including coping with multiple paths between domains
   - Potential addition of a second IP addressing technique through
     IPv6.
   - The use of VPNs and private address space with IPv4, and possibly
     IPv6
   - Evolution of the end-to-end principle to deal with the expanded
     role of the Internet as discussed in [32]]. This paper discusses
     the possibility that the range of new requirements, especially the
     social and techno-political ones, which are being placed on the

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        5
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

     future Internet, may compromise the Internet's original design
     principles.  This might cause the Internet to lose some of its key
     features, in particular its ability to support new and
     unanticipated applications.  The discussion is linked to the rise
     of new stakeholders in the Internet, especially ISPs; new
     government interests; the changing motivations of the ever growing
     user base; and the tension between the demand for trustworthy
     overall operation and the inability to trust the behaviour of
     individual users.
   - Incorporation of alternative forwarding techniques such as the
     explicit routing (pipes) supplied by the MPLS [24] and GMPLS
     environments [25].
   - Integrating additional constraints into route determination from
     interactions with other layers (e.g. Shared Risk Link Groups [31])
   - Support for alternative and multiple routing techniques that are
     better suited to delivering types of content organised other than
     into IP addressed packets.

   Philosophically, the Internet has the mission of transferring
   information from one place to another.  Conceptually, this
   information is rarely organised into conveniently sized, IP-addressed
   packets and the FDR needs to consider how the information (content)
   to be carried is identified, named and addressed. Routing techniques
   can then be adapted to handle the expected types of content.

2.3 High level goals

   This section attempts to answer two questions:
     - What are we trying to achieve in a new architecture?
     - Why should the Internet community care?

   There is a third question that needs to be answered as well, but
   which, for the present, is mostly not explicitly discussed:
     - How will we know when we have succeeded?

2.3.1 Providing a routing system matched to domain organization

   Many of today's routing problems are caused by a routing system that
   is not well matched to the organization and policies which it is
   trying to support.  It is our goal to develop a routing architecture
   where even domain organization that is not envisioned today can be
   served by a routing architecture that matches its requirements.

   We will know when this goal is achieved when the desired policies,
   rules and organization can be mapped into the routing system in a
   natural, consistent and simply understood way.

2.3.2 Supporting a range of different communication services

   Today's routing protocols only support a single data forwarding
   service that is typically used to deliver a best efforts service in
   the Public Internet.  On the other hand, with, for example, DiffServ

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        6
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   it is possible to construct a number of different bit transport
   services within the network.  Using some of the per-domain behaviors
   (PDB)s that have been discussed in the IETF, it should be possible to
   construct services such as Virtual Wire [18] and Assured Rate [19].

   Providers today offer rudimentary promises about how traffic will be
   handled in the network, for example delay and long-term packet loss
   guarantees, and this will probably be even more relevant in the
   future. Communicating the service characteristics of paths in routing
   protocols will be necessary in the near future, and it will be
   necessary to be able to route packets according to their service
   requirements.

   Thus, a goal of this architecture is to allow for adequate
   information about path service characteristics passed between domains
   and consequently allow the delivery of bit transport services other
   than the best-effort datagram connectivity service that is the
   current common denominator.

2.3.3 Scaleable well beyond current predictable needs

   Any proposed new FDR system should scale beyond the size and
   performance we can foresee for the next ten years.  The previous IDR
   proposal has, with some massaging, held up for somewhat over ten
   years in which time the Internet has grown far beyond the predictions
   that were made in the requirements that were placed on it originally.

   Unfortunately, we will only know if we have succeeded in this goal if
   the FDR system survives beyond its design lifetime without serious
   massaging.  Failure will be much easier to spot!

2.3.4 Supporting alternative forwarding mechanisms

   With the advent of circuit based technologies (e.g., MPLS [24] used
   for RSVP-TE or CR-LDP for traffic engineering, GMPLS [25]) managed by
   IP routers there are forwarding mechanisms other than the datagram
   service that need to be supported by the routing architecture.

   An explicit goal of this architecture is to add support for
   forwarding mechanisms other then the current hop-by-hop datagram
   forwarding service driven by globally unique IP addresses.


2.3.5 Supporting separation of topology map and connectivity service

   It is envisioned that an organization can support multiple services
   on top of a single network. These services can, for example, be of
   different quality, of different type of connectivity, or different
   protocols (e.g. IPv4 and IPv6). For all these services there may be
   common domain topology, even though the policies controlling the
   routing of information might differ from service to service.


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        7
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   Thus, a goal with this architecture is to support separation between
   creation of a domain (or organization) topology map and service
   creation.


2.3.6 Achieving separation between routing and forwarding

   The architecture of a router is composed of two main separable parts;
   control and forwarding. These components, while inter-dependent,
   perform functions that are largely independent of each other.
   Control (routing, signaling, and management) is typically done in
   software while forwarding typically is done with specialized ASICs or
   network processors.

   The nature of an IP based network today is that control and data
   protocols share the same network and forwarding regime.  This may not
   always be the case in future networks and we should be careful to
   avoid building this sharing in as an assumption in the FDR.

   A goal of this architecture is to support full separation of control
   and forwarding, and to consider what additional concerns might be
   properly considered separately (e.g. adjacency management).

2.3.7 Providing for use of different routing paradigms in different
     areas of the same network

   A number of different routing paradigms have been used or researched
   in addition to conventional shortest path hop-by-hop paradigm that is
   the current mainstay of the Internet.  In particular, differences in
   underlying transport networks may mean that other kinds of routing
   are more relevant, and the perceived need for traffic engineering
   will certainly alter the routing chosen in various domains.

   Explicitly, one of these routing paradigms should be the current
   routing paradigm, so that the new paradigms will inter-operate in a
   backwards-compatible way with today's system.  This will facilitate a
   migration strategy that avoids flag days.

2.3.8 Preventing denial of service and other security attacks

   Currently, existence of a route to a destination effectively implies
   that anybody who can get a packet onto the network is entitled to use
   that route.  Whilst there are limitations to this generalization,
   this is a clear invitation to denial of service attacks.  A goal of
   the FDR system should be to allow traffic to be specifically linked
   to whole or partial routes so that a destination or link resources
   can be protected from unauthorized use.

2.3.9 Providing provable convergence with verifiable policy interaction

   It has been shown both analytically by Griffin et al (see [12]) and
   practically (see [20]) that BGP will not converge stably or is only

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        8
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   meta-stable (i.e. will not reconverge in the face of a single
   failure) when certain types of policy constraint are applied to
   categories of network topology.  The addition of policy to the basic
   distance vector algorithm invalidates the proofs that could be
   applied to a policy free implementation.

   It has also been argued that global convergence may no longer be a
   necessary goal and that local convergence may be all that is
   required.

   A goal of the FDR should be to achieve provable convergence of the
   protocols used which may involve constraining the topologies and
   domains subject to convergence. This will also require vetting the
   policies imposed to ensure that they are compatible across domain
   boundaries and result in a consistent policy set.

2.3.10 Providing robustness despite errors and failures

   From time to time in the history of the Internet there have been
   occurrences where people misconfiguring routers have destroyed global
   connectivity. This should never be possible.

   A goal of the FDR is to be robust to configuration errors and
   failures.  This should probably involve ensuring that the effects of
   misconfiguration and failure can be confined to some suitable
   locality of the failure or misconfiguration.

2.3.11 Simplicity in management

   With the policy work ([26], [27] and [28]) that has been done at IETF
   there exists an architecture that standardizes and simplifies
   management of QoS. This kind of simplicity is needed in a future
   domain routing architecture and its protocols.

   A goal of this architecture is to make configuration and management
   of inter-domain routing as simple as possible.

2.3.12 The legacy of RFC1126

   RFC1126 outlined a set of requirements that were used to guide the
   development of BGP. While the network is definitely different then it
   was in 1989, many of the same requirements remain.  A future domain
   routing has to support as its base requirement, the level of function
   that is available today.  A detailed discussion of RFC1126 and it
   requirements can be found in [41].  Those requirements, while
   specifically spelled out in that document are to be subsumed by the
   requirements in this document.


3. High level user requirements



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        9
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   This section considers the requirements imposed by the target
   audience of the FDR both in terms of organizations that might own
   networks, which would use FDR, and the human users who will have to
   interact with the FDR.

3.1 Organisational users

   The organizations that own networks connected to the Internet have
   become much more diverse since RFC1126 [4] was published.  In
   particular a major part of the network are now owned by commercial
   service provider organizations in the business of making profits from
   carrying data traffic.

3.1.1 Commercial service providers

   The routing system must take into account the commercial service
   provider's for commercial secrecy and security, as well as allowing
   them to organize their business as flexibly as possible.

   Service providers will often wish to conceal the details of the
   network from other connected networks.  So far as is possible, the
   routing system should not require the service providers to expose
   more details of the topology and capability of their networks than is
   strictly necessary.

   Many service providers will also offer contracts to their customers
   in the form of Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and the routing system
   must allow the providers to support these SLAs through traffic
   engineering and load balancing, as well as multihoming, allowing them
   to achieve the degree of resilience and robustness that they need.

   Service providers can be categorized as

     - Global Service Providers (GSPs) with networks that have a global
        reach.  Such providers may, and usually will, wish to constrain
        traffic between their customers to run entirely on their
        networks.  Such providers will interchange traffic at multiple
        peering points with other GSPs and need extensive policy-based
        controls to control the interchange of traffic.  Peering may be
        through the use of dedicated private lines between the partners
        or increasingly through Internet Exchange Points.
     - National Service Providers (NSPs) that are similar to GSPs but
        typically cover one country.  Such organizations may operate as
        a federation that provides similar reach to a GSP and may wish
        to be able to steer traffic preferentially to other federation
        members to achieve global reach.
     - Local Internet Service Providers (ISPs) operate regionally and
        will typically purchase transit capacity from NSPs or GSPs to
        provide global connectivity, but may also peer with neighbouring
        ISPs.



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        10
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   The routing system should be sufficiently flexible to accommodate the
   continually changing business relationships of the providers, and the
   various levels of trustworthiness that they apply to customers and
   partners.

   Service providers will need to be involved in accounting for Internet
   usage, monitoring the traffic, and may be involved in government
   action to tax the usage of the Internet, enforce social mores and
   intellectual property rules or apply surveillance to the traffic to
   detect or prevent crime.

3.1.2 Enterprises

   The leaves of the network domain graph are in many cases networks
   supporting a single enterprise.  Such networks cover an enormous
   range of complexity with some multi-national companies owning
   networks that rival the complexity and reach of a GSP whereas many
   fall into the Small Office-Home Office (SOHO) category.  The routing
   system should allow simple and robust configuration and operation for
   the SOHO category, whilst effectively supporting the larger
   enterprise.

   Enterprises are particularly likely to lack the capability to
   configure and manage a complex routing system and every effort should
   be made to provide simple configuration and operation for such
   networks.

   Enterprises will also need to be able to change their service
   provider with ease.  Whilst this is predominantly a naming and
   addressing issue, the routing system must be able to support seamless
   changeover, for example, by coping with a changeover period when both
   sets of addresses are in use.

   Enterprises will wish to be able to multihome to one or more
   providers as one possible means of enhancing the resilience of their
   network.

   Enterprises will also frequently need to control the trust that they
   place both in workers and external connections through firewalls and
   similar mid-boxes placed at their external connections.

3.1.3 Domestic networks

   Increasingly domestic, i.e. non business home, networks are likely to
   be 'always on' and will resemble SOHO enterprises networks with no
   special requirements of the routing system.

   The routing system must support dial-up users.

3.1.4 Internet exchange points



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        11
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   Peering of service providers, academic networks and larger
   enterprises is increasingly happening at specific Internet Exchange
   Points where many networks are linked together in a relatively small
   physical area.  The resources of the exchange may be owned by a
   trusted third party or owned jointly by the connecting networks.  The
   routing systems should support such exchange points without requiring
   the exchange point to either operate as a superior entity with every
   connected network logically inferior to it or requiring the exchange
   point to be a member of one (or all) connected networks.  The
   connecting networks have to delegate a certain amount of trust to the
   exchange point operator.

3.1.5 Content providers

   Content providers are at one level a special class of enterprise, but
   the desire to deliver content efficiently means that a content
   provider may provide multiple replicated origin servers or caches
   across a network.  These may also be provided by a separate content
   delivery service.  The routing system should facilitate delivering
   content from the most efficient location.

3.2 Individual users

   This section covers the most important human users of the FDR and
   their expected interactions with the system.

3.2.1 All end users

   The routing system must continue to deliver the current global
   connectivity service (i.e. any address to any other address, subject
   to policy constraints) that has always been the basic aim of the
   Internet.

   End user applications should be able to request, or have requested on
   their behalf by agents and policy mechanisms, end-to-end
   communication services with different QoS characteristics as compared
   with the best efforts service that is the foundation of today's
   Internet.  It should be possible to request both a single service
   channel and a bundle of service channels delivered as a single
   entity.

3.2.2 Network planners

   The routing system should allow them to plan and implement a network
   that can be proved to be stable and will meet their traffic
   engineering requirements.

3.2.3 Network operators

   The routing system should, so far as is possible, be simple to
   configure operate and troubleshoot, behave in a predictable, stable
   fashion and deliver appropriate statistics and events to allow the

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        12
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   network to be managed and upgraded in an efficient and timely
   fashion.

3.2.4 Mobile end users

   The routing system must support mobile end users. It is clear that
   mobility is becoming a predominant mode for network access.

4. Mandated constraints

   While many of the requirement to which the protocol must respond are
   technical, some aren't.  These mandated constraints are those that
   are determined by conditions of the world around us.  Understanding
   these requirements requires and analysis of the world in which these
   systems will be deployed.  The constraints include those that are
   determined by:
      - Environmental factors.
      - Geography
      - Political boundaries and considerations
      - Technological factors such as the prevalence of different
        levels of technology in the developed world as opposed to in
        the developing or undeveloped world.

4.1 The federated environment

   The graph of the Internet network with routers and other control
   boxes at the nodes and communication links along the edges is today
   partitioned administratively into a large number of disjoint domains.

   A common administration may have responsibility for one or more
   domains that may or may not be adjacent in the graph.

   Commercial and policy constraints affecting the routing system will
   typically be exercised at the boundaries of these domains where
   traffic is exchanged between the domains.

   The perceived need for commercial confidentiality will seek to
   minimise the control information transferred across these boundaries,
   leading to requirements for aggregated information, abstracted maps
   of connectivity exported from domains and mistrust of supplied
   information.

   The perceived desire for anonymity may require the use of zero-
   knowledge security protocols to allow users to access resources
   without exposing their identity.

   The requirements should provide the ability for groups of peering
   domains to be treated as a complex domain.  These complex domains
   could have a common administrative policy.

4.2 Working with different sorts of networks


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        13
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   The diverse Layer 2 networks over which the layer 3 routing system is
   implemented have typically been operated totally independently from
   the layer 3 network.  Consideration needs to be given to the degree
   and nature of interchange of information between the layers that is
   desirable.  In particular, the need for robustness through diverse
   routing implies knowledge of the underlying networks to be able to
   guarantee the robustness.

   Mobile access networks may also impose extra requirements on Layer 3
   routing.

4.3 Delivering diversity

   The routing system is operating at Layer 3 in the network.  To
   achieve robustness and resilience at this layer requires that where
   multiple diverse routes are employed as part of delivering the
   resilience, the routing system at Layer 3 needs to be assured that
   the Layer 2 and lower routes are really diverse.  The 'diamond
   problem' is the simplest form of this problem - a layer 3 provider
   attempting to provide diversity buys layer 2 services from two
   separate providers who in turn buy wayleaves from the same provider:

                               Layer 3 service
                                /           \
                               /             \
                           Layer 2         Layer 2
                         Provider A      Provider B
                               \             /
                                \           /
                                Trench provider

   Now when the backhoe cuts the trench, the Layer 3 provider has no
   resilience unless he had taken special steps to verify that the
   trench wasn't common.  The routing system should facilitate avoidance
   of this kind of trap.

   Some work is going on to understand the sort of problems that stem
   from this requirement, such as the work on Shared Risk Link Groups
   [31].  Unfortunately, the full generality of the problem requires
   diversity be maintained over time between an arbitrarily large set of
   mutually distrustful providers.  For some cases, it may be sufficient
   for diversity to be checked at provisioning or route instantiation
   time, but this remains a hard problem requiring research work.

4.4 When will the new solution be required?

   There is a full range of opinion on this subject.  An informal survey
   indicates that the range varies from 2 years to 6 years.  And while
   there are those, possibly outliers, who think there is no need for a
   new routing architecture as well as those who think a new
   architecture was needed years ago, the median seems to lie at around


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        14
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   4 years.  As in all projections of the future this is largely not
   provable at this time.

5. Assumptions

   In projecting the requirements for the Future Domain Routing a number
   of assumptions have been made.  The requirements set out should be
   consistent with these assumptions, but there are doubtless a number
   of other assumptions that are not explicitly articulated here:

   1. The number of hosts today is somewhere in the area of 100 Million.
     With dial in and NATs this is likely to turn into up to 500
     Million users (see [30]). In a number of years, with wireless
     accesses and different appliances attaching to the Internet, we
     are likely to see a couple of Billion (10^9) 'users' on the
     Internet. The number of globally addressable hosts is very much
     dependent on how common NATs will be in the future.
   2. NATs, firewalls and other mid-boxes exist and we cannot assume
     that they will cease being a presence in the networks.
   3. The number of operators in the Internet will probably not grow
     very much, as there is a likelihood that operators will tend to
     merge. However, as Internet-connectivity expands to new countries,
     new operators will emerge and then merge again.
   4. As of the beginning of 2002, there are around 12000 registered
     AS's.  With current use of AS's (for e.g., multi-homing) the
     number of AS's could be expected to grow to 25000 in about 10
     years.[43]  This is down from a previously reported growth rate of
     51% per year.[13].  Future growth rates are difficult to predict.
   5. In contrast to the number of operators, the number of domains is
     likely to grow significantly. Today, each operator has different
     domains within an AS, but this also shows in SLAs and policies
     internal to the operator. Making this globally visible would
     create a number of domains 10-100 times the number of ASs, i.e.,
     between 100,000 and 1,000,000.
   6. With more and more capacity at the edge of the network the IP
     network will expand. Today there are operators with several
     thousands of routers, but this is likely to be increased. A domain
     will probably contain tens of thousands of routers.
   7. The speed of connections in the (fixed) access will technically be
     (almost) unconstrained. However, the cost for the links will not
     be negligible so that the apparent speed will be effectively
     bounded. Within a number of years some will have multi-gigabit
     speed in the access.
   8. At the same time, the bandwidth of wireless access still has a
     strict upper-bound. Within the foreseeable future each user will
     only have a tiny amount of resources available compared to fixed
     accesses (10kbps to 2Mbps for UMTS with only a few achieving the
     higher figure as the bandwidth is shared between the active users
     in a cell and only small cells can actually reach this speed, but
     11Mbps or more for wireless LAN connections). There may also be
     requirements for effective use of bandwidth as low as 2.4 Kbps or
     lower, in some applications.

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        15
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   9. Assumptions 7 and 8 taken together suggest a minimum span of
     bandwidth between 2.4 kbps to 10 Gbps.
   10. The speed in the backbone has grown rapidly, and there is no
     evidence that the growth will stop in the coming years. Terabit-
     speed is likely to be the minimum backbone speed in a couple of
     years.  The range of bandwidths that need to be represented will
     require consideration on how to represent the values in the
     protocols.
   11. There have been discussions as to whether Moore's law will
     continue to hold for processor speed. If Moore's law does not
     hold, then communication circuits might play a more important role
     in the future. Also, optical routing is based on circuit
     technology, which is the main reason for taking ³circuits³ into
     account when designing an FDR.
   12. However, the datagram model still remains the fundamental model
     for the Internet.
   13. The number of peering points in the network is likely to grow, as
     multi-homing becomes important. Also traffic will become more
     locally distributed, which will drive the demand for local
     peering.
   14. The FDR will achieve the same degree of ubiquity as the current
     Internet and IP routing.

6. Functional requirements

   This section includes a detailed discussion of new requirements for a
   future domain routing architecture.  As discussed in section 2.3.12 a
   new architecture must build upon the requirements of the past routing
   framework and must, and MUST not reduce the functionality of the
   network.  A discussion and analysis of the RFC1126 requirements can
   be found in [41].


6.1 Topology

6.1.1 Routers should be able to know and exploit the domain topology


   R(1)  Routers MUST be able to acquire and hold sufficient
         information on the underlying topology of the domain to
         allow the establishment of routes on that topology.

   R(2)  Routers MUST have the ability to control the
         establishment of routes on the underlying topology.

   R(3)  Routers MUST be able, where appropriate, to control Sub-
         IP mechanisms to support the establishment of routes.

   The OSI Inter-Domain Routing Protocol (IDRP) [36] utilized a
   capability which allowed a collection of topologically related
   domains to be replaced by a domain collection object in a similar way
   to the Nimrod[9] domain hierarchies, allowing a route to be more

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        16
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   compactly represented by a single collection in place of a sequence
   of individual domains.

   R(4)  Routers MUST, where appropriate, be able to construct
         abstractions of the topology that represent an
         aggregation of the topological features of some area of
         the topology.

6.1.2 The same topology information should support different path
     selection ideas:

   The same topology information needs to provide a more flexible
   spectrum of path selection methods that we might expect to find in a
   future Internet, including, amongst others, both distributed
   techniques such as hop-by-hop, shortest path, local optimization
   constraint-based, class of service, source address routing, and
   destination address routing as well as the centralized, global
   optimization constraint-based 'traffic engineering' type (Open
   constraints should be allowed).  Allowing different path selection
   techniques to be used will produce a much more predictable and
   comprehensible result than the 'clever tricks' that are currently
   needed to achieve the same results.  Traffic engineering functions
   need to be combined.

   R(5)  Routers MUST be capable of supporting a small number of
         different path selection algorithms

6.1.3 Separation of the routing information topology from the data
     transport topology.

   R(6)  The controlling network MAY be logically separate from
         the controlled network.

   Physically, the two functional 'planes' can reside in the same nodes
   and share the same links, but this is not the only possibility. Other
   options can also be feasible, and may sometimes be necessary.  An
   example is a pure circuit switch (that cannot see individual IP
   packets), combined with an external controller. Another example may
   be where there are multiple links between two routers, and all the
   links are used for data forwarding, but only one is used for carrying
   the routing session.

6.2 Distribution

6.2.1 Distribution mechanisms


   R(7)  Relevant changes in the state of the network, including
         modifications to the topology and changes in the values
         of dynamic capabilities, MUST be distributed to every
         entity in the network that needs them in a reliable, and


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        17
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

         trusted way at the earliest appropriate time after the
         change has occurred.

   R(8)  Information MUST NOT be distributed outside areas where
         it is needed or believed to be needed for the operation
         of the routing system.

   R(9)  Information MUST be distributed in such a way that it
         minimizes the load on the network consistent with the
         required response time of the network to changes.


6.2.2 Path advertisement


   R(10) The router MUST be able to acquire and store additional
         static and dynamic information relating to the
         capabilities of the topology and its component nodes and
         links, which can subsequently be used by path selection
         methods.

   The inter-domain routing system must be able to advertise more kinds
   of information than just connectivity and domain path.

   R(11) The Routing System MUST support service specifications,
         e.g. the Service Level Specifications (SLSs) developed by
         the Differentiated Services working group. [42]

   Careful attention should be paid to ensuring that the distribution of
   additional information with path advertisements remains scalable as
   domains and the Internet get larger, more numerous and more
   diversified.

   R(12) The distribution mechanism used for distributing network
         state information MUST be scalable with respect to the
         expected size of domains and the volume and rate of
         change of dynamic state that can be expected.

   The combination of R(3) and R(3) may result in a compromise between
   the responsiveness of the network to change and the overhead of
   distributing change notifications.  Also attempts to respond to very
   rapid changes may damage the stability of the routing system.

   Possible examples of additional capability information that might be
   carried include:

   -  QoS information

   To allow an ISP to sell predictable end-to-end QoS service to any
   destination, the routing system should have information about the
   end-to-end QoS. This means that:


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        18
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   R(13) The routing system MUST be able to support different
         paths for different services.

   R(14) The routing system MUST be able to forward traffic on the
         path appropriate for the service selected for the traffic
         either according to an explicit marking in each packet of
         the traffic (e.g. MPLS labels, DiffServ PDB's or
         TOS-values) or implicitly (e.g. the physical or logical
         port on which the traffic arrives).


   R(15) The routing system SHOULD also be able to carry
         information about the expected (or actually, promised)
         characteristics of the entire path and the price for the
         service.

   (If such information is exchanged at all between network operators
   today, it is through bilateral management interfaces, and not through
   the routing protocols.)

   This would allow for the operator to optimise the choice of path
   based on a price/performance trade-off.

   In addition to providing dynamic QoS information the system should be
   able to use static class-of-service information.

   -  security information

   Security characteristics of other domains (in the path or in the map)
   can allow the routing entity to choose routing decision based on some
   political reasons. The information itself is assumed to be so secure
   that you can trust it.

   -  usage and cost information

   This can be used for billing and traffic engineering purpose. In
   order to support cost based routing policies for customers (i.e. peer
   ISPs), information such as "traffic on this link or path costs XXX
   per Gigabyte" needs to be advertised, so that the customer can choose
   a cheap or an expensive route from an economic perspective.

   -  monitored performance

   Some performance information such as delay and drop frequency can be
   carried. (This is may only be suitable inside a domain because of
   trust considerations).  This should support at least the kind of
   delay bound contractual terms that are currently being offered by
   service providers.  Note that these values refer to the outcome of
   carrying bits on the path, whereas the QOS information refers to the
   proposed behaviour that results in this outcome.



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        19
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   - Multicast information

   R(16) The routing system must provide necessary information
         needed to create multicast distribution trees. This
         information MUST be provided for one-to-many distribution
         trees and SHOULD be provided for many-to-many
         distribution trees.

   The actual construction of distribution trees is not necessarily done
   by the routing system.

6.2.3 Stability of routing information

   R(17) The new network architecture MUST be stable without
         needing global convergence, i.e. convergence is a local
         property.

   The degree to which this is possible and the definition of local
   remains a research topic. Restricting the requirement for convergence
   to localities will have an effect on all of the other requirements in
   this section.

   R(18) The distribution, and the rate of distribution of changes
         MUST NOT affect the stability of the routing information,
         e.g. by commencing redistribution of a change before the
         previous one had settled.

6.2.3.1  Avoiding routing oscillations

   R(19) The routing system MUST minimize oscillations in route
         advertisements.

6.2.3.2 Providing loop free routing and forwarding

   In line with the separation of concerns of routing and forwarding:

   R(20) The distribution of routing information MUST be, so far
         as is possible, loop-free.

   R(21) The forwarding information created from this routing
         information MUST seek to minimize persistent loops in the
         data forwarding paths.

   It is accepted that transient loops may occur during convergence of
   the protocol and that there are trade-offs between loop avoidance and
   global scalability.

6.2.3.3 Detection, notification and repair of failures

   R(22) The routing system MUST provide means for detecting
         failures of both node equipment and communication links.


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        20
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   R(23) The routing system SHOULD be able to coordinate responses
         to failure detection indications from layer 3 mechanisms
         and nodal mechanisms built into the routing system and
         from lower layer mechanisms that are propagated up to
         Layer 3 in order to determine the root cause of the
         failure.  This will allow the routing system to react
         correctly to the failure by activating appropriate
         mitigation and repair mechanisms if required, whilst
         ensuring that it does not react if lower layer repair
         mechanisms are able to repair or mitigate the fault.

   Most layer 3 routing protocols have utilized keepalives or 'hello'
   protocols as a means of detecting failures at Layer 3.  The keepalive
   mechanisms are often complemented by analog (e.g. laser light
   detection) and hardware mechanisms (e.g. hardware/software watchdogs)
   that are built into routing nodes and communication links.  Great
   care must be taken to make best possible use of the various failure
   repair methods available whilst ensuring that only one repair
   mechanism at a time is allowed to repair any given fault:
   Interactions between (say) fast reroute mechanisms at layer 3 and
   SONET/SDH repair at Layer 1 are highly undesirable and are likely to
   cause problems in the network.

   R(24) Where a network topology and routing system contains
         multiple fault repair mechanisms, the responses of these
         systems to a detected failure SHOULD be coordinated so
         that the fault is repaired by the most appropriate means,
         and no extra repairs are initiated.

   R(25) Where specialized packet exchange mechanisms (e.g. layer
         3 keepalive or 'hello' protocol mechanisms) are used to
         detect failures, the routing system MUST make provision
         to allow the rate of transmission of these keepalives to
         be configured, including the capability to turn them off
         altogether where links are deliberately broken when no
         real user or control traffic is present (e.g. ISDN
         links).

This will allow the operator to compromise between the speed of failure
detection and the proportion of link bandwidth dedicated to failure
detection.

6.3 Addressing

6.3.1 Support mix of IPv4, IPv6 and other types of addresses

   R(26) The routing system MUST support a mix of different kinds
         of addresses.

   This mix will include at least IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, and
   preferably various types of non-IP addresses too. For instance
   networks like SDH/SONET and WDM may prefer to use non-IP addresses.

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        21
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   It may also be necessary to support multiple sets of 'private' (e.g.
   RFC1918) addresses when dealing with multiple customer VPNs.

   R(27) The routing system SHOULD support the capability to use a
         single topology representation to generate routing and
         forwarding tables for multiple address families on the
         same network.

   This capability would minimise the protocol overhead when exchanging
   routes.

6.3.2 Support for domain renumbering/readdressing

   R(28) If a domain is subject to address reassignment that would
         cause forwarding interruption then the routing system
         SHOULD support readdressing (e.g. when a new prefix is
         given to an old network, and the change is known in
         advance) by maintaining routing during the changeover
         period [39], [40].

6.3.3 Multicast and anycast

   R(29) The routing system MUST support multicast addressing,
         both within a domain and across multiple domains.

   R(30) The routing system SHOULD support anycast addressing
         within a domain.  The routing system MAY support anycast
         addressing across domains.

   It is still an open question as to whether it is possible or useful
   to support anycast addressing between cooperating domains.

6.3.4 Address scoping

   R(31) The routing system MUST support scoping of unicast
         addresses, and SHOULD support scopingof multicast and
         anycast address types.

   For unicast address scoping, as is being designed for IPv6, does not
   seem to cause any special problems with respect to routing. IPv6
   Inter-domain routing handles only IPv6 global addresses, while intra-
   domain routing also needs to be aware of site-local addresses. Link-
   local addresses are never routed at all.

   For scoping in a more general sense, and for scoping of multicast and
   anycast addresses, more study may be needed to identify the
   requirements solutions.

6.3.5 Mobility support




Group B               Expires: September 2002                        22
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   R(32) The routing system MUST support system mobility (and
         movability, and portability, whatever the differences may
         be). The term system includes anything from an end system
         to an entire domain.


   We observe that the existing solutions based on re-numbering and/or
   tunneling are designed to work with the current routing, so they do
   not add any new requirements to future routing. But the requirement
   is general, and future solutions may not be restricted to the ones we
   have today.

6.4 Statistics support

   R(33) Both the routing and forwarding parts of the routing
         system MUST maintain statistical information about the
         performance of their functions.

6.5 Management requirements

   While the tools of management are outside the scope of routing, the
   mechanisms to support the routing architecture and protocols are
   within scope:

   R(34) Mechanisms to support Operational, Administrative and
         Management control of the routing architecture and
         protocols MUST be designed into the original fabric of
         the architecture.

6.5.1 Simple policy management

   The basic aims of this specification are:
   -  to require less manual configuration than today
   -  to satisfy both the requirements for easy handling, and maximum
      control, i.e.
      -  All the information should be available
      -  But should not be visible except for when desired.
      - Policies themselves should be advertised and not only the
        result of policy, and
      - Provide Policy conflict Resolution

   R(35) The routing system MUST provide for management of the
         system by means of policies; e.g. that can be expressed
         in terms of the business and services implemented on the
         network and reflect the operation of the network in terms
         of the services affected.

   R(36) The distribution of policies MUST be amenable to scoping,
         to protect proprietary policies that are not of relevance
         beyond the local set of domains from distribution.



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        23
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

6.5.2 Startup and Maintenance of Routers

   A major problem in today's networks is the need to perform initial
   configuration on routers from a local interface before a remote
   management system can take over.  It is not clear that this imposes
   any requirements on the routing architecture beyond what is need for
   a ZeroConf host.

   Similarly, maintenance and upgrade of routers can cause major
   disruptions to the network routing because the routing system and
   management of routers is not organized to minimize such disruption.
   Some improvements have been made, such as graceful restart mechanisms
   in protocols, but more needs to be done.

   R(37) The routing system and routers SHOULD provide mechanisms
         that will minimize the disruption to the network caused
         by maintenance and upgrades of software and hardware.  It
         is recognized that some of the capabilities needed are
         outside the scope of the routing architecture (e.g.
         minimum impact software upgrade) but the routing system
         SHOULD provide the necessary support for such
         capabilities.

6.6 Provability

   R(38) The routing system and its component protocols MUST be
         provably locally convergent under the permitted range of
         parameter settings and policy options that the
         operator(s) can select.

   There are various methods for proof that include, but are not limited
   to: mathematical, heuristic, and pattern recognition.  No requirement
   is made on the method used for proving local convergence properties.

   R(39) Routing protocols employed by the routing system and the
         overall routing system SHOULD be resistant to bad routing
         policy decisions made by operators.

   Tools are needed to check compatibility of routing policies. While
   these tools are not part of the routing architecture, the mechanisms
   to support such tools are.

   Routing policies are compatible if their interaction does not cause
   divergence. A domain or group of domains in a system is defined as
   being convergent if and only if, after an exchange of routing
   information, routing tables reach a stable state that does not change
   until routing policies or topology changes.

   To achieve the above-mentioned goals:




Group B               Expires: September 2002                        24
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   R(40) The routing system MUST provide a mechanism to publish
         and communicate policies so that operational coordination
         and fault isolation is possible.

   Tools are required that verify the stability characteristics of the
   routing system in specified parts of Internet. The tools should be
   efficient (fast) and have a broad scope of operation (check large
   portions of Internet).  While these tools are not part of the
   architecture, developing them is in the interest of the architecture
   and should be defined as a Routing Research Group activity while
   research on the architecture is in progress.

   Tools analyzing routing policies can be applied statically or
   (preferably) dynamically. Dynamic solution requires tools that can be
   used for run time checking for a source of oscillations that arise
   from policy conflicts. Research is needed to prove that there is an
   efficient solution to the dynamic checking of oscillations.

6.7 Traffic engineering

   The ability to do traffic engineering and get the feedback from the
   network that enables traffic engineering are capabilities that should
   be included in the future domain architecture.  Traffic engineering
   is, at base, another alternative or extension for the path selection
   mechanisms of the routing system:  No fundamental changes to the
   requirements are needed but the iterative processes involved in
   traffic engineering may require some additional capabilities and
   state in the network.
   Traffic engineering typically involves a combination of off-line
   network planning and administrative control functions in which the
   expected and measured traffic flows are examined resulting in changes
   to static configurations and policies in the routing system.  During
   operations under these configurations control the actual flow of
   traffic and affect the dynamic path selection mechanisms:  The
   results are measured and fed back into further rounds of network
   planning.

6.7.1 Support for and provision of traffic engineering tools

   At present there is an almost total lack of effective traffic
   engineering tools, whether on-line at all times for network control
   or off-line for network planning.  The routing system should
   encourage the provision of such tools.

   R(41) The routing system MUST generate statistical and
         accounting information in such a way that traffic
         engineering and network planning tools can be used both
         in real time and for off-line planning and management.





Group B               Expires: September 2002                        25
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

6.7.2 Support of multiple parallel paths

   R(42) The routing system MUST support the controlled
         distribution, over multiple links or paths, of traffic
         towards the same destination. This applies to domains
         with two or more connections to the same neighbor domain,
         and to domains with connections to more than one neighbor
         domain. The paths need not have the same metric.

   R(43) The routing system MUST support forwarding over multiple
         parallel paths when available. This support SHOULD extend
         to cases where the offered traffic is known to exceed the
         available capacity of a single link, and to the  cases
         where load is to be shared over paths for cost or
         resiliency reasons.

   R(44) Where traffic is forwarded over multiple parallel paths,
         the routing system MUST, so far as is possible, avoid
         reordering of packets in individual micro-flows.

   R(45) The routing system MUST have mechanisms to allow the
         traffic to be reallocated back on to a single path when
         the multiple paths are not needed.

6.7.3 Peering support


   R(46) The routing system MUST support peer-level connectivity
         as well as hierarchical connections between domains.

   The network is becoming increasingly complex with private peering
   arrangements set up between providers at every level of the hierarchy
   of service providers and even by certain large enterprises, in the
   form of dedicated extranets.


   R(47) The routing system MUST facilitate traffic engineering of
         these peer routes so that traffic can be readily
         constrained to travel as the network operators desire and
         they can consequentially make optimal use of the
         available connectivity.

6.8 Support for mid-boxes

   One of our assumptions is that NATs and other Mid-boxes such as
   firewalls, web proxies and address family (e.g. IPv4 to IPv6)
   translators are here to stay.

   R(48) The routing system SHOULD work in conjunction with mid-
         boxes, e.g. NAT, to aid in bi-directional connectivity
         without compromising the additional opacity and privacy
         that the mid-boxes offer.

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        26
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002


   This problem is closely analogous to the abstraction problem, which
   is already under discussion for the interchange of routing
   information between domains.



7. Performance requirements

   Over the past several years, the performance of the routing system
   has frequently been discussed.  The requirements that derive from
   those discussions are listed below.  Currently the required values
   for these performance requirements are left for further discussion.


   R(49) The routing system MUST support domains of at least X
         systems. A system is taken to mean either an individual
         router or a domain.

   R(50) Local convergence SHOULD occur within X units of time.

   R(51) The routing system MUST be 99.99x?% available.

   R(52) The routing system MUST be reliable as measured by TBD.

   R(53) The routing system MUST be locally stable as measured by
         TBD.

   R(54) The routing system MUST be globally stable as measured by
         TBD.

   R(55) The routing system SHOULD scale to an indefinitely large
         number of domains.


   In many cases there has been very little data or statistical evidence
   for many of the performance claims being made.  In recent years
   several efforts have been initiated to gather data and do the
   analyses required to make scientific assessments of the performance
   issues and requirements.  In order to complete this section of the
   requirements analysis, the data and analyses from these studies needs
   to be gathered and collated into this document.  This work has been
   started but has yet to be completed.

8. Backwards compatibility (cutover) and maintainability

   This area poses a dilemma. On one hand it is an absolute requirement
   that:

   R(56) The introduction of the routing system MUST NOT require
         any flag days


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        27
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   R(57) The network currently in place MUST continue to run at
         least as well as it does now while the new network is
         being brought in around it.

   However, at the same time, it is also an absolute requirement that:

   R(58) The new architecture MUST NOT be limited by the
         restrictions that plague today's network.  [It has to be
         admitted that this is not a well defined requirement,
         because we have not fully articulated what the
         restrictions might be.  Some of these restrictions can be
         derived by reading the discussions for the positive
         requirements above:  It would be a useful exercise to
         explicitly list all the restrictions and irritations that
         we wish to do away with.  It would be further useful to
         determine if these restrictions can currently be removed
         at reasonable cost or whether we are actually condemned
         to live with them.]

   Those restrictions cannot be allowed to become permanent baggage on
   the new architecture.  If they do, the effort to create a new system
   will come to naught.  It may, however, be necessary to live with some
   of them temporarily for practical reasons whilst providing an
   architecture which will eventually allow them to be removed.

   These three requirements have significance not only for the
   transition strategy, but for the architecture itself implying that it
   must be possible for an internet such as today's BGP controlled
   network, or one of its ASs, to exist as a domain within the new FDR.

9. Security requirements

   As previously discussed, one of the major changes to have overtaken
   the Internet since its inception, is the erosion of trust between end
   users making use of the net, between those users and the suppliers of
   services, and between the multiplicity of providers.  Hence security,
   in all its aspects, will be much more important in the FDR.

   It must be possible to secure the routing communication:

   R(59) The communicating entities MUST be able to identify who
         sent and who received the information (authentication)

   R(60) The communicating entities MUST be able to verify that
         the information has not been changed on the way
         (integrity).

   Security is more important in inter-domain routing where the operator
   has no control to the other domains, then in intra-domain routing
   since all the links and the nodes are under the administration of the
   operator and can be expected to share a trust relationship.  This


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        28
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   property of intra-domain trust, however, should not be taken for
   granted:

   R(61) Routing communications MUST be secured by default, but an
         operator MUST have the option to relax this requirement
         within a domain where analysis indicates that other means
         (such as physical security) provide an acceptable
         alternative.

   R(62) The routing communication mechanism MUST be robust
         against denial-of-service attacks.

   Further considerations that may impose requirements include:
   -  Whether no one else but the intended recipient must be able to
      access (privacy) or understand (confidentiality) the information.
   -  Whether it is possible to verify that all the information has been
      received (non-repudiation).
   -  Whether there is a need to separate security of routing from
      security of forwarding.
   -  Whether traffic flow security is needed (i.e. whether there is
      value in concealing who can connect to whom, and what volumes of
      data are exchanged).

   Securing the BGP session, as done today, only secures the exchange of
   messages from the peering domain, not the content of the information.
   In other words, we can confirm that the information we got is what
   our neighbor really sent us, but we do not know if this information
   (that originated in some remote domain) is true or not.

   A decision has to be made on whether to rely on chains of trust (we
   trust our peers who trust their peers who..), or whether we also need
   authentication and integrity of the information end-to-end.  This
   information includes both routes and addresses. There has been
   interest in having digital signatures both on originated routes, but
   also countersignatures by address authorities to confirm that the
   originator has authority to advertise the prefix.  Even understanding
   who can confirm the authority is non-trivial as it might be the
   provider who delegated the prefix (with a whole chain of authority
   back to ICANN) or it may be straight to an address registry.  Where a
   prefix delegated by a provider is being advertised though another
   provider as in multi-homing, both may have to be involved to confirm
   that the prefix may be advertised through the provider who doesn't
   have any interest in the prefix!


   R(63) The routing system MUST cooperate with the security
         policies of mid-boxes whenever possible.

   This is likely to involve further requirements for abstraction of
   information, as, for example, the firewall is seeking to minimize
   interchange of information that could lead to a security breach.  The


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        29
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   effect of such changes on the end-to-end principle should be
   carefully considered as discussed in [32].


   R(64) The routing system MUST be capable of complying with
         local legal requirement for interception of
         communication.

10.Debatable issues

   This section covers issues that need to be considered and resolved in
   deciding on a future domain routing architecture.  While they can't
   be described as requirements, they do affect the types of solution
   that are acceptable.  The discussions included below are very open-
   ended.

10.1Network modeling

   The mathematical model that underlies today's routing system uses a
   graph representation of the network.  Hosts, routers and other
   processing boxes are represented by nodes and communications links by
   arcs.  The model is a topological model in that routing does not need
   to directly model the physical length of the links or the position of
   the nodes:  The model can be transformed to provide a convenient
   picture of the network by adjusting the lengths of the arcs and the
   layout of the nodes.  The connectivity is preserved and routing is
   unaffected by the transformation.

   The routing algorithms in traditional routing protocols utilize a
   small number of results from graph theory.  It is only recently that
   additional results have been employed to support constraint based
   routing for traffic engineering.

   The naturalness of this network model and the 'fit' of the graph
   theoretical methods may have tended to blind us to alternative
   representations and inhibited us from seeking out alternative strands
   of theoretical thinking that might provide improved results.

   We should not allow this habitual behavior to stop us looking for
   alternative representations and algorithms:  Topological revolutions
   are possible and allowed, at least in theory.

10.2System modeling

   The assumption that object modeling of a system is an essential first
   step to creating a new system is still novel in this context.
   Frequently the effort to object model becomes an end in itself and
   does not lead to system creation.  But there is a balance and a lot
   that can be discovered in an ongoing effort to model a system such as
   the future domain routing system.



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        30
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   It is recommended that this process be included in the requirements.
   It should not, however be a gating event to all other work.

   Some of the most important realizations will occur during the process
   of determining the following:
   - Object classification
   - Relationships and containment
   - Roles and Rules

10.3 One, two or many protocols

   There has been a lot of discussion of whether the FDR protocol
   solution should consist of one (probably new) protocol, two (intra
   and inter domain) protocols or many protocols. While in the best of
   all possible worlds, it might be best to have one protocol that
   handles all situations, this seems improbable in this less then best
   of all possible worlds.  On the other hand, maintaining the 'strict'
   division evident in the network today between the IGP and EGP has
   been effectively argued elsewhere as being too restrictive an
   approach.  Given this, and the fact that there are already many
   routing protocols in use, the only possible answer seems to be that
   the architecture SHOULD support many protocols.  It remains an open
   issue, one for the solution, to determine if a new protocol needs to
   be designed in order to support the highest goals of this
   architecture.  The expectation is that, yes, a new protocol will need
   to be designed.

10.4Class of protocol to use

   If a new protocol is required to support the FDR architecture, the
   question remains open as to what kind of protocol this ought to be.
   It is our expectation that a map distribution protocol will be
   required to augment the current path-vector protocol and shortest
   path first protocols.

10.5Map abstraction

   Assuming that a map distribution protocol is required, what are the
   requirements on this protocol?  If every detail is advertised
   throughout the Internet, there will be a lot of information.
   Scalable solutions require abstraction.

   - If we summarise too much, some information will be lost on the
     way.

   - If we summarise too little, then more information then required is
     available contributing to scaling limitations.

   - One can allow more summarisation, if there also is a mechanism to
     query for more details within policy limits.



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        31
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   - The basic requirement is not that the information shall be
     advertised, but rather that the information shall be available to
     those who need it. Of course we should not presuppose a solution
     where advertising is the only possible mechanism.


10.6Clear identification for all entities

   As in all other fields, the words used to refer to concepts and to
   describe operations about routing are important. Rather than describe
   concepts using terms that are inaccurate or rarely used in the real
   world of networking, it is necessary to make an effort to use the
   correct words. Many networking terms are used casually, and the
   result is a partial or incorrect understanding of the underlying
   concept. Entities such as nodes, interfaces, sub-networks, tunnels,
   and the grouping concepts such as ASs, domains, areas, and regions,
   need to be clearly identified and defined to avoid mixing from each
   other.

   There is also a need to separate identifiers (what or who) from
   locators (where) from routes (how to reach).


10.7Robustness and redundancy:

   The routing association between two domains should survive even if
   some individual connection between two routers goes down.

   The "session" should operate between logical "routing entities" on
   each domain side, and not necessarily be bound to individual routers
   or addresses. Such a logical entity can be physically distributed
   over multiple network elements. Or it can reside in a single router,
   which would default to the current situation.


10.8Hierarchy

   A more flexible hierarchy with more levels and recursive groupings in
   both upward and downward directions allows more structured routing.
   The consequence is that no single level will get too big for routers
   to handle.

   On the other hand, it appears that the real world Internet is
   becoming less hierarchical, so that it will be increasingly difficult
   to use hierarchy for scaling control.

   Note that groupings can look different depending on which aspect we
   use to define them. A DiffServ area, a MPLS domain, a trusted domain,
   a QoS area, a multicast domain, etc, do not always coincide. And
   neither are they strict hierarchical subsets of each other. The basic
   distinction at each level is "this grouping versus everything
   outside".

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        32
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002


10.9Will new control mechanisms be needed?

   Is it possible to apply a control theory framework, and analyze the
   stability of the control system of the whole network domain, for e.g.
   convergence speed and the frequency response, and then use the
   results from that analysis to set the timers and other protocol
   parameters.

   Control theory could also play a part is QoS Routing, by modifying
   current link state protocols with link costs dependent on load.
   Control theory is used to increase the stability of such systems.

   At best, it might be possible to construct a new totally dynamical
   routing protocol solely on a control theoretic basis as opposed to
   the current protocols which are based in graph theory and static in
   nature.

10.10 Byzantium

   Is solution to the Byzantine Generals problem a requirement?  This is
   the problem of reaching a consensus among distributed units if some
   of them give misleading answers. The current intra-domain routing
   system is, at one level, totally intolerant of misleading
   information, but the effect of different sorts of misleading or
   incorrect information has vastly varying results, from total collapse
   through to purely local disconnection of a single domain.  This sort
   of behavior is not very desirable.

   What are some of the other network robustness issues that must be
   resolved?

10.11 VPN support

   Today BGP is also used for VPN and other stuff for example as
   described in RFC2547 [16].

   Internet routing and VPN routing have different purposes, and most
   often exchange different information between different devices. Most
   Internet routers do not need to know any VPN specific information.
   The concepts should be clearly separated.

   But when it comes to the mechanisms, VPN routing can share the same
   protocol as ordinary Internet routing, it can use a separate instance
   of the same protocol, or it can use a different protocol. All
   variants are possible and have their own merits.  These requirements
   currently are silent on this issue.


10.12  End to end reliability



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        33
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

   The existing Internet architecture neither requires or provides end-
   to-end reliability of control information dissemination.  For
   example, in distributing VPN information there is, however, a
   requirement for end to end reliability of control information, i.e.
   the ends of the VPN established need to have a acknowledgement of the
   success in setting up the VPN.   While it is not necessarily the
   function of a routing architecture to provide end-to-end reliability
   for this kind of purpose, we must be clear that end-to-end
   reliability becomes a requirement if the network has to support such
   reliable control signaling.  There may be other requirements that
   derive from requiring the FDR to support reliable control signaling.

10.13  End to end transparency

   The introduction of private addressing schemes, Network Address
   Translators and firewalls has significantly reduced the end-to-end
   transparency of the network.  In many cases the network is also no
   longer symmetric, so that communication between two addresses is
   possible if the communication session originates from one end but not
   from the other.  This impedes the deployment of new peer-to-peer
   services, and some 'push' services where the server in a client-
   server arrangement originates the communication session.  Whether a
   new routing system either can or should seek to restore this
   transparency is an open issue.

   A related issue is the extent to which end user applications should
   seek to control the routing of communications in the rest of the
   network.

11.Bibliography

   The following were consulted in the writing of this document.  Not
   all are specifically referred to in the document, but all helped in
   forming this work.  These references are not intended as normative.

     [1]            Clark, D., "Policy Routing in Internet
                    Protocols", RFC 1102, May 1989.

     [2]            Estrin, D., "Requirements for Policy Based
                    Routing in the Research Internet", RFC 1125,
                    November 1989.

     [3]            Steenstrup, M,. "An Architecture for Inter-Domain
                    Policy Routing",  RFC 1478, June 1993

     [4]            Little, M., "Goals and Functional Requirements
                    for Inter-Autonomous System Routing", RFC 1126,
                    July 1989.

     [5]            Perlman, R., "Interconnections Second Edition",
                    1999, Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        34
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

     [6]            Perlman, R., "Network Layer Protocols with
                    Byzantine Robust-ness", Ph.D. Thesis, Department
                    of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
                    MIT, August 1988.

     [7]            Castineyra, I., Chiappa, N., Steenstrup, M., "the
                    Nimrod Routing Architecture", RFC1992, Aug 1996

     [8]            Chiappa, N., "IPng Technical Requirements of the
                    Nimrod Routing and Addressing Architecture", RFC
                    1753, Dec 1994

     [9]            Chiappa, N., "A New IP Routing and Addressing
                    Architecture"

     [10]           Wroclowski, J., The Metanet White Paper -
                    Workshop on Research Directions for the Next
                    Generation Internet, 1995

     [11]           Labovitz, C., Ahuja, A., Farnam J., Bose, A.,
                    Experimental Measurement of Delayed Convergence,
                    NANOG

     [12]           Griffin, T.G., Wilfong, G., An Analysis of BGP
                    Convergence Properties, SIGCOMM 1999

     [13]           Huston, G., Commentary on  Inter-Domain Routing
                    in the Internet,RFC 3221, Dec 2001

     [14]           Alaettinoglu, C.,  Jacobson, V. and Yu, H, ,
                    Towards Milli-Second IGP Convergence, Internet
                    Draft - draft-alaettinoglu-isis-convergence-00,
                    Nov 2000 Work in Progress

     [15]           Sandick, H., Squire, M., Cain, B., Duncan, I.,
                    Haberman, B., Fast LIveness Protocol (FLIP),
                    Internet Draft - draft-sandiick-flip-00,
                    Feb 2000, Work in Progress

     [16]           Rosen, E. and Rekhter, Y., BGP/MPLS VPNs,
                    RFC2547, March 1999

     [17]           Clark, D., Chapin, L., Cerf, V., Braden, R.,
                    Hobby, R., "towards the Future Internet
                    Architecture", RFC1287, December 1991

     [18]           Jacobson, V., Nichols, K. and Poduri, K., The
                    'Virtual Wire' Behavior Aggregate, Internet Draft
                    - draft-ietf-diffserv-pdb-vw-00, July 2000, Work
                    in Progress



Group B               Expires: September 2002                        35
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

     [19]           Seddigh, N., Nandy, B., and Heinanen, J.,
                    An Assured Rate Per-Domain Behaviour for
                    Differentiated Services, Internet Draft -
                    draft-ietf-diffserv-pdb-ar-00, Feb 2001, Work in
                    Progress

     [20]           McPherson, D., Gill, V., Walton, D. and Retana,
                    A., "BGP Persistent Route Oscillation Condition",
                    Internet Draft - draft-mcpherson-bgp-route-
                    oscillation-00, Dec 2000, Work in Progress

     [21]           Hain, T, "Architectural Implications of NAT", RFC
                    2993, November 2000

     [22]           McPherson, D. and Przygienda, T., OSPF Transient
                    Blackhole Avoidance, Internet Draft - draft-
                    mcpherson-ospf-transient-00, July 2000 Work In
                    Progress

     [23]           [BGMP] Thaler, D., Estrin, D. and Meyer, D.
                    (editors), Border Gateway Multicast Protocol
                    (BGMP): Protocol Specification, Internet Draft -
                    draft-ietf-bgmp-spec-02, Nov 2000 Work in
                    progress

     [24]           Rosen, E. Et al., Multiprotocol Label Switching
                    Architecture, RFC 3031

     [25]           Ashwood-Smith, P. Et al., Generalized MPLS -
                    Signaling Functional Description, Internet Draft
                    - draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-01.txt,
                    Work in progress

     [26]           IETF Resource Allocation Protocol working group,
                    http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/rap-
                    charter.html

     [27]           IETF Configuration management with SNMP working
                    group,
                    http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/snmpconf-
                    charter.html

     [28]           IETF Policy working group,
                    http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/policy-
                    charter.html

     [29]           Yu J., "Scalable Routing Design Principles", RFC
                    2791

     [30]           Telcordia Technologies Netsizer web site
                    http://www.netsizer.com/


Group B               Expires: September 2002                        36
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

     [31]           Inference of Shared Risk Link Groups,
                    draft-many-inference-srlg-00.txt,
                    Work in progress

     [32]           Blumenthal, Marjory S. and Clark, David D.,
                    Rethinking the design of the Internet:
                    The end to end arguments vs. the brave new world,
                    May 2001,
                    http://ana-www.lcs.mit.edu/anaweb/papers.html

     [33]           Lang et al, Link Management Protocol,
                    draft-lang-mpls-lmp-02.txt,
                    Work in progress

     [34]           Xu, Z., Dai, S. and Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J.,
                    A More Efficient Distance Vector Routing
                    Algorithm, Proc. IEEE MILCOM 97, Monterey,
                    California, November 2-5, 1997,
                    http://www.cse.ucsc.edu/research/ccrg/
                    publications/zhengyu.milcom97.pdf

     [35]           Bradner, S. and Mankin, A., "The Recommendation
                    for the IP Next Generation Protocol", RFC 1752,
                    January 1995.

     [36]           ISO/IEC, "Protocol for Exchange of Inter-Domain
                    Routeing      Information among Intermediate
                    Systems to support Forwarding of ISO 8473 PDUs",
                    International Standard 10747,
                    ISO/IEC JTC 1,Switzerland 1993

     [37]           Bates, T., Rekhter, Y., Chandra, R. and Katz, D,
                    "Multiprotocol Extensions to BGP-4",
                    RFC2858, June 2000

     [38]           Berkowitz, H. and Krioukov, D, "To Be Multihomed:
                    Requirements and Definitions",
                    draft-berkowitz-multirqmt-02.txt,
                    Work in progress.

     [39]           Ferguson, P. and Berkowitz, H. "Network
                    Renumbering Overview: Why would I want it and
                    what is it anyway?", RFC2071, January 1997

     [40]           Berkowitz, H., "Router Renumbering Guide",
                    RFC2072, January 1997

     [41]           [History] Doria (ed), draft-groupb-irtf-rr-
                    history-00.txt, work in progress

     [42]           Grossman, Dan, "New Terminology and
                    Clarifications for Diffserv", draft-ietf-

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        37
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

                    diffserv-new-terms-08.txt, January 2002, Work in
                    progress.

     [43]           Broido, A., Nemeth, e., kc, and elves., Internet
                    Expansion, Refinement and Churn, Presentation at
                    Nanog, Feb 2002


12.Author's Addresses


  Elwyn Davies
  Nortel Networks
  London Road
  Harlow, Essex CM17 9NA
  UK
  Phone: +44-1279-405498
  Email:  elwynd@nortelnetworks.com

  Avri Doria
  Div. of Computer Communications
  Lulea University of Technology
  S-971 87 Lulea
  Sweden
  Phone: (+46) 920 46 3030
  Email: avri@sm.luth.se

  Howard Berkowitz
  Gett Communications
  5012 25th Street South
  Arlington, VA 22206
  USA
  Phone +1 703 998 5819
  Email: hcb@gettcomm.com

  Dmitri Krioukov
  Nortel Networks
  2325 Dulles Corner Boulevard 
    th
  11   Floor
  Herndon
  VA 20171, USA
  Phone: +1 571 331 1104
  Email: dima@krioukov.net

  Malin Carlzon
  Royal Institute of Technology
  Network Operating Centre
  KTHNOC
  SE-100 44 Stockholm
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 70 269 6519
  Email: malin@sunet.se

Group B               Expires: September 2002                        38
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

  Anders Bergsten
  Telia Research AB
  Aurorum 6
  S-977 75 Lulea
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 920 754 50
  Email: anders.p.bergsten@telia.se

  Olle Pers
  Telia Research AB
  S- 123 86 Farsta
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 8 713 8182
  Email: olle.k.pers@telia.se

  Yong Jiang
  Telia Research AB
  S- 123 86 Farsta
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 8 713 8125
  Email: yong.b.jiang@telia.se

  Lenka Carr Motyckova
  Div. of Computer Communications
  Lulea University of Technology
  S-971 87 Lulea
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 920 91769
  Email: lenka@sm.luth.se

  Pierre Fransson
  Div. of Computer Communications
  Lulea University of Technology
  S-971 87 Lulea
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 70 646 0384
  Email: pierre@cdt.luth.se

  Olov Schelen
  Div. of Computer Communications
  Lulea University of Technology
  S-971 87 Lulea
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 70 536 2030
  Email: Olov.Schelen@cdt.luth.se








Group B               Expires: September 2002                        39
 


INTERNET DRAFT              FDR Requirements             February, 2002

  Tove Madsen
  Utfors Bredband AB
  Rsundavgen 12
  P.O. Box 525
  SE-169 29 Solna
  Sweden
  Phone: +46 8 5270 5040
  Email: tove.madsen@utfors.se













































Group B               Expires: September 2002                        40
 

