


Network Working Group                                      Chunqiang. Li
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Standards Track                       February 22, 2008
Expires: August 25, 2008


   Deriving Fast Handover Key from MSK to secure the FMIPv6 signaling
                    draft-li-mipshop-fbu-sec-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).














Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


Abstract

   This specification introduces a symmetric cryptography mechanism for
   protecting signaling messages between the Mobile Node and previous
   Access Router for Fast Mobile IPv6.  The method defined here utilizes
   the Master Session Key(MSK) generated from EAP authentication to
   derive a fast handover key between the Mobile Node and the Access
   Router in order to avoid certain attacks.  This mechanism also adopts
   the Mobile Node Identifier option and the mobility message
   authentication option to the FMIPv6 signaling messages.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Messages Flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11




























Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


1.  Introduction

   In order to reduce the handover latency, Fast Mobile IPv6(FMIPv6)
   RFC4068 [2], proposes a fast handover mechanism for IPv6 Mobile
   Nodes.  It requires a tunnel between the previous Access Router and
   the Mobile Node.  The MN sends a "Fast Binding Update" message to its
   previous Access Router to establish the tunnel.  Without
   corresponding verification of FBU, an attacker can redirect a victim
   node's traffic at will.  To avoid certain attacks, the FMIPv6
   signaling messages between the mobile node and the access router must
   be secured to ensure FMIPv6 support for a legitimate mobile node that
   has been authorized to obtain such services.

   The extensible authentication protocol (EAP)RFC3748 [3] is a generic
   framework supporting multiple types of authentication methods.
   According to the document RFC3748 [3],after successful
   authentication, the authentication server transports the Master
   Session Key(MSK) to the authenticator.  The underlying L2 or L3
   protocol can uses the MSK to derive additional keys.  Generally, the
   MSK is used for bootstrapping the security associations for the
   access link between the mobile node and the network.

   Fast Mobile IPv6 requires that a Fast Binding Update is secured using
   a security association between an Access Router and a Mobile Node.
   In this document, a method for establishing a shared secret key
   between the Access Router and the Mobile Node is defined to protect
   this signaling.  The mechanism utilizes the MSK to derive a fast
   handover key shared between the Mobile Node and previous Access
   Router.

   The access authentication is to authorize the Mobile Node to obtain
   the access link's network services; and FMIPv6 denotes that MN still
   continues to use the network services provided by the previous link,
   therefore, from the authorization view, applied the access
   authentication key to protect the FMIPv6 signaling is appropriate.
















Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [1].














































Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


3.  Applicability Statement

   This mechanism is useful in scenarios where the following conditions
   are all met:

   -The authenticator is co-located with the access router, furthermore,
   the previous access router acted as the authenticator of the mobile
   node.

   -After successful authentication, the MSK was generated,so the EAP
   method used by mobile node should support the generation of MSK.








































Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


4.  Messages Flow

   The figure below describes the sequence of messages sent and received
   between the MN and pAR in the registration process.  Fast Binding
   Update (FBU) and Fast Binding Acknowledgement (FBack) messages are
   used in the process.

          MN                                           pAR/Authenticator
          |                   FBU to pAR                         |
    (a)   |----------------------------------------------------->|
          |         (including MN-ID option,                     |
          |          mobility message authentication option)     |
          |                                                      |
          |                            AR/Authenticator authenticates MN
          |                                                      |
          |                   FBack to MN                        |
    (b)   |<-----------------------------------------------------|
          |         (including MN-ID option,                     |
          |          mobility message authentication option)     |
          |                                                      |

                      Figure 1:  Fast Binding Update to AR

   The MN needs to signal the previous AR by FBU message during the
   MIPv6 fast handover procedure, the MN utilizes the fast handover key
   derived from MSK and corresponding authentication algorithm to
   generate the message authentication code of FBU.  The Mobile Node
   MUST use the Mobile Node Identifier option, specifically the MN-NAI
   mobility option as defined in RFC4283 [4] to identify itself while
   authenticating with the previous AR.  As specified by FMIPv6, the MN
   MUST include the old care-of address in a Home Address Option.

   Upon receiving FBU message containing authentication code and MN-NAI
   option, according to the MN-NAI, the pAR figured out the MSK,
   utilized the same method with mobile node to derive the fast handover
   key, and then applied this key to verify the authentication code
   included in the mobility message authentication option.  The FMIPv6
   document provides more detail on how the previous AR processes an FBU
   containing an authentication code.












Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


5.  Security Considerations

   This document describes a shared key establishing method for FMIPv6
   protocol.  The key establishing method utilizes the MSK to derive a
   child key to protect the FMIPv6 signaling.  This mechanism can defend
   against the other malicious node to impersonate a legal Mobile Node
   to send faked FBU messages.  However, lack of verification the
   ownership of care-of addresses, a malicious node can send a FBU
   message to redirect traffic to an incorrect address or to steal
   another node's traffic with the genuine security association.
   Obviously, owing to the security association established from the
   successful authentication, according to the MN-NAI in the FBU
   messages, the AR can track the malicious node.  From the
   administrative view, this can limit the attacks from the nodes with
   the genuine security association.

   For other FMIPv6 security considerations, please see the FMIPv6
   document RFC4068 [2].

































Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


6.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations introduced by this draft.
















































Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


7.  References

   [1]  Bradner, S, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [2]  R. Koodli, "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", July 2005.

   [3]  B. Aboba, "extensible authentication protocol", June 2004.

   [4]  A. Patel, "Mobile Node Identifier Option for Mobile IPv6",
        November 2005.








































Li                       Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


Author's Address

   Chunqiang Li
   Huawei Technologies

   Email: li.chunqiang@huawei.com













































Li                       Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               FMIPv6 Security               February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Li                       Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 11]

