
Network Working Group                                         R. Hedberg
Internet-Draft                                      Stockholm University
Expires: July 1, 2004                                       January 2004


               Simple Policy Control Protocol over TCP/IP
                       draft-hedberg-spocp-tcp-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 1, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.



















Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


Table of Contents

   1. Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. Protocol implementation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3. Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   A. Simple examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 8










































Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


1. Abstract

   The SPOCP protocol has been described in [SPOCP]. The description is
   done in general terms and is not done in such a way that implementers
   can directly implement the protocol. To make that possible there has
   to be a mapping defined between the more abstract description and a
   bits on the wire description. This document represents one possible
   mapping.











































Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


2. Protocol implementation

   We have choosen a very simple base for our approach: namely to use as
   a common structure tuples, consisting of a length and a value (LV).
   The format of the length part is the printable representation of the
   length and the value is then a variable length value field. The
   boarder between the length and the value is denoted by a ':' (0x3A) .

   So, the string "foobar" would be represented by the LV "6:foobar".

   The reason for choosing this format is of course that the Spocp
   server must anyway be able to parse canonical S-expressions [SPOCP
   Sexp] and there for already has the capability to parse LV's. So no
   extra code is needed for decoding this format. The other benefit is
   that the server and the client, after having read a couple of bytes
   of a command or response from the net, knows how many bytes it must
   read before it has all the information. For the client if a multipart
   response is received there is no length field telling how big the
   combined length of all the parts is. Each part is coded separately.

   More general, a protocol operations in SPOCP which consists of a
   operand and a set of zero or more arguments will be represented using
   the format:

      L(L'Operand' *L'arg')

   For example (using the canonical s-expression representation) the
   permission check:

      QUERY (4:http(4:page10:index.html)(6:action3:GET)(6:userid4:olav))

   Would be represented as

      70:5:QUERY60:(4:http(4:page10:index.html)(6:action3:GET)(6:userid4:olav))


   The server is quiet unless the client sends a query. That is, no
   initial greeting is sent from the server.

   *Note:* As of this moment there is no default SPOCP port defined.











Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


3. Security considerations

   This document is about how the SPOCP protocol is to be coded on the
   wire. Security concerns with the protocol itself and the usage of a
   generalized access control service is delt with in [SPOCP] and [SPOCP
   Sexp].













































Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


References

   [SPOCP Sexp]
              Hedberg, R. and O. Bandmann, "Restricted S-expressions for
              usage in a generalized access control service".

   [SPOCP]    Hedberg, R., "The Simple Policy Control Protocol".


Author's Address

   Roland Hedberg
   Stockholm University
   Kasamark 114
   Umea  90586
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 90 147275
   EMail: roland@it.su.se
































Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


Appendix A. Simple examples

   C: marks what the client sends and S: the replies from the server.

   Adding a new rule:

      C: 49:3:ADD41:(4:http(4:page)(6:action3:GET)(6:userid))

      S: 9:3:2002:Ok

   A typical query session:

      C:
      70:5:QUERY60:(4:http(4:page10:index.html)(6:action3:GET)(6:userid4:olav))

      S: 9:3:2002:Ok

      C: 8:6:LOGOUT

      S: 10:3:2033:Bye

   If the client wants to keep the connection open in order to send more
   queries it just does not send and LOGOUT command.




























Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 SPOCP/TCP                    January 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Hedberg                   Expires July 1, 2004                  [Page 9]


