


Internet Engineering Task Force                        Jan Novak, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                         Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                         May 21, 2008
Expires: November 20, 2008


         IP Flow Information Accounting and Export Benchmarking
                               Methodology
                  draft-janovak-bmwg-ipflow-meth-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 20, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document provides methodology and framework for quantifying 
   performance implications of enabling selective monitoring of
   IP flows on a network device and export of this information to
   a collector as specified in [RFC5101].



Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 1]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      1.1. Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2. Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.1. Existing Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.2. Newly Defined Terminology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3. Test Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.1. Testbed Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.2. Basic Packet Forwarding Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.3  Flow Monitoring Configuration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.4  Frame Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.5  Frame Sizes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.6  Flow Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.7  Traffic Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   4. Processor Utilisation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      4.1 Executing the metrics measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      4.2 Cache States Maintenance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
          4.2.1 Metrics Definition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
          4.2.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
          4.2.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
          4.2.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
      4.3 Cache States Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
          4.3.1 Metrics Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
          4.3.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
          4.3.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
          4.3.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
      4.4 Flow Expiration Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          4.4.1 Metrics Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          4.4.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          4.4.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          4.4.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
      4.5 Flow Export Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
          4.5.1 Metrics Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
          4.5.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          4.5.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          4.5.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
      4.6 Cache Overflow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          4.6.1 Metrics Definition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          4.6.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
          4.6.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
          4.6.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
   5. Throughput Tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
      5.1 Single Traffic Component. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
      5.2 Two Traffic Components. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
   6. Evaluating Flow Monitoring Applicability. . . . . . . . . . .17 
   7. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
   8. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
   9. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
   10.References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
      10.1. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
      10.2. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

 
 











































Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

1.  Introduction

   Monitoring of IP flows (Flow Monitoring) on network devices is an
   application which has numerous usage in both service provider and
   enterprise segments as detailed in [RFC3917]. The question any user
   considering its deployment asks is - And what performance
   implication Flow Monitoring will have on my network ? 

   The network operator concern is always twofold:
       a. what will be CPU usage
       b. what will be the forwarding performance

   when enabling Flow Monitoring on network devices. This document
   defines set of traffic parameters which influence most the 
   performance of network devices and provides methodology how to
   measure effects of Flow Monitoring from both points of view as 
   specified above.

   IETF IPFIX working group concentrates its effort on standardising
   the Flow Monitoring data export to an external collecting
   device while the actual application providing the data inside of
   a network device is left to the implementors liberty. The goal of
   this document is to address both these aspects of Flow Monitoring,
   since typical implementation will allow to separately enable 
   monitoring (for the users to query the data using command line
   interface or SNMP) and export of the IP flow information.

   
1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", 
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

2.1 Existing Terminology

   Device Under Test (DUT)   [RFC2285, section 3.1.1]

   IP Traffic Flow/Flow      [RFC5101, section 2]

   Flow Key                  [RFC5101, section 2]

   Flow Record (FR)          [RFC5101, section 2]

   Observation Point         [RFC5101, section 2]

   Exporter                  [RFC5101, section 2]

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 4]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

   Collector                 [RFC5101, section 2]

   Control Information       [RFC5101, section 2]

   Data Stream               [RFC5101, section 2]

   Flow Expiration           [IPFIX-ARCH, section 5.1.1]

   Flow Export               [IPFIX-ARCH, section 5.1.2]

   Throughput                [RFC1242, section 3.17]



2.2 Defined Terminology

2.2.1 Cache

   Definition:
      Memory area held and dedicated by the DUT to store Flow Record 
      information

2.2.2 Cache Size

   Definition:
      The size of the cache in terms of how many entries of Flow 
      Records the cache can hold

   Discussion:
      This term is typically represented as a configurable option
      in the particular Flow Monitoring implementation. It needs to 
      be at least known in order to define the tests circumstances
      properly. Its highest value will depend on the memory available
      in the network device.
                     
   Measurement units: 
      Number of entries

2.2.3 Flow Expiration Rate (FER)
       
   Definition:
      Number of Flow Records which expire (as defined by the Flow 
      Expiration term) from the Cache within a time interval

   Measurement units:
      Number of Flow Records per second 

2.2.4 Active Timeout

   Definition:
      The time interval from the time when first packet of a particular
      Flow was seen till the Flow will be expired while there are still

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 5]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

      packets arriving to the DUT which belong to the Flow. 

   Discussion:
      This term is typically represented as a configurable option in the
      particular Flow Monitoring implementation. See section 5.1.1 of
      [IPFIX-ARCH] for more detailed discussion.
 
   Measurement units: 
      Seconds

2.2.5 Inactive Timeout

   Definition:
      The time interval from the time when last packet has been observed
      for a particular Flow till the Flow is expired from the Cache, while
      no packets which belong to the Flow are seen during the whole period.

   Discussion:
      This term is typically represented as a configurable option in the
      particular Flow Monitoring implementation. See section 5.1.1 of
      [IPFIX-ARCH] for more detailed discussion.
 
   Measurement units: 
      Seconds  

2.2.6 Baseline Processor Utilisation (BPU)

   Definition:
      The Processor (CPU) utilisation under steady traffic stream without
      Flow Monitoring configured. 

   Discussion:
      The CPU utilisation SHOULD BE collected from the DUT after sufficient
      time interval under the test traffic stream to obtain reliable 1 minute
      average CPU usage. 
      The recommended time before collecting the 1 minute average CPU usage
      is 5 to 10 minutes.
           
   Measurement units: 
      Percent 

2.2.7 Flow Monitoring Processor Utilisation (FMPU)

   Definition:
      The Processor (CPU) utilisation under steady traffic stream with Flow
      Monitoring configured. 

   Discussion:
      The CPU utilisation SHOULD BE collected from the DUT after sufficient
      time interval under the test traffic stream to obtain reliable 1 minute
      average CPU usage. 
      The recommended time before collecting the 1 minute average CPU usage

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 6]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

      is 5 to 10 minutes.
 
   Measurement units: 
      Percent                 
          
3. Test Set Up

3.1 Testbed Topology

   The test set-up is identical to the one used by [RFC2544]:

         +--------+         +------------+          +----------+
         |        |         |            |          |          |
         | sender |-------->|    DUT     |--------->| receiver |
         |        |         |            |          |          |
         +--------+         +------------+          +----------+
                               Figure 1


   The ideal way to implement the test is using one tester with a sending
   port and a receiving port. This allows for an easy check if all the sent
   traffic by the sender was transmitted by the DUT and received at the
   receiver.

   If the effects of enabling Flow Monitoring on several interfaces are
   of concern, the topology can be expanded with several input and output 
   ports.
      
3.2 Basic Packet Forwarding Set Up

   DUT needs to have very basic configuration just allowing IP packet
   forwarding without any use of dynamic IP routing protocols. The only
   objective of the configuration is to allow transmission of the test traffic
   with as low interference of any control (routing) traffic as possible.

3.3 Flow Monitoring Configuration

   The DUT Observation Points configuration needs to be decided upon 
   depending on the interest and scope of the testing as follows:

      a. input port/ports only
      b. output port/ports only
      c. both input and output

   The testing procedures are otherwise same for all these possible
   configurations.

3.4 Frame Formats

   Frame formats to use are specified in [RFC2544] section 8.

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 7]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

3.5 Frame Sizes

   Frame sizes to use are specified in [RFC2544] section 9.

3.6 Flow Records

   The Flow Record definition is very implementation specific. A Flow
   Monitoring implementation might allow only for fixed Flow Record
   definition, based on the most common IP parameters in the IPv4 or
   IPv6 headers - like source and destination IP addresses, IP
   protocol numbers or transport level port numbers. Another
   implementation might allow the user to actually define his own
   completely arbitrary Flow Record to monitor the traffic. The
   requirement for the tests defined in this document is only the need
   for a large number of Flow Records in the Cache. The Flow Keys 
   needed to achieve that will typically be source and destinations IP
   addresses and transport level port numbers.

3.7 Traffic Definitions

   The traffic definitions in the sections below serve only as examples
   how to achieve the particular test objectives with certain Flow 
   Record definition, the exact set-up will therefore always be Flow
   Monitoring implementation specific.

4. Processor Utilisation Metrics

   Every Network Operator carefully monitors Processor (CPU) utilisation
   on all network devices for two major reasons:

      a. increased CPU usage can indicate unwanted network activity like
         Denial of  Service attacks or faulty device or network 
         connection
      b. each network device typically runs quite large routing protocols
         tables and needs some free processing power to maintain routing
         and forwarding

   There is no commonly accepted limit to the CPU usage but typically
   usage in the range of 70 - 80 % becomes already a critical issue.

   Flow Monitoring can be run on different network device
   architectures from centralised software only, distributed, to fully
   hardware accelerated. Irrespective of its architecture, the
   device will have some CPU and some part of Flow Monitoring tasks will
   always need to be processed on that CPU even though some parts of the
   functionality could be off loaded to the specialised hardware.
   The measurements in this section can be therefore performed either on
   the CPU which performs all the routing tasks or a CPU on some device
   linecard for a distributed system depending what represents the major
   concern and where are the Flow Monitoring tasks running.

   The purpose of this section is to define a set of metrics and tests to

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 8]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008
 
   measure influence of the Flow Monitoring on the CPU of a network device.
   The following CPU usage metrics are defined and measured here:

      a. Cache States Maintenance CPU usage
      b. Cache States Update CPU usage
      c. Flow Expiration Rate CPU usage
      d. Flow Export Rate CPU usage
      e. Cache Overflow CPU usage

4.1 Executing the metrics measurements

   The CPU tests methodology is same for all the tests specified in this
   section. The whole test course step by step SHOULD be executed as 
   follows:

      a. Configure DUT for base forwarding as specified in the section
         3.2               
      b. Configure traffic streams on the Sender and configure Receiver
         to just sink the traffic. The Receiver SHOULD perform checks
         that the traffic sent by the Sender was successfully forwarded
         by the UUT to the Receiver

      c. Perform measurements in a loop from 1 to n, where n is the
         number of defined streams:

            1. Start traffic stream n
            2. Measure BPU
            3. Stop traffic, clear all packet statistics and apply Flow
               Monitoring configuration on the DUT as specified in the 
               section 3.3 and as defined in the particular test section
            4. Start traffic stream n
            5. Wait to populate the cache and verify Flow Monitoring
               statistics  
            6. Measure FMCU
            7. Stop traffic and clean all Flow Monitoring DUT
               configuration

4.2 Cache States Maintenance

4.2.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to maintain the Flow Record information held
   in the Cache in a completely static scenario without any changes to the
   stored information.

4.2.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Cache States Maintenance CPU utilisation the presence of
   a large amount of Flows Records in the Cache is needed but with no Flow
   Expiration from the Cache during the test and also no counter refresh

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 9]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

   - the test traffic is sent just once to populate the cache.

4.2.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Keys Definition:
      Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be created
      in the Cache
           
   Cache Size: 
      Maximum configurable value on the network device.

   Sender Traffic Definition:

      Define n traffic streams while incrementing the number of unique Flow
      Keys combinations in the increments of about 1/nth of the cache size,
      leaving about 10% of the cache entries free at the maximum.

      The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT exceed
      the configured Cache Size at any point of the measurement.
                  
   Number of packets sent: each stream sends just the configured number of 
      unique Flow Keys values in one batch to just populate the cache before
      the measurement starts

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

      Inactive Timeout:
         Inactive Timeout must be configured in such a way, that the Flow 
         Records get created in the Cache and never expire. The best value is
         the maximum configurable Inactive Timeout.
                  
      Active Timeout:
         Active Timeout MUST be configured in such a way that the active Flow
         Records never expire from the Cache during the whole measurement
         period with one of the defined traffic streams.

   The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the measurement
   execution to verify that the measurement conditions have been reached as
   specified - namely the number of entries and number of added entries in
   the Cache SHOULD NOT change during and after the cache has been populated.
   sent. 

 4.2.4 Analysing the Results

    The test run will produce n triplets of values as follows:
       "Number of Flow Records in the Cache" "BPU" "FMCU"

    The CPU usage needed to maintain the states in the Cache is represented
    by the values difference (FMCU - BPU) and is a function of the number of
    states held in the Cache.          


Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008
        
4.3 Cache States Update

4.3.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to update the Flow Record information held
   in the Cache while the number of Flow Records does not change, only the
   counters (typically bytes and packets numbers) corresponding to each
   Flow Record are updated by the flowing traffic stream.


4.3.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Cache States Update CPU utilisation the presence of a large
   amount of Flows Records in the Cache is needed but with no Flow Expiration
   from the Cache during the test. The traffic needs to flow steadily at
   certain rate while updating the Flow Record counters.

4.3.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Keys Definition:
      Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be created
      in the Cache

   Flow Record Definition - MUST contain counter fields like bytes and
      packets which get updated with each sent packet.
           
   Cache Size: 
      Maximum configurable value on the network device.

   Sender Traffic Definition:

      Define n traffic streams while incrementing the packet rate. The number
      of unique Flow Keys combinations SHOULD be at about 90% of the
      configured Cache Size.

      The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT exceed
      the configured Cache Size at any point of the measurement.
                  
   Number of packets sent: continuous traffic stream

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

      Inactive Timeout:
         Inactive Timeout must be configured in such a way, that the Flow 
         Records get created in the Cache and never expire. The best value is
         the maximum configurable Inactive Timeout.
                  
      Active Timeout:
         Active Timeout MUST be configured in such a way that the active Flow
         Records never expire from the Cache during the whole measurement
         period with one of the defined traffic streams.

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 11]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

   The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the measurement
   execution to verify that the measurement condition have been reached as
   specified - namely the number of entries and number of added entries in
   the Cache SHOULD NOT change after the cache is fully populated.
       
4.3.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce n triplets of values as follows:
      "Packet Rate" "BPU" "FMCU"

   The CPU usage needed to update and maintain the states in the Cache is
   represented by the values difference (FMCU - BPU) and is a function of
   the number of updates per second - in this particular set-up it is equal
   to the packet rates.
         
4.4 Flow Expiration Rate

4.4.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to expire at certain rate the Flow Record
   information held in the Cache while the number of Flow Records in the
   Cache never exceeds the configured Cache Size.

4.4.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Flow Expiration Rate CPU utilisation the traffic needs to
   populate the Cache at certain steady rate. The Flow Record needs to be
   expired from the Cache before it can be refreshed by the next packet with
   the same Flow Key parameters combination. The total amount of Flow Records
   in the Cache MUST NOT reach the configured Cache Size.
   

4.4.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Keys Definition:
      Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be created
      in the Cache
           
   Cache Size: 
      Maximum configurable value on the network device.

   Sender Traffic Definition:

      Define n traffic streams while incrementing the packet rate. The number
      of unique Flow Keys combinations MUST be many multiples of the 
      configured Cache Size.

      The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT exceed
      the configured Cache Size at any point of the measurement. This can be
      achieved by the Flow Monitoring timers configuration as specified below.
                  
Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 12]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

   Number of packets sent: continuous traffic stream

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

      Inactive Timeout:
         Inactive Timeout must be configured in such a way, that the Flow 
         Records get created in the Cache and expire before they can be 
         refreshed by the next packet in the stream with the same parameters.
         The Inactive Timeout value MUST be smaller than (90% configured Cache
         Size) divided by the stream packet rate. This way the number of 
         active Flow Records in the Cache will never exceed the Cache Size.
         The same thing can be achieved if the Flow Monitoring implementation
         allows to configure Inactive Timeout equal to 0 seconds (e.g.
         immediate expiration).

   The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the measurement
   execution to verify that the measurement conditions have been reached as
   specified - namely the number of entries MUST NOT exceed the Cache Size
   during the whole measurement with one of the defined traffic streams.

   The number of Flow Records in the Cache entries SHOULD oscillate around
   the value:

           (Inactive Timeout * packet rate)

   or ideally be stable and equal to that value. 
           
4.4.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce N triplets of values as follows:
      "Packet rate" "BPU" "FMCU"

   Due to the Flow Monitoring and the test traffic configuration the packet
   rate represents also the Flow Expiration Rate - each packet of the test
   traffic streams creates one Flow and the Flows later expire at the same
   rate the packets were sent and the Flows created.
   The triplets can therefore be interpreted as:
      "Flow Expiration Rate" "BPU" "FMCU"

   The measured FMCU represents the CPU usage of three components:

      a. BPU
      b. Cache state updates and maintenance 
      c. Flow Expiration Rate

4.5 Flow Export Rate

4.5.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to export at certain rate the Flow Record
   information held in the Cache while the number of Flow Records in the Cache
   never exceeds the configured Cache Size.

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 13]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

4.5.2 Measurement Procedure

   Same as in 4.4.2, the DUT is in addition configured with Flow Export

4.5.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

   The DUT needs to be configured for Flow Export to one or more Collectors.
   The Collectors do not need to exist neither any export data analysis needs
   to be done. The DUT MUST have a route and forwarding adjacency to reach 
   all the Collectors. The export packets SHOULD exit the DUT on another
   interface than the one used to connect the Receiver so that the test
   traffic statistics on that interface are not polluted by the export
   packets. The Flow Export statistics SHOULD be checked on the DUT and
   compared to the expected Flow Expiration Rate. The Flow Export packets
   exit interface SHOULD be checked for the packets statistics to make sure
   the export packets indeed leave the DUT.

   All the other measurement components need to be configured exactly same way as
   in the section 4.4.
             
4.5.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce n triplets of values as follows:
      "Flow Expiration Rate" "BPU" "FMCU"

   The measured FMCU represents now the CPU usage of four components

      a.) BPU
      b.) Cache state update and maintenance 
      c.) Flow Expiration Rate
      d.) Flow Export Rate

4.6 Cache Overflow

   The common factor of sections 4.2 to 4.4 was that the number of Flow Records
   created in the Cache never exceeded the configured Cache Size. This represents
   a normal and very healthy network status. This picture can easily change in
   the environment of a more busy network device - either having less resources
   available for Flow Monitoring or simply more active Flow Monitoring due to
   different traffic patterns. The Flow Monitoring implementation specific 
   processes which handle Cache maintenance can significantly change under the
   condition where the amount of created Flow Records exceeds the available Cache
   Size to hold them.
          
4.6.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to expire at certain rate the Flow Record
   information held in the Cache while the number of Flow Records created in the
   Cache always reaches and overflows the configured Cache Size.

Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 14]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

4.6.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Cache Overflow CPU utilisation the traffic needs to fill
   the Cache at the beginning of the measurement. The number of unique Flow Key
   values combinations must be very large as compared to the configured Cache Size
   so that each packet always creates a new Flow Record and forces another Flow
   Record to be expired from the Cache.

4.6.3 Measurement Configuration
 
  Flow Keys Definition:
     Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be created
     in the Cache

  Cache Size: 
     Configured to such a value so that the Cache gets filled up within short
     initial interfval of the stream sending.
 
  Sender Traffic Definition:

     Define n traffic streams while incrementing the packet rate. The number
     of unique Flow Keys combinations MUST be many multiples of the 
     configured Cache Size.

     The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST exceed the
     configured Cache Size before the test starts. 


  Flow Monitoring Configuration:

     Inactive Timeout:
        Inactive Timeout SHOULD be configured to the largest possible value
        so that the flows do not expire from the Cache using ordinary expiration
        processes.
        Under this Sender and Flow Monitoring configuration the number of Flow
        Records created in the Cache will exceed the configure Cache Size in the
        first seconds of sending the traffic. 

     Active Timeout:
        Active Timeout SHOULD be configured equal or larger than Inactive Timeout.

     The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the test execution
     to verify that the test conditions have been reached as specified - namely the
     number of Flow Records in the Cache needs to be always very close or equal to
     the configured Cache Size.
           
4.6.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce N triplets of values as follows:
      "Packet rate" "BPU" "FMCU"

   
Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 15]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

   Due to the Flow Monitoring and the test traffic configuration the packet rate 
   represents also the Flow Expiration Rate - each packet of the test traffic stream 
   creates one Flow and the Flows later expire at the same rate the packets were sent
   and the Flows created. The triplets can therefore be interpreted as:
      "Flow Expiration Rate" "BPU" "FMCU"

   The measured FMCU represents the CPU usage of three components:

   a. BPU
   b. Cache state updates and maintenance 
   c. Flow Expiration Rate under the condition of Cache overflow      

5. Throughput Tests

   The throughput tests can use the methodology as defined in
   [RFC2544] but in the presence of Flow Monitoring configuration
   on the DUT. This represents certain challenge to create controlled
   and well defined test environment also from the point of view of
   Flow Monitoring. 
   [RFC2544] defines frames formats, sizes and rates for the 
   Throughput tests. From the prospective of Flow Monitoring these
   test streams can be used in two ways to create Cache as specified
   in the following sections.

5.1 Single Traffic Component

   Section 12 of [RFC2544] discusses the use of protocol source and
   destination addresses for the Throughput tests. In order to perform
   Throughput measurement with Flow Monitoring enabled the defined
   Flow Keys MUST contain IP source and destination address. The IP Flow
   Monitoring measurements 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6 can be executed using [RFC2544]
   Throughput test methodology under these additional conditions:

    a. the test traffic does not use just single unique pair of source and
       destination address
        
    b. the Sender allows to define test traffic as follows
            
       1) define the test streams exactly as specified in the sections 4.4,
          4.5 and 4.6
       2) allow for a parameter to say send N (where N is an integer number
          starting at 1 and incremented in small steps) packets with IP
          addresses A and B before changing both IP addresses to the next
          value


    This test traffic definition allows to execute the above defined IP FLow
    Monitoring tests with one defined Flow Expiration rate while measuring at
    the same time the DUT Throughput as defined in [RFC2544].

    This set-up is the better option since it best simulates the life network

 Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008               [Page 16]
 Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008  
  
    traffic scenario with Flows containing more than just one packet.

5.2 Two Traffic Components

   The test traffic set-up in the section 5.1 might be difficult to achieve
   with commercial traffic generators. The way around it is to define two 
   traffic components in the test traffic - one to populate Flow Monitoring
   Cache and the second one to execute the throughput test.

   Flow Monitoring Test Traffic Component - the exact traffic definition as
      specified in the sections 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6.

   Throughput Test Traffic Component - test traffic as specified by [RFC2544] 
      but under the condition it MUST create just one Flow Record in the DUT
      Cache. In the particular set-up discussed here this would mean a traffic
      stream with just one pair of unique source and destination IP address
      (but could be avoided if Flow Keys were for example UDP/TCP source and
      destination ports).

   The first traffic component will exercise the DUT CPU in terms of IP Flow
   activity while the second traffic component will measure the Throughput under
   the conditions of [RFC2544]. The traffic rates of first component can be simply
   added to the achieved Throughput value of the second component.             

6. Evaluating Flow Monitoring Applicability

   The results obtained for certain DUT allow for a preliminary analysis of 
   a Flow Monitoring deployment based on Internet traffic analysis data
   provided by organisations like [CAIDA]. The data needed to make
   an estimate of a network device CPU usage spent on Flow Monitoring
   are as follows:

   Average packet size:            350 bytes
   Number of packets per IP Flow:  20

   Expected data rate on the network device: 1 Gbit/s

   This results in:

   Expected packet rate: 357 000 pps  

      being (1 Gbit/s divided by 350 bytes/packet)

   Flows per second:   : 18 000

      being (packet rate 357 000 pps divided by 20 packets per IP Flow)

   Under constant load of traffic with the parameters above the network
   device will always run in the Cache Overflow mode (if the network is 
   large enough the Flows will hardly ever repeat itself within few 
   seconds needed to fill up lets say 300 000 entries Cache) and from pure
   Flow Monitoring point of view the CPU usage will be around 14 % - see

 Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008          [Page 17]
 Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

   This needs to be add up on top of the Base CPU usage measurement for
   the corresponding traffic rate and packet sizes.

7.  Acknowledgements

   This work could have been performed thanks to the patience and support
   of Cisco System Netflow development team, namely Paul Aitken, Paul Atkins
   and Andrew Johnson. Thanks belong also to Aamer Akhter for initiating
   this work.
   
8.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA considerations.

9.  Security Considerations

   Documents of this type do not directly affect the security of
   the Internet or corporate networks as long as benchmarking
   is not performed on devices or systems connected to operating
   networks.

10. References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [RFC5101]  Claise B., "Specification of the IP Flow Information Export
              (IPFIX) Protocol for the Exchange of IP Traffic Flow
              Information", Standards Track, RFC 5101, January 2008.


10.2.  Informative References


   [RFC1242]  Bradner, S., "Benchmarking Terminology for Network
              Interconnection Devices", RFC 1242, July 1991.

   [RFC2285]  Mandeville R., "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching
              Devices", Informational, RFC 2285, May 21998.

   [RFC2544]  Bradner, S., "Benchmarking Methodology for Network 
              Interconnect Devices", Informational, RFC 2544, March 1999

   [RFC3917]  Quittek j., "Requirements for IP Flow Information Export
              (IPFIX)", Informational, RFC 3917, October 2004.

   [IPFIX-ARCH]  Sadasivan, G., Brownlee, N., Claise, B., and J. Quittek, 
              "Architecture Model for IP Flow Information Export", Work
              in Progress, September 2006.

 Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008                  [Page 18]
 Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008

     [CAIDA]  Claffy, K., "The nature of the beast: recent traffic measurements
              from an Internet backbone",
              http://www.caida.org/publications/papers/1998/Inet98/Inet98.html

Author's Addresses

   Jan Novak (editor)
   Cisco System
   Edinburgh,
   UK
   Phone: +44 7740 925889
   Email: janovak@cisco.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
 Novak                 Expires November 20, 2008                  [Page 19]
 Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking       May 2008
