



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 S. Jiang
Internet-Draft                              Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
Intended status: Informational                                   H. Deng
Expires: November 30, 2014                                  China Mobile
                                                                 F. Bari
                                                                    AT&T
                                                                R. Zhang
                                                           China Telecom
                                                             S. Krishnan
                                                                Ericsson
                                                            May 29, 2014


       Application Enabled COllaborative NETworking Gap Analysis
                    draft-conet-aeon-gap-analysis-00

Abstract

   Identification and treatment of application flows have become more
   and more important for network operators.  In order to efficiently
   distinguish ICPs' traffic, coordination between ISPs and ICPs is
   required.  IP flow identification can be based on ICPs' traffic
   carrying some mutually agreed identifiers.  This document analyzes
   the technical gap between the current network functions and required
   network capability to enable such functionality.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 30, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Overview of Technical Consideratins . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Traffic Identifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Collaboration between ICPs and ISPs . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Identifying Traffics between End Users and Network  . . . . .   8
   6.  Limitations of Existing Signaling Mechanisms  . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Efforts in Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   11. Change log [RFC Editor: Please remove]  . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   While the Internet traffic is continually growing, more and more ICPs
   (Internet Content Providers) realize the essentiality and advantages
   of cooperating with ISPs (Internet Service Providers).  In order to
   serve their users better, ICPs have an emerging requirement that the
   traffic of their products needs to be treated differently, both in
   traffic handling process as well as in traffic accounting process.



Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   [I-D.conet-aeon-problem-statement] has described such problems and
   related requirements.

   The biggest technical challenge that network operators or the ISPs
   face is of distinguishing the traffic in finer granularity.
   Nowadays, DPI (Deep Packet Inspection) or DFI (Deep Flow Inspection)
   mechanisms have been widely used in identifying application
   information specific to individual IP flows.  However, they are
   expensive both operationally and computationally.  In many cases,
   they are also not able to interact with real-time network operations.
   An alternative approach would be that the traffic from ICPs carries
   traffic identifiers that the network entities of ISPs can recognize
   and act on.  For that to properly work, the traffic identifers must
   be mutually understood by ISPs and ICPs.

   This document analyzes the technical gap between the current network
   functions and required network capability.

2.  Overview of Technical Consideratins

   Overall, there are three technical aspects that need to be
   considered, as listed below.

   o  A traffic identifier.

   o  An ICP notify/negotiate traffic identifiers and the desired
      processing way regarding both traffic handling and traffic
      accounting with an ISP.  The policies of traffic processing need
      to be propagated and corresponding network entities need to be
      configured within an ISP network.

   o  Signaling/negotiation of traffic identifier by an end user host or
      application to/with network.

   Note: the application-level communication between ICP servers and
   their client applications on end user hosts, including dynamically
   deciding the traffic identifier that end user hosts may embed in
   packets, is out of scope.  This document focuses on only the network
   layer and transport layer .

3.  Traffic Identifiers

   The precondition for a traffic flow to be handled differently is that
   it can be recognized by the network entities.  In this document, the
   field in data packet that is used to distinguish a traffic flow or a
   type/category of traffic flow is called traffic identifier.  There
   are a few requirements for traffic identifiers:




Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   o  Traffic identifiers must be stable, at least for the lifetime of
      an IP flow.

   o  Traffic identifiers should be easy to inspect by the network
      entities.

   o  Traffic identifiers should accurately distinguish IP traffic flow
      or a type/category of traffic flow.

   o  Traffic identifiers must be trustable and protected against
      tampering during transportation.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may be aggregated in order to reduce the
      management complexity on stateful records/policies.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may be dynamically decided just before
      the real traffic is generated.  The decision of identifiers may
      dynamically involve ISPs, ICPs and end user devices.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may not be set by the traffic initiators.
      A intermediate node, for example a CPE or an ingress router, may
      re-mark or set new traffic identifier based on its traffic
      recognition.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may be meaningful across network
      administrative boundaries.

   Current common approach to identify traffic flows of applications in
   a network is to rely on dedicated content aware devices.  These
   devices not only parse fields on the IP and transport layers but also
   recognize application related information above transport layer.
   Content awareness ability mainly utilizes DPI function, which
   inspects characteristic signature (e.g. key string, binary sequence,
   etc.), and DFI function, which analyzes statistical characteristic
   and connection behavior of traffic flows, to identify application.
   However, there are limitations in deployment and operation of the
   ability.

   o  Since both DPI and DFI are essentially deductive methods difficult
      to fully grasp the characteristics of applications, accuracy of
      application identification cannot be guaranteed.  Error or
      omission is inevitable.

   o  Internet applications are expected to change frequently, and so
      are their characteristics.  There will be a time lag between a
      complete application traffic analysis and update of signature
      database when a new application or a new version appears, and this
      also contributes to the inaccuracy of identification.



Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   o  Content identification mechanisms are usually proprietary and act
      as a black box.  There is no standard way in their implementation
      or a way of benchmarking.  So the ability highly depends on
      vendors.  Different boxes are likely to give different
      identification results to the same traffic.

   o  Content identification functionality requires parsing the payload
      of IP packets, leading to very high use of computational
      resources.  Built-in content identification function modules in
      network elements will therefore affect the forwarding performance
      and thus impact data transmission.

   o  Investment costs cannot be neglected.  Sometimes the cost to
      identify the traffic is no less than that of forwarding the
      traffic.  Operational cost of the additional nodes is also an
      important issue.  More potential failure points will also affect
      network quality.

   o  Furthermore, the usage of TLS (Transport Layer Security,
      [RFC5246]) and HTTPS [RFC2818] is increasing the difficulties of
      DPI.

   Another simpler approach is to identify traffic by IP addresses.  An
   example would be a white list of IP addresses of an application of
   the ICP, and network can match traffic with the list to pick the
   application.  This approach will have limitations when dealing with
   more complex scenarios.

   o  More granular traffic handling cannot be satisfied.  If part of
      the application traffic or traffic of some of the users is to be
      treated separately, IP based identification is too coarse.  For
      example, the real-time game traffic and video traffic for the same
      website are likely to receive different treatment but target to
      the same IP address; traffics from two users to the same server
      may also need to be distinguished.

   o  If cache or CDN (Content Distribution Network) is deployed in the
      network, then different users are likely to visit different
      addresses, and the addresses are likely to be different from the
      original addresses of ICPs.  Managing the list will have to
      consider the IP addresses of caches and CDN nodes deployed.

   o  Configuring the IP address list is not always extensible as the
      addresses may change, and sometimes it is not supposed to expose
      the addresses of ICPs.

   There are also other traffic identifiers or components that may get
   used as traffic identifiers:



Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   o  IP addresses of end user devices.  They are natural identifiers
      that can distinguish the communication nodes.  However, one end
      user node would have many IP traffic flows.  There is requirement
      to recognize only the traffics associated with certain ICPs.  So,
      only IP addresses of end user devices are not sufficient.
      Furthermore, many end user devices may be assigned private IPv4
      addresses.  These addresses are replaced by public IPv4 addresses
      after NAT (Network Address Translator, [RFC3022]).

   o  Port numbers.  They are useful to distinguish flows/services from
      the same node.  However, it cannot be used to identify network
      traffic independently.  It must be used together with identifiers
      that distinguish nodes.

   o  Flow labels [RFC6437].  It is only available in IPv6 traffic.  It
      is changed for every flow.  Like port numbers, flow labels cannot
      be used to identify network traffics independently.  Normally, it
      is used as triple-tuple with source and destination address.
      Because it is encoded in the IPv6 fixed header, it is easier to
      recognize than port numbers.  However, another disadvantage of
      flow label is that it is not protected, particularly, there is no
      mechanism to validate its integrity.

   o  DiffServ Field (Differentiated Services Field, [RFC2474]).  It was
      defined to identify the differentiated services that network
      should apply on the packets.  It is the explicit result for
      network entities to apply different handling policies accordingly.
      However, the precondition DiffServ field can be used is that there
      is strong trust relatioship between the nodes that set DiffServ
      Field and network entities.

   Each of the above mentioned traffic identifiers have their own
   suitable use cases and possible limitations.

   For many scenarios, the combination of abovementioned traffic
   identifiers may be used.  The 5-tuple (source IP address, destination
   IP address, source port number, destination port number, IP protocol
   number) is the most commonly used traffic identifier to identify a
   flow accurately in IP layer.  However, 5-tuple itself is not tightly
   associated with upper-layer applications or contents.  There are
   mapping gaps to use 5-tuple to identify traffics relevant to a
   certain ICP or its certain services.  Another issue of 5-tuple is
   that 5-tuple cannot be easily aggregated.  Managing numerous 5-tuple
   may be a big burden for ISPs.  Furthermore, the existance of NATs
   makes the use of the 5-tuple difficult.  Consequently, the traffic
   identifiers associated with IPv4 addresses become a very complicated
   management issue.




Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


4.  Collaboration between ICPs and ISPs

   Firstly, ICP needs to define traffic identifiers in consultation with
   ISP.

   The ICP defines the specific traffic identifiers, which may have
   multiple categories, and the desired policies associated with each
   traffic categories, in consultation with the ISP.  Then the ISP
   network can apply these policies to actual network traffic.

   The notification process between ICPs and ISPs can be dynamic through
   a protocol/interface.  In 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project)
   mobile network, Rx interface [Rx-3GPP] has been defined to allow
   interaction between ICPs and ISPs using Diameter [RFC6733], and AF-
   Application-identifier AVP has also been defined to indicate the
   particular service that the AF (Application Function) service session
   belongs to.  This information may be used by the PCRF (Policy and
   Charging Rule Function) to differentiate QoS for different
   application services.

   However, currently few ICPs have support for Diameter protocol.
   Considering ICP is more familiar with XML based protocol, 3GPP is
   working on the solutions for an XML based protocol (e.g.  SOAP,
   Restful HTTP, etc.) over Rx interface between the AF and the PCRF
   [XML_AF_PCRF].

   With in an ISP network, Traffic management policy must be propagated
   to network entities that actually handle traffics.  In 3GPP mobile
   network, Gx interface [Gx-3GPP] has been defined to enable PCRF
   autonomically configures matching rules regarding to a certain
   traffic on GGSN/P-GW.

   BroadBand Forum has also defined the Broadband Policy Control
   Framework [BPCF] that meets the similar function of Rx and Gx
   interfaces in the fixed broadband networks.

   This model has two limitations as below:

   1.  Some ICPs may have one server address, but with different sub-
       content behind that server address.  Because current PCRF only
       focus on 5-tuple traffic description, it may be difficult to
       support fine-grained traffic identification.

   2.  Because of lack of involvement from end user devices/
       applications, it will be difficult and more complex to identify
       devices if they are behind NAT (they have NATed IPv4 addresses).





Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   Another major issue is that this model is ISP-oriented.  ICP traffics
   commonly cross multiple ISP networks.  Hence, an ICP may have to work
   with multiple ISPs independently.  The traffic handling across
   different administration domain may be different, giving the
   possibility that different ISPs may use different traffic identifiers
   and different policies.  When there was a traffic issue, such as high
   latency or packet lost, it may be a challenge for the ICP to find out
   which network has problem.

5.  Identifying Traffics between End Users and Network

   When an end user host or application initiates traffic towards ICP
   contents, it is possible that the content instead is retrieved from a
   cache/CDN that is deployed in the operator network.  In that case,
   the traffic identifier provided from the end user host or application
   to the network is used to classify traffic.

   The traffic identifiers used by end user host or application:

   o  may be authorized and assigned by the ICPs after application-level
      authentication or out-of-band authentication.  Then, these traffic
      identifiers would be carried by packets.

   o  may be dynamically decided by the negotiation between the end user
      host or application and the network.  Out-of-band controlling
      policies, including network authentication and authorization, may
      also be notified/negotiated together.

   o  may just describe the traffic characteristics, and leave the
      network to recognize them, then mapped into other traffic
      identifiers that have explicit meaning within the network.

   Currently, there are not many in-band mechanisms, where traffic
   identifiers that the end user devices/applications set up are carried
   within packets.  In-band mechanisms allow packet traversal across
   administration domains, with the traffic getting identical handling.
   The precondition of in-band mechanisms is that the integrity of
   traffic identifiers can be validated by network entities.

6.  Limitations of Existing Signaling Mechanisms

   The IETF has standardized several mechanisms involving explicit
   signaling between applications and the network that may be used to
   support visibility and differentiated network services workflows.
   These existing protocols were designed to serve their own purposes
   and scenarios.  Unfortunately, none of these have experienced
   widespread deployment success, nor are they well suited for the




Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   usages described previously.  Existing signaling options include the
   following:

   o  RSVP (Resource Reservation Protocol, [RFC2205]), a resource
      reservation setup protocol, is the original on-path signaling
      protocol standardized by the IETF.  It is transported out-of-band
      and could be used to signal information about any transport
      protocol traffic (it currently supports TCP and UDP).  Its
      original goal was to provide admission control.  It is mainly used
      among network entities.  Its requirement for explicit reservation
      of resources end to end proved too heavy for most network
      environments.  Its success was further impacted by its reliance on
      router-alert, which often leads to RSVP packets being filtered by
      intervening networks, and by its requirement for access to a raw
      socket, something that is generally not available to applications
      running in user space.  To date, more lightweight signaling
      workflows utilizing RSVP have not been standardized within the
      IETF.

   o  NSIS (next Steps in Signaling, [RFC4080]) is the next iteration of
      RSVP-like signaling defined by the IETF.  It focused on the same
      fundamental workflow as RSVP admission control as its main driver,
      and because it did not provide significant enough use-case
      benefits over RSVP, it has seen even less adoption than RSVP.

   o  DiffServ [RFC4594] and VAN Tagging [IEEE-802.1Q] style packet
      marking can help provide QoS in some environments, but such
      markings are often modified or removed at various points in the
      network or when crossing network boundaries.  There are additional
      limitations when using DiffServ with real-time communications
      applications, and the DART working group has been chartered to
      write a document that explains the limitations that exist with
      DiffServ when used with RTP in general as well in the specific
      RTCWeb use cases [I-D.ietf-rtcweb-use-cases-and-requirements].

   o  DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol, [RFC2131], [RFC3315])
      was designed to provide information, including assigning host IP
      address, from network to hosts.  It is a one-way information
      provisioning protocol.  It does not provide authentication and
      information protection function.

   o  Radius (Remote Authentication Dial In User Service, [RFC2865]) and
      Diameter [RFC6733] provides an Authentication, Authorization and
      Accounting for network access.







Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


7.  Efforts in Progress

   Not surprisingly, there are several evolving proposals that aim to
   address the visibility and differentiated network services workflows
   where existing approaches are not sufficient.  Protocol specific
   extensions are being defined, creating duplicate or inconsistent
   information models.  This results in operational complexity and a
   need to convert information between protocols to leverage the best
   protocol option for each specific use case.  Examples of evolving
   signaling options include the following:

   o  STUN (Session Traversal Utilities for NAT, [RFC5389]) is an on-
      path, in-band signaling protocol that could be extended to provide
      signaling to on-path network devices.  It provides an easily
      inspected packet signature, at least for transport protocols such
      as UDP.  Through its extensions TURN [RFC5766] and ICE [RFC5245],
      it is becoming prevalent in application signaling driven by the
      initial use-case of providing NAT and firewall traversal
      capabilities and detecting local and remote candidates for peer-
      to-peer media sessions.  The TRAM working group is chartered to
      update TURN and STUN to make them more suitable for WebRTC.

   o  PCP (Port Control Protocol, [RFC6887]) provides a mechanism to
      describe a flow to the network.  The primary driver for PCP is
      creating port mappings on NAT and firewall devices.  When doing
      this, PCP pushes flow information from the host into the network
      (specifically to the network's NAT or firewall device), and
      receives information back from the network (from the NAT or
      firewall device).  It is not meant to be used end-to-end but
      rather independently on one "edge" of a flow.

   o  RESTCONF [I-D.ietf-netconf-restconf] is a REST-like protocol that
      provides a programmatic interface over HTTP for accessing data
      defined in YANG, using the datastores defined in NETCONF
      [RFC6241].  It is meant to provide a standard mechanism for web
      applications to access the configuration data, operational data,
      data-model specific protocol operations, and notification events
      within a networking device, in a modular and extensible manner.

   o  I2RS (Interface to the Routing System) is a working group
      chartered to provide interfaces for management applications,
      network controllers, and user applications to make specific
      demands on the network.

   o  ACTN (Abstraction and Control of Transport Networks) is a non-
      working group mailing list intended to enable discussion of the
      architecture, use-cases, and requirements that provide abstraction




Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


      and virtual control of transport networks to various applications/
      clients.

   o  Prefix coloring has been proposed for use in HOMENET and 6MAN
      working groups to provide differentiated services to applications
      based on IP address.

   o  RMCAT (RTP Media Congestion Avoidance Techniques) has been
      chartered to address the lack of generally accepted congestion
      control mechanisms for interactive real-time media, which is often
      carried via sets of flows using RTP over UDP.  Explicit exchanges
      of flow characteristics and congestion information between
      applications and the network could play an important role in such
      mechanisms.

   o  TAPS (Transport Services) is an effort to create a working group
      to define transport services that are exposed to internet
      applications.  A TAP enabled application identifies its needs of
      the locally available transports services via an API.
      Furthermore, the transport services of TAPS could benefit from
      this communication with the network.

   o  SFC (Service Function Chaining) is a working group chartered to
      address issues associated with the deployment of service functions
      (e.g. firewalls, load balancers) in large-scale environments.
      Service function chaining is the definition and instantiation of
      an ordered set of instances of such service functions, and the
      subsequent "steering" of traffic flows through those service
      functions.

8.  Security Considerations

   A trust relationship should be established among end users, ICPs and
   ISPs.  The authentication and authorization for end user access
   should be as easy as possible.  OAUTH protocol [RFC6749] & OpenID
   [OpenID] may be adopted.

   Traffic identifiers with packets should be protected against any
   tampering during transportation.

   The protocol used to notify/negotiate the traffic identifiers to/with
   network should be protected.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.





Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


10.  Acknowledgements

   Valuable comments were received from Peng Fan, and Weihua Qiao.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].

11.  Change log [RFC Editor: Please remove]

   draft-conet-aeon-gap-analysis-00: original version, 2014-05-29.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC
              2131, March 1997.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [RFC2474]  Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F., and D. Black,
              "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS
              Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474, December
              1998.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC
              2865, June 2000.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January
              2001.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC4080]  Hancock, R., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., and S. Van den
              Bosch, "Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS): Framework", RFC
              4080, June 2005.

   [RFC4594]  Babiarz, J., Chan, K., and F. Baker, "Configuration
              Guidelines for DiffServ Service Classes", RFC 4594, August
              2006.






Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245, April
              2010.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC5389]  Rosenberg, J., Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and D. Wing,
              "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5389,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5766]  Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and J. Rosenberg, "Traversal Using
              Relays around NAT (TURN): Relay Extensions to Session
              Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5766, April 2010.

   [RFC6241]  Enns, R., Bjorklund, M., Schoenwaelder, J., and A.
              Bierman, "Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC
              6241, June 2011.

   [RFC6437]  Amante, S., Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and J. Rajahalme,
              "IPv6 Flow Label Specification", RFC 6437, November 2011.

   [RFC6733]  Fajardo, V., Arkko, J., Loughney, J., and G. Zorn,
              "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 6733, October 2012.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework", RFC
              6749, October 2012.

   [RFC6887]  Wing, D., Cheshire, S., Boucadair, M., Penno, R., and P.
              Selkirk, "Port Control Protocol (PCP)", RFC 6887, April
              2013.

12.2.  Informative References

   [BPCF]     BroadBand Forum Technical Report 134, "Broadband Policy
              Control Framework", July 2012.

   [Gx-3GPP]  3GPP Work Item 13029, "Gx reference point for Policy and
              Charging Control", July 2008.

   [I-D.conet-aeon-problem-statement]
              Fan, P., Deng, H., Boucadair, M., Reddy, T., and C. Eckel,
              "Application Enabled Collaborative Networking: Problem
              Statement and Requirements", draft-conet-aeon-problem-
              statement-00 (work in progress), May 2014.





Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   [I-D.ietf-netconf-restconf]
              Bierman, A., Bjorklund, M., Watsen, K., and R. Fernando,
              "RESTCONF Protocol", draft-ietf-netconf-restconf-00 (work
              in progress), March 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-rtcweb-use-cases-and-requirements]
              Holmberg, C., Hakansson, S., and G. Eriksson, "Web Real-
              Time Communication Use-cases and Requirements", draft-
              ietf-rtcweb-use-cases-and-requirements-14 (work in
              progress), February 2014.

   [IEEE-802.1Q]
              IEEE 802.1Q, "IEEE Standards for Local and Metropolitan
              Area Networks: Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks", 2005,
              <http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/
              download/802.1Q-2005.pdf>.

   [OpenID]   OpenID Foundation, "OpenID Authentication 2.0 - Final",
              December 2007, <http://specs.openid.net/auth/2.0>.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [Rx-3GPP]  3GPP Technical Specification 29.214, "Policy and charging
              control over Rx reference point", July 2008.

   [XML_AF_PCRF]
              3GPP Technical Report 29.817, "Study on eXtensible Markup
              Language (XML) based access of the Application Function
              (AF) to the Policy and Charging Rules Function (PCRF)",
              March 2014.

Authors' Addresses

   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Q14, Huawei Campus, No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100095
   P.R. China

   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com








Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           CONET/AEON Gap Analysis                May 2014


   Hui Deng
   China Mobile
   Xuanwumenxi Ave. No.32
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: denghui@chinamobile.com


   Farooq Bari
   AT&T
   7277 164th Ave NE
   Redmond  WA 98052
   USA

   Email: farooq.bari@att.com


   Rong Zhang
   China Telecom
   No.109 Zhongshandadao avenue
   Guangzhou  510630
   China

   Email: zhangr@gsta.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900 x42871
   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com
















Jiang, et al.           Expires November 30, 2014              [Page 15]
