


Internet Engineering Task Force                       D. Harrington, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Intended status: Informational                             April 8, 2008
Expires: October 10, 2008


          Templates for Internet Drafts Containing MIB Modules
               draft-harrington-text-mib-doc-template-05

Status of This Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 10, 2008.

Abstract

   This memo references three annotated templates for IETF documents
   that contain the definition of MIB modules.  It is intended to reduce
   the work of the editors of such documents, making these documents
   more uniform and easier to read and review, thus furthering the
   quality of such documents and expediting their publication.










Harrington              Expires October 10, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        MIB Module Document Templates           April 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4











































Harrington              Expires October 10, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        MIB Module Document Templates           April 2008


1.  Introduction

   This memo references three annotated templates for IETF documents
   that contain the definition of MIB modules.  It is intended to reduce
   the work of the editors of such documents, making these more uniform
   and easier to read and review, thus furthering the quality of such
   documents and expediting their publication.

2.  Overview

   The templates referenced by this document were developed at the
   request of the IETF MIB Doctors directorate, to make IETF documents
   that contain MIB modules more consistent.  This makes it easier for a
   MIB Doctor to review the document.  There are a number of MUSTs in
   the templates, especially in the advice; these usually refer to IESG
   requirements for internet drafts, and MIB Doctors are likely to check
   for these requirements.

   The templates contain boilerplates that are required for IETF MIB
   module documents.  It has been common practice for editors to use
   existing MIB module documents as templates.  This approach has
   problems because boilerplates and other required elements change over
   time.  The templates referenced by this document will be made
   available on an IETF web site, and occasionally updated to reflect
   the latest requirements.  The most up-to-date revisions of the
   templates are available at http://www.tools.ietf.org.

   The templates contain sections that describe the purpose and
   organization of the MIB module, and the relationship between this MIB
   module and other MIB modules.  This makes it easier for MIB Doctors
   to understand the MIB module, which speeds the review process.

   Editors should read RFC4181 "Guidelines for Authors and Reviewers of
   MIB Documents" [RFC4181] which describes best current practices for
   MIB module document editing.

   The document templates do not include a template for the MIB module
   itself.  Tools to validate MIB modules typically require that the MIB
   module be separated from the surrounding document.  The MIB Doctors
   feel that the simplest approach is to develop the MIB module outside
   the document that contains the surrounding text, and then include the
   MIB module into the surrounding document written using the templates.

3.  Security Considerations

   This memo recommends templates for editing; it has no direct impact
   on network security.  The templates include boilerplates and
   associated advice for writing the Security Considerations section of



Harrington              Expires October 10, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        MIB Module Document Templates           April 2008


   an Internet Draft that documents a MIB module.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

5.  Contributors

   These templates are based on contributions from the MIB Doctors,
   especially Juergen Schoenwaelder, Dave Perkins, C.M.Heard and Randy
   Presuhn.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC4181]  Heard, C., "Guidelines for Authors and Reviewers of MIB
              Documents", BCP 111, RFC 4181, September 2005.

Author's Address

   David Harrington (editor)
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100
   Plano, TX 75075
   USA

   Phone: +1 603 436 8634
   EMail: dharrington@huawei.com
























Harrington              Expires October 10, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        MIB Module Document Templates           April 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.












Harrington              Expires October 10, 2008                [Page 5]


