


Kerberos Working Group                                   A. Perez-Mendez
Internet-Draft                                            R. Marin-Lopez
Intended status: Experimental                       F. Pereniguez-Garcia
Expires: July 4, 2012                                    G. Lopez-Millan
                                                    University of Murcia
                                                                Jan 2012


                GSS-API pre-authentication for Kerberos
                   draft-perez-krb-wg-gss-preauth-01

Abstract

   This document describes a pre-authentication mechanism for Kerberos
   based on the Generic Security Service Application Program Interface
   (GSS-API), which allows a Key Distribution Center (KDC) to
   authenticate clients by using any GSS mechanism.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 4, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Definition of the Kerberos GSS padata  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  GSS Pre-authentication Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Generation of GSS preauth requests . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Processing of GSS preauth requests . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  Generation of GSS preauth responses  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.4.  Processing of GSS preauth responses  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Data in the KDC_ERR_PREAUTH_REQUIRED . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Supported pre-authentication facilities  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  KDC state management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   11. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11





























Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


1.  Introduction

   The GSS-API (Generic Security Service Application Programming
   Interface) [RFC2743] provides a generic toolset of functions that
   allow applications to establish security contexts in order to protect
   their communications through security services such as
   authentication, confidentiality and integrity protection.  Thanks to
   the GSS-API, applications remain independent from the specific
   underlying mechanism used to establish the context and provide
   security.

   Kerberos [RFC4120] defines a process called pre-authentication.  This
   feature is intended to avoid the security risk of providing tickets
   encrypted with the user's long-term key to attackers.  The execution
   of a pre-authentication mechanism may require the exchange of several
   KRB_AS_REQ/KRB_ERROR messages before the KDC delivers the TGT
   requested by the client within a KRB_AS_REP.  These messages
   transport authentication information by means of pre-authentication
   elements.

   There exists a variety of pre-authentication mechanisms, like PKINIT
   [RFC4556] and encrypted time-stamp [RFC4120].  Furthermore,
   [I-D.ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework] provides a generic framework for
   Kerberos pre-authentication, which aims to describe the features that
   a pre-authentication mechanism may provide (e.g. mutual
   authentication, replace reply key, etc.).  Additionally, in order to
   simplify the definition of new pre-authentication mechanisms, it
   defines a mechanism called FAST (Flexible Authentication Secure
   Tunneling), which provides a generic and secure transport for pre-
   authentication elements.  More specifically, FAST establishes a
   secure tunnel providing confidentiality and integrity protection
   between the client and the KDC prior to the exchange of any specific
   pre-authentication data.  Within this tunnel, different pre-
   authentication methods can be executed.  This inner mechanism is
   called a FAST factor.  It is important to note that FAST factors
   cannot usually be used outside the FAST pre-authentication method
   since they assume the underlying security layer provided by FAST.

   The aim of this draft is to define a new pre-authentication
   mechanism, following the recommendations of
   [I-D.ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework], that relies on the GSS-API
   security services to pre-authenticate clients.  This pre-
   authentication mechanism will allow the KDC to authenticate clients
   making use of any current or future GSS mechanism, as long as they
   satisfy the minimum security requirements described in this
   specification.  The Kerberos client will play the role of the GSS
   initiator, while the Authentication Server (AS) in the KDC will play
   the role of the GSS acceptor.



Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Motivation

   This work is mainly motivated by the necessity of a way to allow the
   KDC to make use of the technologies defined in the ABFAB WG to
   perform the access control of federated users.  Specifically, the
   ABFAB architecture requires relying parties to make use of the GSS-
   EAP mechanism to perform authentication.  The
   [I-D.perez-abfab-eap-gss-preauth] defines how GSS-EAP is transported
   on top of the GSS pre-authentication mechanism defined in this
   document.


3.  Definition of the Kerberos GSS padata

   To establish the security context, the GSS-API defines the exchange
   of GSS tokens between the initiator and the acceptor.  These tokens,
   which contain mechanism-specific information, are completely opaque
   to the application.  However, how these tokens are transported
   between the initiator and the responder depends on the specific
   application.  Since GSS-API is defined as independent of the
   underlying communications service, its use does not require to
   implement any specific security feature for the transport.  For
   instance, tokens could just be sent by means of plain UDP datagrams.
   For this reason, security and ordered delivery of information must be
   implemented by each specific GSS mechanism (if required).

   Therefore, GSS tokens are the atomic piece of information from the
   application point of view when using GSS-API, which require a proper
   transport between the initiator (Kerberos client) and the acceptor
   (AS).  In particular, the proposed GSS-based pre-authentication
   mechanism defines a new pre-authentication element (hereafter padata)
   called PA-GSS-TOKEN to transport a generic GSS token from the
   Kerberos client to the AS and vice-versa.  The ASN.1 specification
   for this padata is:

      PA-GSS-TOKEN          To be defined (TBD)

      PA-GSS-TOKEN ::= OCTECT STRING --value of the GSS token






Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


4.  GSS Pre-authentication Operation

4.1.  Generation of GSS preauth requests

   The Kerberos client (initiator) starts by calling to the
   GSS_Init_sec_context function.  In the first call to this function,
   the client provides GSS_C_NO_CTX as the value of the context_handle
   and NULL as the input_token, given that no context has been initiated
   yet.  When using multi round-trip GSS mechanisms, in subsequent calls
   to this routine the client will use both, the context_handle value
   obtained after the first call, and the input_token received from the
   KDC.

   The GSS_Init_sec_context returns a context_handle, an output_token
   and a status value.  If the obtained status is GSS_S_COMPLETE, the
   generated token contains the necessary information to establish the
   context and, therefore, no further tokens are expected from the KDC
   to complete the authentication process.  On the contrary, if the
   obtained status is GSS_S_CONTINUE_NEEDED, the KDC is expected to
   provide a token in order to continue with the context establishment
   process.  In both cases, the Kerberos client includes the obtained
   output_token into a new PA-GSS-TOKEN padata and sends it to the KDC
   through a KRB_AS_REQ message.

4.2.  Processing of GSS preauth requests

   When the KDC (GSS acceptor) receives a KRB_AS_REQ message containing
   a PA-GSS-TOKEN, but a PA-FX-COOKIE (see Section 7) is not included,
   the KDC assumes that this is the first message of a context
   establishment, and thus GSS_C_NO_CTX is used as context_handle to
   invoke the GSS_Accept_sec_context routine.  Conversely, if a PA-FX-
   COOKIE is included, the KDC assumes that this message is part an
   ongoing authentication and the value of the PA-FX-COOKIE is used to
   recover the state of the authentication (see Section 7).  In both
   cases, after receiving the message, the KDC calls to the
   GSS_Accept_sec_context function, using the adequate context_handle
   value and using the received token in the PA-GSS-TOKEN padata as
   input_token.

   Once the execution of the GSS_Accept_sec_context function is
   completed, the KDC obtains a context_handle, an output_token
   (optional) that MUST be sent to the initiator in order to continue
   with the authentication process, and a status value.  If the obtained
   status is GSS_S_COMPLETE, the client is considered authenticated and
   the value of the output_token may be NULL.  If the status is
   GSS_S_CONTINUE_NEEDED, further information is required to complete
   the process.




Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


4.3.  Generation of GSS preauth responses

   Once the KDC has processed the input_token provided by the client (as
   described in Section 4.2), two main different situations may occur
   depending on the status value.  If the client is successfully
   authenticated (GSS_S_COMPLETE), the KDC will reply to the client with
   a KRB_AS_REP message.  This message will transport the final
   output_token (if generated) in a PA-GSS-TOKEN padata type.
   Additionally, there are three alternatives to encrypt the enc-part
   field of the KRB_AS_REP message.  The first one is to make use of the
   client's password as described in the standard Kerberos [RFC4120].  A
   second option is to strengthen this key by using keying material from
   the GSS context (more details are provide in Section 6).  The final
   option is to employ a key cryptographically independent from the
   user's password which could be generated by using the keying material
   from the GSS context.  Section 6 provides further details regarding
   these two last options.

   On the contrary, if further data is required to complete the
   establishment process (GSS_S_CONTINUE_NEEDED), the KDC will reply to
   the client with a KDC_ERR_MORE_PREAUTH_DATA_REQUIRED error message
   [I-D.ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework].  In the e-data field of the
   message, the KDC will include two padata types: a PA-FX-COOKIE
   containing the information that the KDC will need to regenerate the
   authentication state (see Section 7), and a PA-GSS-TOKEN containing
   the obtained output_token.

4.4.  Processing of GSS preauth responses

   When the client receives a KDC_ERR_MORE_PREAUTH_DATA_REQUIRED error,
   it extracts the token from the PA-GSS-TOKEN element and invokes the
   GSS_Init_sec_context function, as described in section Section 4.1.
   The received PA-FX-COOKIE is treated as an opaque element, which is
   simply copied and included into the following KRB_AS_REQ message
   without further processing.

   On the other hand, when the client receives a KRB_AS_REP, the context
   establishment has finalized successfully.  If the KRB_AS_REP message
   contains a PA-GSS-TOKEN padata type, the client invokes the
   GSS_Init_sec_context function using the transported input_token.
   Note that, to be consistent, this call MUST return GSS_S_COMPLETE and
   not generate any output_token, since the KDC does not expect further
   data from the client.  Similarly, if the client does not expect any
   data from the KDC (it obtained a GSS_S_COMPLETE status value on the
   last call) and the KDC provides an input_token, an unexpected
   situation happens and the context establishment must be aborted.

   If the context establishment is completed correctly, the client MUST



Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


   use the same process followed by the KDC (Section 4.3).


5.  Data in the KDC_ERR_PREAUTH_REQUIRED

   When the KDC sends a KDC_ERR_PREAUTH_REQUIRED error to the client, it
   includes a sequence of padata, each corresponding to an acceptable
   pre-authentication method.  Optionally, these padata elements contain
   data valuable for the client to configure the selected mechanism.
   The data to be included in the padata for this message is described
   in this section.

   TBD.  (For example, list of the OIDs of the GSS mechanisms supported
   by the KDC)


6.  Supported pre-authentication facilities

   The pre-authentication framework [I-D.ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework]
   defines a set of facilities that the pre-authentication mechanisms
   may provide.  Specifically, the GSS pre-authentication mechanism
   proposed in this draft may provide the following facilities:

   o  Client-authentication facility.  The GSS pre-authentication
      mechanism authenticates the client based on GSS-API calls.  At the
      end of the GSS context establishment process, the client is
      authenticated against the KDC by means of the specific GSS
      mechanism credentials.

   o  Strengthening-reply-key facility.  After a successful
      authentication, client and KDC may strengthen the reply key (the
      key used to encrypt the enc-part field of the KRB_AS_REP message)
      by adding additional keying material to it.  This additional
      keying material can be obtained by means of calls to the
      GSS_Pseudo_random [RFC4401] function, although the standard
      GSS_getMIC function could be used if the former is not available
      for the specific GSS mechanism.

   o  Replacing-reply-key facility.  Similarly to the strengthening
      facility, client and KDC may decide to completely replace the
      reply key used to encrypt the KRB_AS_REP by a new one that is
      cryptographically independent from the client's password stored in
      client password on the Kerberos users database.  To generate this
      keying material, the same GSS-API functions used for the previous
      facility would be used.

   o  KDC-authentication facility.  This facility is also provided, as
      an optional feature, since the GSS-API allows the initiator of the



Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


      security context to request mutual authentication during the
      establishment process.  If the mutual_req_flag is indicated in the
      GSS_Init_sec_context call, the acceptor (KDC) must be
      authenticated by the initiator (client) before the context is
      established.

   The selection of the facilities that the GSS pre-authentication
   mechanism will provide, and how will they be negotiated with the
   client is still under discussion.


7.  KDC state management

   The Kerberos standard [RFC4120] defines the KDC as a stateless
   entity.  This means that, if the GSS mechanism requires more than one
   round-trip, the client MUST provide enough data to the KDC in the
   following interactions to allow recovering the complete state of the
   ongoing authentication.  This is specially relevant when the client
   switches from one KDC to different one (within the same realm) during
   a pre-authentication process.  This second KDC must be able to
   continue with the process in a seamless way.  In
   [I-D.ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework], the PA-FX-COOKIE pre-
   authentication element is defined to transport opaque state
   information from the KDC to the client.  This state information is
   included by the client in the following KRB_AS_REQ message as-is,
   without further processing.  When the KDC receives the PA-FX-COOKIE
   padata, it tries to recover the state and, if successful, continue
   with the authentication process.

   The GSS-API manages the so-called security contexts.  They represent
   the whole context of an authentication, including all the state and
   relevant data of the ongoing security context.  In order to deal with
   the statelessness of the KDC, two approaches are being discussed
   within the Kerberos Working Group, which are summarized in the
   following.

   On the one hand, as the GSS-API is a collection of abstract calls, we
   assume that it will be the actual implementation of the GSS-API the
   one in charge of managing of the state associated with each security
   context and not the KDC, which would remain agnostic to them and,
   therefore, completely stateless.  For example, one may think on a
   GSS-API implementation which is executed in an independent process to
   the KDC.  In this way, even on an eventual restart of the KDC process
   (e.g. in case of inetd managed connections), the GSS-API state is not
   lost.  Moreover, the GSS-API implementation could be executed in an
   distributed way, in such a way that different KDCs within the same
   realm could make use of the same GSS-API security contexts, even when
   they were not initiated by them.  Note that the GSS acceptor name



Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


   will be the TGS name, which is shared amongst all the KDCs in a
   realm.

   When this approach is followed, the contents for the PA-FX-COOKIE
   padata will consist on the context_handle value returned after the
   first call to the GSS_Accept_sec_context function.  This value will
   be directly used by the recipient KDC for the subsequent calls to the
   GSS-API functions, to allow the GSS-API implementation to
   unequivocally identify the specific security context.

   On the other hand, others think that the GSS-API must be considered
   as a library that is executed within the same thread or process as
   the calling application (the KDC in this specific case).  If such is
   the assumption, then the KDC will be indeed storing the state
   associated to the security contexts, making it statefull.  In that
   case, it would not be enough building the PA-FX-COOKIE padata just
   with the context_handle, as it could not be possible to recover the
   whole state of the KDC plus GSS-API from that information.  On the
   contrary, the whole GSS-API security context must be serialized and
   included into the cookie.  In order to prevent replay attacks, the
   PA-FX-COOKIE MUST also contain a time-stamp.  Furthermore, since
   critical information may be contained in the exported security
   context, the data contained in the PA-FX-COOKIE MUST be
   confidentiality and integrity protected using a key shared amongst
   all the KDCs deployed in the realm.

   The main problem with this approach is that the current GSS-API
   specification does not define a function that allows the exportation
   of a security context which has not been completely established yet.
   In this regard, the GSS_Export_sec_context() call is intended to
   create an interprocess token that can be transferred to another
   process within an end system.  However, this call requires a
   completely established security context.  Furthermore, despite
   allowed, it would require to define the contents of the PA-FX-COOKIE
   per each mechanism in order to determine the information required to
   recover the state of the authentication, which may not be trivial.

   The authors of this draft defend the use of the first approach, as we
   consider the GSS-API implementation as something external to the GSS-
   API caller and, therefore, whether it stores state or not is
   irrelevant from the point of view of the KDC, which remains
   stateless.


8.  Acknowledgements

   This work is supported by the project MULTIGIGABIT EUROPEAN ACADEMIC
   NETWORK (FP7-INFRASTRUCTURES-2009-1).  It is also funded by a Seneca



Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


   Foundation grant from the Human Resources Researching Training
   Program 2007.  Authors finally thank the Funding Program for Research
   Groups of Excellence with code 04552/GERM/06 granted by the Fundacion
   Seneca.


9.  Security Considerations

   Protection of Request/Responses with FAST, restriction on GSS
   mechanism, etc.  TBD.


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


11.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework]
              Hartman, S. and L. Zhu, "A Generalized Framework for
              Kerberos Pre-Authentication",
              draft-ietf-krb-wg-preauth-framework-17 (work in progress),
              June 2010.

   [I-D.perez-abfab-eap-gss-preauth]
              Perez-Mendez, A., Lopez, R., Pereniguez-Garcia, F., and G.
              Lopez-Millan, "GSS-EAP pre-authentication for Kerberos",
              draft-perez-abfab-eap-gss-preauth-00 (work in progress),
              June 2011.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2743]  Linn, J., "Generic Security Service Application Program
              Interface Version 2, Update 1", RFC 2743, January 2000.

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              July 2005.

   [RFC4401]  Williams, N., "A Pseudo-Random Function (PRF) API
              Extension for the Generic Security Service Application
              Program Interface (GSS-API)", RFC 4401, February 2006.

   [RFC4556]  Zhu, L. and B. Tung, "Public Key Cryptography for Initial
              Authentication in Kerberos (PKINIT)", RFC 4556, June 2006.




Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 GSS preauth                      Jan 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Alejandro Perez-Mendez (Ed.)
   University of Murcia
   Campus de Espinardo S/N, Faculty of Computer Science
   Murcia,   30100
   Spain

   Phone: +34 868 88 46 44
   Email: alex@um.es


   Rafa Marin-Lopez
   University of Murcia
   Campus de Espinardo S/N, Faculty of Computer Science
   Murcia,   30100
   Spain

   Phone: +34 868 88 85 01
   Email: rafa@um.es


   Fernando Pereniguez-Garcia
   University of Murcia
   Campus de Espinardo S/N, Faculty of Computer Science
   Murcia,   30100
   Spain

   Phone: +34 868 88 78 82
   Email: pereniguez@um.es


   Gabriel Lopez-Millan
   University of Murcia
   Campus de Espinardo S/N, Faculty of Computer Science
   Murcia,   30100
   Spain

   Phone: +34 868 88 85 04
   Email: gabilm@um.es











Perez-Mendez, et al.      Expires July 4, 2012                 [Page 11]

