


Network Working Group                                         S. Hartman
Internet-Draft                                                       MIT
Expires: December 27, 2006                                 June 25, 2006


       Requirements for Web Authentication Resistant to Phishing
                 draft-hartman-webauth-phishing-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 27, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This memo proposes requirements for protocols between web identity
   providers and users and for requirements for protocols between
   identity providers and relying parties.  These requirements minimize
   the likelihood that criminals will be able to gain the credentials
   necessary to impersonate a user or be able to fraudulently convince
   users to disclose personal information.  To meet these requirements
   browsers must change.  Websites must never receive information such
   as passwords that can be used to impersonate the user to third
   parties.  Browsers should perform mutual authentication and flag



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   situations when the target website is not authorized to accept the
   identity being offered as this is a strong indication of fraud.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Capabilities of Attackers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Attacks of Interest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Requirements for Preventing Phishing . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Support for Passwords  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Trusted UI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  No Password Equivelents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Mutual Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.5.  Authentication Tied to Resulting Page  . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.6.  Restricted Identity Providers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.7.  Protecting Enrollment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Is it the right Server?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18

























Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


1.  Introduction

   Typically, web sites ask users to send a user name and password in
   order to log in and authenticate their identity to the website.  The
   user name and plaintext password is often sent over a TLS [RFC4346]
   encrypted connection.  As a result of this, the server learns the
   password and can pretend to be the user to any other system where the
   user has used the same password.  The security of passwords over TLS
   depends on making sure that the password is sent to the right,
   trusted server.  TLS implementations typically confirm that the name
   entered by the user in the URL corresponds to the certificate as
   described in [RFC2818].

   One serious security threat on the web today is phishing.  Phishing
   is a form of fraud where an attacker convinces a user to provide
   confidential information to the attacker believing they are providing
   the information to a party they trust with that information.  For
   example, an email claiming to be from a user's bank may direct the
   user to go to a website and verify account information.  The attacker
   captures the user name and password and potentially other sensitive
   information.  Domain names that look like target websites, links in
   email, and many other factors contribute to phishers' ability to
   convince users to trust them.

   It is useful to distinguish two targets of phishing.  Sometimes
   phishing is targeting web authentication credentials such as user
   name and password.  Sometimes phishing is targeting other
   confidential information.  This memo presents requirements that
   significantly reduce the effectiveness of the first category of
   phishing: these requirements guarantee that even if the user
   authenticates to the wrong server, that server cannot impersonate the
   user to a third party.  However to combat phishing targeted at other
   confidential information the best we can do is try to help the user
   detect fraud before they release confidential information.

   So, the approach taken by these requirements is to handle these two
   types of phishing differently.  Users are given some trusted
   mechanism to determine whether they are typing their password into a
   secure browser component that will authenticate them to the web
   server or whether they are typing their password into a legacy
   mechanism that will send their password to the server.  If the user
   types a password into the trusted browser component, they have strong
   assurances that their password has not been disclosed and that the
   page returned from the web server was generated by a party that
   either knows their password or who is authenticated by an identity
   provider who knows their password.  The web server can then use
   confidential information known to the user and web server to enhance
   the user's trust in its identity beyond what is available given the



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   social engineering attacks against TLS server authentication.  If a
   user enters their password into the wrong server but discovers this
   before they give that server any other confidential information, then
   there exposure is very limited.















































Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


2.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


3.  Threat Model

   This section describes the assumed capabilities of phishers,
   describes assumptions about web security and describes what
   vulnerabilities exist.

   We assume that the browser and operating system are secure and can be
   trusted by the end user.  There are many attacks against browsers and
   operating systems.  However without this assumption we cannot make
   progress in securing web authentication.  So we will assume that
   browsers and operating systems are secure and note that other work to
   improve the security of browsers and operating systems is critical to
   the security of the entire web authentication system.

   We assume that users have limited motivation to combat phishing.
   Users cannot be expected to read the source of web pages, understand
   how DNS works well enough to look out for spoofed domains, or
   understand URI encoding.  Users do not typically understand
   certificates and cannot make informed decisions about whether the
   subject name in a certificate corresponds to the entity they are
   attempting to communicate with.

3.1.  Capabilities of Attackers

   Attackers can convince the user to go to a website of their choosing.
   Since the attacker controls the web site and since the user chose to
   go to the website the TLS certificate will verify and the website
   will appear to be secure.  The certificate will typically not be
   issued to the entity the user thinks they are communicating with, but
   as discussed above, the user will not notice this.

   The attacker can convincingly replicate any part of the UI of the
   website being spoofed.  The attacker can also spoof trust markers
   such as the security lock, URL bar and other parts of the browser UI.
   There is one limitation to the attacker's ability to replicate UI.
   The attacker cannot replicate a UI that depends on information the
   attacker does not know.  For example, an attacker could generally
   replicate the UI of a banking site's login page.  However the
   attacker probably could not replicate the account summary page until
   the attacker learned the user name and password.

   The attacker can convince the user to do anything with the phishing
   site that they would do with the real target site.  As a consequence,
   if we want to avoid the user giving the attacker their password, we
   must transition to a solution where the user would not give the real
   target site their password.  Instead they will need to
   cryptographically prove that they know their password without
   revealing it.



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


3.2.  Attacks of Interest

   The primary attack of interest is an attack in which the user sends
   confidential information to an unintended recipient.

   Another significant attack is an attack in which a recipient gains
   sufficient credentials to impersonate the user to other recipients.
   The obvious version of this attack is when the recipient learns the
   password of the user.  However even giving the recipient a time-
   limited token that can be used to impersonate the user would be an
   instance of this attack.  Note that some authentication systems such
   as Kerberos [RFC4120] provide a facility to delegate the ability to
   act as the user to the target of the authentication.  Such a facility
   when used with an inappropriately trusted target would be an instance
   of this attack.

   Of less serious concerns at the present time are attacks on data
   integrity where a phisher provides false or misleading information to
   a user.
































Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


4.  Requirements for Preventing Phishing

   This section describes requirements for web authentication solutions.
   These solutions are intended to prevent phishing targeted at
   obtaining web authentication credentials.  These requirements will
   make it more difficult for phishers to target other confidential
   information.

   The requirements discussed here are similar to the principles
   outlined in "Limits to Anti-Phishing" [ANTIPHISHING].  Most of this
   work was discovered independently but work from that paper has been
   integrated where appropriate.  Google's perspective on phishing is
   very interesting because of their operational experience.

4.1.  Support for Passwords

   The web authentication solution MUST support passwords and MUST be
   secure even when passwords are commonly used.  In many environments,
   users need the ability to walk up to a computer they have never used
   before and log in to a website.  Carrying a smart card or USB token
   significantly increases the deployment cost of the website and
   decreases user convenience.  The smart card is costly to deploy
   because it requires a process for replacing smart cards, requires
   support staff to be trained in answering questions regarding smart
   cards and requires a smart card to be issued when an identity is
   issued.  Smart cards are less convenient because users cannot gain
   access to protected resources without having their card physically
   with them.  Many public access computers do not have smart cards
   available and do not provide access to USB ports; when they do they
   tend not to support smart cards.  It is important not to
   underestimate the training costs (either in money or user
   frustration) of teaching people used to remembering a user name and
   password about a new security technology.

   IT is desirable that a solution support other forms of authentication
   such as smart cards and one-time passwords as these are useful in
   some environments.

4.2.  Trusted UI

   Users need the ability to trust components of the UI in order to know
   that the UI is being presented by a trusted component of the browser.
   The primary concern is to make sure that the user knows the password
   is being given to trusted software rather than being filled into an
   HTML form element that will be sent to the server.

   There are three basic approaches to establishing a trusted UI.  The
   first is to use a dynamic UI based on a secret known by the UI; the



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   Google paper [ANTIPHISHING] recommends this approach.  A second
   approach is to provide a UI action that highlights trusted or non-
   trusted components in some way.  This could work similarly to the
   Expose feature in Apple's OS X where a keystroke visually
   distinguishes structural elements of the UI.  Of course such a
   mechanism would only be useful if users actually used it.  Finally,
   the multi-level security community has extensive research in
   designing UIs to display classified, compartmentalized information.
   It is critical that these UIs be able to label information and that
   these labels not be spoofable.

   See Section 5 for another case where confidential information in a UI
   can be used to build trust.

4.3.  No Password Equivelents

   A critical requirement is that when a user authenticates to a
   website, the website MUST NOT receive a strong password equivalent
   [IABAUTH].  A strong password equivalent is anything that would allow
   a phisher to authenticate as a user with a different identity
   provider.  Weak password equivalents MAY only be sent when a new
   identity is being enrolled or a password is changed.  A weak password
   equivalent allows a party to authenticate to a given identity
   provider as the user.

   There are two implications of this requirement.  First, strong
   cryptographic authentication protocol needs to be used instead of
   sending the password encrypted over TLS.  The zero-knowledge class of
   password protocols such as those discussed in section 8 of the IAB
   authentication mechanisms document [IABAUTH] seem potentially useful
   in this case.  Note that mechanisms in this space tend to have
   significant deployment problems because of intellectual property
   issues.

   The second implication of this requirement is that if an
   authentication token is presented to a website, the website MUST NOT
   be able to modify the token to authenticate as the user to a third
   party.  The party generating the token must cryptographically bind it
   to either the website that will receive the token or to a key known
   only to the user.  If tokens are bound to keys, the user MUST prove
   knowledge of this key as part of the authentication process.  The key
   MUST not be disclosed to the server unless the token is bound to the
   server and the key is only used with that token.

4.4.  Mutual Authentication

   The Google paper [ANTIPHISHING] describes a requirement for mutual
   authentication.  A common phishing practice is to accept a user name



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   and password as part of an attempt to make the phishing site
   authentic.  The real target is some other confidential information.
   The user name and password are captured, but are not verified.  After
   the user name and password are entered, the phishing site collects
   other confidential information.

   Authentication of the server at the TLS level and authentication of
   the client within the TLS session is not sufficient.  AS discussed
   previously the attacker can direct the user to a site that the
   attacker controls so the TLS authentication will succeed.  So an
   authentication solution for phishing MUST detect the situation where
   the server ignores or does not participate in the authentication.  If
   authentication is based on a shared secret such as a password, then
   the authentication protocol MUST prove that the secret or a suitable
   verifier is known by both parties.  Interestingly the existence of a
   shared secret will provide better protection that the right server is
   being contacted than if public key credentials are used.  By their
   nature, public key credentials allow parties to be contacted without
   a prior security association.  In protecting against phishing
   targeted at obtaining other confidential information, this may prove
   a liability.  However public key credentials provide strong
   protection against phishing targeted at obtaining authentication
   credentials because they are not vulnerable to dictionary attacks.
   Such dictionary attacks are a significant weakness of shared secrets
   such as passwords intended to be remembered by humans.  For public
   key protocols, this requirement would mean that the server typically
   needs to sign an assertion of what identity it authenticated.

4.5.  Authentication Tied to Resulting Page

   Users expect that whatever party they authenticate to will be the
   party that generates the content they see.  One possible phishing
   attack is to insert the phisher between the user and the real site as
   a man-in-the-middle.  On today's websites, the phisher typically
   gains the user's user name and password.  Even if the other
   requirements of this specification are met, the phisher could gain
   access to the user's session on the target site.  This attack is of
   particular concern to the banking industry.  A man-in-the-middle may
   gain access to the session which may give the phisher confidential
   information or the ability to execute transactions on the user's
   behalf.

   The authentication system MUST guarantee to the user and the target
   server that the response is generated by the target server and will
   only be seen by parties authorized by either the target server or the
   user.  This can be done in several ways:





Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   1.  Assuming that only certificates from trusted CAs are accepted and
       the user has not bypassed certificate validation, it is
       sufficient to confirm that the identity of the server at the TLS
       level is the same at the HTTP authentication level.  In the case
       of TLS client authentication this is trivially true.

   2.  Another alternative is to bind the authentication exchange to the
       channel created by the TLS session.  The general concept behind
       channel binding is discussed in section 2.2.2 of [BTNS].  This
       paragraph needs to be expanded to point to proposals for doing
       channel binding with TLS. xxx

   3.  Redirect based schemes in which the identity provider is told
       what site to return the user to meets this requirement provided
       again that certificate validation is done at the TLS layer.

4.6.  Restricted Identity Providers

   Some identity providers will allow anyone to accept their identity.
   However particularly for financial institutions and large service
   providers it will be common that only authorized business partners
   will be able to accept the identity.  The confirmation that the the
   relying party is such a business partner will often be a significant
   part of the value provided by the identity provider, so it is
   important that the protocol enable this.  For such identities, the
   user MUST be assured that the target server is authorized by the
   identity provider to accept identities from that identity provider.
   Several mechanisms could be used to accomplish this:

   1.  The target server can provide a certificate issued by the
       identity provider as part of the authentication.

   2.  The identity provider can explicitly approve the identity.  For
       example in a redirect-based scheme the identity provider knows
       the identity of the relying party before providing claims of
       identity to that party.  A similar situation happens with
       Kerberos.

4.7.  Protecting Enrollment

   One area of particular vulnerability to phishing is enrollment of a
   new identity in an identity provider.  Protecting against phishing
   targeted at obtaining other confidential information as a new service
   is established is outside the scope of this document.  If
   confidential information such as credit card numbers are provided as
   part of account setup, then this may be a target for phishing.

   However there is one critical aspect in which enrollment impacts the



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   security of authentication.  During enrollment, a password is
   typically established for an account at an identity provider.  The
   process of establishing a password MUST NOT provide a strong password
   equivalent to the identity provider.  That is, the identity provider
   MUST NOT gain enough information to impersonate the user to a third
   party while establishing a password.













































Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


5.  Is it the right Server?

   In Section 4, requirements were presented for web authentication
   solutions to minimize the risk of phishing targeted at web access
   information.  This section discusses in a non-normative manner
   various mechanisms for determining that the right server has been
   contacted.  Authenticating to the right party is an important part of
   reducing the risk of phishing targeted at other confidential
   information.

   Validation of the certificates used in TLS and verification that the
   name in the URI maps to these certificates can be useful.  As
   discussed in Section 3, attackers can spoof the name in the URI.
   However the TLS checks do defeat some attacks.  Also, as discussed in
   Section 4.5, TLS validation may be important to higher-level checks.

   A variety of initiatives propose to assign trust to servers.  This
   includes proposals to allow users to indicate certain servers are
   trusted based on information they enter.  Also, proposals to allow
   third parties including parties established for this purpose and
   existing certificate authorities to indicate trust have been made.
   These proposals will almost certainly make phishing more difficult.

   In the case where there is an existing relationship, these
   requirements provide a way that information about the relationship
   can be used to provide assurance that the right party has been
   contacted.

   In Section 4.2, we discuss how a secret between the user and their
   local computer can be used to let the user know when a password will
   be handled securely.  A similar mechanism can be used to help the
   user once they are authenticated to the website.  The website can
   present information based on a secret shared between the user and
   website to convince the user that they have authenticated to the
   correct site.  This depends critically on the requirements of
   Section 4.5 to guarantee that the phisher cannot obtain the secret.
   It is tempting to use this form of trusted UI before authentication.
   For example, a website could request a user name and then display
   information based on a secret for that user before accepting a
   password.  The problem with this approach is that phishers can obtain
   this information, because it can be obtained without knowing the
   password.  However if the secret is displayed after authentication
   then phishers could not obtain the secret.  This is one of the many
   reasons why it is important to prevent phishing targeted at
   authentication credentials.






Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   This memo discusses the security of web authentication and how to
   minimize the risk of phishing in web authentication systems.  This
   section discusses the security of the overall system and discusses
   how components of the system that are not directly within the scope
   of this document affect the security of web transactions.  This
   section also discusses residual risks that remain even when the
   requirements proposed here are implemented.

   The approach taken here is to separate the problem of phishing into
   phishing targeted at web authentication credentials and phishing
   targeted at other information.  Users are given some trusted
   mechanism to determine whether they are typing their password into a
   secure browser component that will authenticate them to the web
   server or whether they are typing their password into a legacy
   mechanism that will send their password to the server.  If the user
   types a password into the trusted browser component, they have strong
   assurances that their password has not been disclosed and that the
   page returned from the web server was generated by a party that
   either knows their password or who is authenticated by an identity
   provider who knows their password.  The web server can then use
   confidential information known to the user and web server to enhance
   the user's trust in its identity beyond what is available given the
   social engineering attacks against TLS server authentication.  If a
   user enters their password into the wrong server but discovers this
   before they give that server any other confidential information, then
   there exposure is very limited.

   This model assumes that the browser and operating system are a
   trusted component.  As discussed in Section 3, there are numerous
   attacks against host security.  Appropriate steps should be taken to
   minimize these risks.  If the host security is compromised, the
   password can be captured as it is typed by the user.

   This model assumes that users will only enter their passwords into
   trusted browser components.  There are several potential problems
   with this assumption.  First, users need to understand the UI
   distinction and know what it looks like when they are typing into a
   trusted component and what a legacy HTML form looks like.  Users must
   care enough about the security of their passwords to only type them
   into trusted components.  The browser must be designed in such a way
   that the server cannot create a UI component that appears to be a
   trusted component but is actually a legacy HTML form; Section 4.2
   discusses this requirement.

   IN addition, a significant risk that users will type their password
   into legacy HTML forms comes from the incremental deployment of any



Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


   web authentication technology.  Websites will need a way to work with
   older web browsers that do not yet support mechanisms that meet these
   requirements.  Not all websites will immediately adopt these
   mechanisms.  Users will sometimes browse from computers that have
   mechanisms meeting these requirements and sometimes from older
   browsers.  They only gain protection from phishing when they type
   passwords into trusted components.  If a password is sometimes used
   with websites that meet these requirements and sometimes with legacy
   websites, and if the password is captured by a phisher targeting a
   legacy website, then that captured password can be used even on
   websites meeting these requirements.  Similarly, if a user is tricked
   into using HTML forms when they should not, passwords can be exposed.
   Users can significantly reduce this risk by using different passwords
   for websites that use trusted browser authentication than for those
   that still use HTML forms.

   The risk of dictionary attack is always a significant concern for
   password systems.  Users can (but typically do not) minimize this
   risk by choosing long, hard to guess phrases for passwords.  The risk
   can be removed once a password is already established by using a
   zero-knowledge password protocol.  However the risk of dictionary
   attack is always present when setting up a new password or changing a
   password.  Minimizing the number of services that use the same
   password can minimize this risk.  When zero-knowledge password
   protocols are used, being extra careful to make sure the right server
   is used when establishing a password can significantly reduce this
   risk.
























Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [ANTIPHISHING]
              Nelson, J. and D. Jeske, "Limits to Anti Phishing",
              January 2006.

              Proceedings of the W3c Security and Usability Workshop; ht
              tp://www.w3.org/2005/Security/usability-ws/papers/
              37-google/'

   [BTNS]     Touch, J., "Problem and Applicability Statement for Better
              Than Nothing Security",
              draft-ietf-btns-prob-and-applic-02.txt (work in progress),
              February 2006.

   [IABAUTH]  Rescorla, E., "A Survey of Authentication Mechanisms",
              draft-iab-auth-mech-05.txt (work in progress),
              February 2006.

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              July 2005.

   [RFC4346]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1", RFC 4346, April 2006.

















Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


Author's Address

   Sam Hartman
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   Email: hartmans-ietf@mit.edu













































Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Web Phishing Requirements              June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Hartman                 Expires December 27, 2006              [Page 18]


