

MMUSIC Working Group                                       F. Andreasen
Internet-Draft                                            Cisco Systems
Document: draft-andreasen-mmusic-sdp-simcap-00.txt        November 2000
Category: Informational


                   SDP Simple Capability Negotiation


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



1. Abstract

   This document proposes a set of Session Description Protocol (SDP)
   attributes that allow SDP to provide a minimal and backwards
   compatible capability negotiation mechanism. The mechanism is
   intended as a simple and limited solution to the general capability
   negotiation problem being addressed by ongoing work on the next
   generation of SDP, also known as SDPng.


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].


3. Introduction

   The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [3] describes multimedia
   sessions for the purposes of session announcement, session
   invitation, and other forms of multimedia session initiation. SDP
   was not intended to provide capability negotiation, however as the
   need for this has become increasingly important, work has begun on a

Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation     November 2000


   "next generation SDP" (SDPng) [4] that supports both session
   description and capability negotiation. SDPng is not anticipated to
   be backwards compatible with SDP and work on SDPng is currently only
   in the requirements phase. However, several other protocols, e.g.
   SIP [5] and MGCP [6], use SDP, and are likely to continue doing so
   for the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, in many cases these
   protocols have an urgent need for some limited form of capability
   negotiation.

   For example, an endpoint may support G.711 audio (over RTP) as well
   as T.38 fax relay (over UDP or TCP). Unless the endpoint is willing
   to support two media streams at the same time, this can not
   currently be expressed in SDP. Another example involves support for
   multiple codecs. An endpoint indicates this by including all the
   codecs in the "m=" line in the session description. However, the
   endpoint thereby also commits to simultaneous support for each of
   those codecs. In practice, DSP memory and processing power
   limitations may not make this feasible.

   As noted in [4], the problem with SDP is, that media descriptions
   are used to describe session parameters as well as capabilities
   without a clear distinction between the two.

   In this document, we propose a minimal and backwards compatible
   capability negotiation feature in SDP by defining a set of new SDP
   attributes. It should be noted, that the mechanism is not intended
   to solve the general capability negotiation problem targeted by
   SDPng. It is merely intended as a simple and limited solution to the
   most urgent problems facing current users of SDP.


4. Requirements

   In the following sections, we list and discuss requirements for the
   simple capability negotiation.

4.1 Backwards Compatibility

   The solution must be backwards compatible with SDP. In particular,
   it must adhere to the current SDP grammar. Furthermore,
   implementations that do not support it must be able to ignore and
   skip capability information provided without affecting the semantics
   of the remaining SDP.

4.2 Simplicity and Limited Scope

   The solution must be simple both in terms of syntax and semantics.
   In line with this, the scope of the solution should only be to solve
   the most common and pressing capability negotiation problems
   encountered by current users of SDP.

   A more precise definition of this particular requirement is
   desirable, however the details of it will invariably be subjective.

Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation     November 2000


   Nevertheless, the following provides some additional detail based on
   [4], [7] and previous discussion within the MMUSIC working group:

   The following are considered minimum requirements:
   * It must be possible to describe each capability independently.
   * Lists of alternative values for a capability must be supported.
   * Supplying a capability should simply imply a willingness to
   support that capability, but not an actual commitment.
   * The description of a capability should be straightforward from its
   representation in the session description itself (do not want to
   come up with elaborate new syntax).

   The following list a set of requirements that were considered, but
   where further discussion is felt to be needed:
   * The ability to express ranges of values for a particular
   capability, possibly with "step" values within the range, e.g.
   "between 10 and 100 in increments of 10".

   The following list a set of requirements that were considered, but
   seen as non-essential:
   * Capability interdependence, incl.
        - grouping capabilities,
        - expressing simultaneous capability sets,
        - expressing alternative capability sets
        - constraining the number of uses of a certain capability (set)


5. Simple Capability Negotiation Attributes

   In this section, we provide a list of SDP attributes enabling the
   simple SDP capability negotiation we are looking for. The attributes
   form a capability set which describes the media capabilities of the
   endpoint.

   The capability set begins with a single sequence number followed by
   one or more capability descriptions listing all media formats the
   endpoint is currently able and willing to support. A subsequent
   request to use one of these media formats is however not guaranteed
   to succeed, e.g. due to limited DSP processing power, or bandwidth
   constraints.

   The sequence number is on the form

     a=sqn: <sqn-num>

   where <sqn-num> is an integer between 0 and 255 (both included). The
   initial sequence number is 0 and increments by 1 modulo 256 with
   each new capability set from the endpoint. The sequence number may
   either be provided as a session- or media-level attribute.

   Each capability description in the capability set is on the form:

     a=cdsc: <cap-num> <media> <transport> <fmt list>

Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation     November 2000



   where <cap-num> is an integer between 1 and 255 (both included)
   identifying the capability, and <media>,  <transport>, and <fmt
   list> are defined as in the SDP ôm=ö line. The capability number
   should start with 1 in the first capability description, and be
   incremented by the number of capabilities in the <fmt list> for each
   subsequent capability description.

   A capability description may include one or more capability
   parameter lines on the form:

     a=cpar: <cap-par>

   where <cap-par> is either bandwidth information (ôb=ö) or an
   attribute (ôa=ö). A capability parameter line provides additional
   parameters for the preceding capability description.

   Capability parameter lines MUST immediately follow the "cdsc" line
   they refer to, thus a capability description ends at the first non
   "cpar" line that follows the "cdsc" attribute line.

   Capability descriptions may be provided at the session- or media-
   level. A capability description provided at the session-level
   applies to all the media streams specified, where as a capability
   description provided at the media-level only applies to that
   particular media stream.


   Below we show an example session description using the above
   capability negotiation attributes:

   v=0
   o=- 25678 753849 IN IP4 128.96.41.1
   s=-
   c=IN IP4 128.96.41.1
   t=0 0
   m=audio 3456 RTP/AVP 18 96
   a=rtpmap:96 telephone-event
   a=fmtp:96 0-15,32-35
   a=sqn: 0
   a=cdsc: 1 audio RTP/AVP 0 18 96
   a=cpar: a=fmtp:96 0-16,32-35
   a=cdsc: 4 image udptl t38
   a=cdsc: 5 image tcp t38


   The sender of this session description is currently prepared to send
   and receive G.729 audio as well as telephone-events 0-15 and 32-35.
   The sender is furthermore capable of supporting:
   * media streams using PCMU encoding
   * telephone events 0-16 and 32-35
   * T.38 fax relay using udp or tcp (see [8])


Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation     November 2000


   Note, that the first capability number is 1, where as the next is 4,
   since three media formats were included in the first capability.
   Also note, that the rtpmap for payload type 96 was not included in
   the capability description again, as it was already specified for
   the media (m=) line.


6. Security Considerations

   The addition of the simple capability negotiation attributes to SDP
   is not believed to affect security.


7. References

   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   3  M. Handley and V. Jacobson, "SDP: session description protocol,"
      Request for Comments (Proposed Standard) 2327, Internet
      Engineering Task Force, Apr.  1998.

   4  Kutscher, Ott, Bormann, "Requirements for Session Description and
      Capability Negotiation", draft-kutscher-mmusic-sdpng-req-00.txt,
      July 14, 2000

   5  M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg, "SIP:
      session initiation protocol," Request for Comments (Proposed
      Standard) 2543, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1999.

   6  Arango, M., Dugan, A., Elliott, I., Huitema, C. and S. Pickett,
      "Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP) Version 1.0", RFC 2705,
      October 1999.

   7  J. Ott, J. Kutscher, C. Bormann, "Capability description for
      group cooperation", draft-ott-mmusic-cap-00.txt, June 1999

   8  PROPOSED T.38 AMENDMENT û REC. T.38 ANNEX D, Geneva, 2-10
      February, 2000, (available from
      ftp://standards.nortelnetworks.com/itu_to_ietf/SG8/February00/Dra
      ft_T38_Annex_D.txt)

   9  Beser, B., "Codec Capabilities Attribute for SDP", Internet
      Draft, draft-beser-mmusic-capabilities-00.txt, March 2000.




8. Acknowledgments


Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation     November 2000



   This work draws upon the ongoing work on SDPng; in particular [4].
   Furthermore, this work was inspired by [7] and the CableLabs
   PacketCable project. Related work can be found in [9] as well.



9. Author's Addresses

   Flemming Andreasen
   Cisco Systems
   499 Thornall Street, 8th floor
   Edison, NJ
   Email: fandreas@cisco.com








































Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    SDP Simple Capability Negotiation     November 2000



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




















Andreasen          Informational - Expires May 2001           [Page 7]
