	      
   Internet Draft                  I. Miloucheva (Fraunhofer Institute), 
                                      Ch. Brandauer (Salzburg Research),
                                        G. Panholzer (Salzburg Research)
                                     
                                        				       
    Expires: April 24, 2009                      November 24, 2008
							 

     Policy based monitoring and learning of context for enhanced 
                       QoS guarantees
            draft-miloucheva-policy-monitoring-00.txt


   Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2009.
 

Abstract 

   In order to enhance the policy provisioning and QoS guarantees, 
   policy  monitoring and context learning facilities are used.
   This document is focussed on facilities for monitoring and learning
   of context integrated in autonomous policy management system for 
   enhanced user-centric Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees in
   heterogeneous Internet environment.     
   The autonomous policy management includes components aimed 
   at automation of QoS policy specification, provisioning and 
   adaptation based on common policy repository.
   Integration of monitoring and context learning facilities allows
   to consider measurement and context data for more efficient 
   policy provisioning and adaptation.
   The goal is to collect measurement and context information, in order
    

Miloucheva             Expires April 2009                        [Page 1]
 
INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context    November 24, 2008



   to support automated policy decision and adaptation of actor's policies,
   when specific events (patterns) are detected in a given network context.

 
Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction................................................  2
   2.   Terminology used in this document...........................  3
   3.   Overview of QoS Monitoring and context learning facilities..  4
   3.1. Architectural considerations................................  4
   3.2. Policy monitoring ..........................................  5
   3.3. Optimisation of QoS monitoring .............................  6
   3.4. Context learning ...........................................  7
   4.   Usage of Policy monitoring and context learning in QoS policy
        management scenarios .......................................  8
   4.1. NetQOS system for autonomous QoS policy management .........  8
   4.2. Integration of policy monitoring in NETQoS ................. 10
   5.   Further work ............................................... 11
   6.   References.................................................. 11
   7.   Author's Addresses.......................................... 13
   8.   Full Copyright Statement.................................... 13
   9.   Intellectual Property ...................................... 14
 


1. Introduction
    
   Facilities and tools for automated policy monitoring and learning of  
   context are described, which are used for autonomous user centric  
   QoS policy management in heterogeneous Internet environment based 
   on dynamic policy specifications by different actors. 
   The goal of the automated policy monitoring and context discovery is  
   to facilitate the automated provisioning and adaptation of QoS  
   policies of different actors considering performance and context    
   events. Such events can be described by parameter values, thresholds 
   and patterns. 

   The background is the QoS policy framework for heterogeneous Internet
   environment (HQPIM) of the NETQOS architecture (see, [1], [2]). 
   Its goal is to support QoS selection and mapping for different
   actors (users, operators, network providers) in heterogeneous networks
   including fixed, mobile and sensor technologies. 
   The QoS policy framework for heterogeneous Internet is derived from the
   Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) [3], the Common Information Model 
   (CIM)[4] and the QoS Policy Information Model(QPIM)[5]. 
   The QoS policy monitoring and context learning facilities are based on:
   - Measurement and learning of context according to specifications of 
     policy related performance parameters and patterns;
   - Collection, filtering and aggregation of policy related monitoring 
     and context data in data bases;


Miloucheva                Expires April 2009                     [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context    November 24, 2008



   - Detection of policy violations and policy change requirements based   
     on monitoring and detection of policy related parameters;
   - Interaction procedures and signalling between the QoS policy 
     management system and the components for policy monitoring and 
     context learning.

   This draft is focussed on the architectural considerations for QoS  
   policy monitoring and context learning, as well as on the basic 
   integration approach of the policy monitoring and context learning in 
   the NETQOS autonomous QoS policy management system [1] [2].
   The NETQOS system  is based on business policy specifications and 
   hierarchical policy refinement used to support preferences of different
   actors (users, operators) for  QoS guarantees in heterogeneous Internet 
   environment according Service Level Agreements (SLAs). 
   

2. Terminology used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [6].

   This Draft considers the policy management terminology [7] and 
   policy functions / components defined in NETQOS context [1]. 

   
   Abbreviations used in the following text:

   MoMe       - Monitoring and Measurement Manager
   CLM        - Context Learning Manager
   MP         - Measurement Policy
   MSC        - Message Sequence Chart
   APM        - Actor Preference Manager
   POLD       - Policy Descriptor   
   APA        - Automated Policy Adaptor
   NetAgent   - Component for automated configuration of mechanisms at 
                network devices
   TransAgent - Component for policy configuration of mechanisms at 
                transport entities.
   CM         - Context Manager
   HQPIM      - Heterogeneous networks QoS policy information model     
   PCIM       - Core Information Model
   QPIM       - QoS Policy Information Model
   SLA	      - Service Level Agreement
   QoS        - Quality of Service
   GUI        - Graphical User Interface
   NETQOS     - Policy management system for QoS guarantees in 
                heterogeneous Internet environment


     
Miloucheva                Expires April 2009                     [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context    November 24, 2008


3. Overview of QoS Monitoring and context learning facilities

   3.1. Architectural considerations
   
   Policy monitoring and context learning is based on specification of 
   business QoS policies by policy actors (users, network operators, 
   service providers) and their mapping to intermediate and operational
   policies. Requirements for performance parameter monitoring and context
   learning are assigned to the business policy specifications of the 
   policy actors and are mapped to concrete monitoring and context 
   detection tasks. The basic architecture for QoS policy monitoring and
   context learning is shown in fig.1.

     +----------------------------------------------+
     ! QoS policy management interface for          !
     !  Policy monitoring and context learning      !
     +----------------------------------------------+  
           !                 !                 !    
           v                 v                 !
     +------------+     +-----------+   +-----------+  
     ! Measurement!     ! Context   !   !Signalling !
     ! Monitoring !     ! learning  !   !of policy  !
     ! manager    !     ! manager   !   !events     !
     +------------+     +-----------+   +-----------+           
           !                 !                 !                                   
           v                 v                 ! 
     +----------------+  +-----------+         ! 
     ! Monitoring     !  ! Context   !         !    
     ! Tools          !  ! brokers   !         !              
     +----------------+  +-----------+         !                                                        
          !                 !                  !                
          v                 v                  ! 
     +----------------------------------+      !
     ! monitoring and context           !-------
     !      data bases                  ! 
     +----------------------------------+   

   Figure 1: Architecture for policy based QoS monitoring 
          and context learning 

   The architecture includes following components:
   - Measurement and Monitoring Manager; 
   - Context learning manager;
   - Infrastructure for monitoring  (passive and 
     active monitoring tools);
   - Context brokers, context learning and identity management 
     facilities;
   - Data bases of monitoring and context data.  
   The interactions of the components allows the automated monitoring 
   and context learning based on QoS policy specifications involving 
  

Miloucheva               Expires April 2009                     [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context    November 24, 2008

   
   policy monitoring and measurement tools, as well as context brokers,
   identity management and other supporting facilities. 

3.2. Policy monitoring

   Policy monitoring is aimed at detection of QoS policy violation for a 
   given actor considering policy and SLA requirements.
   Policy monitoring actions can be assigned on different way to a given 
   policy. One approach is to define one or more measurement policies   
   related to given QoS policy definition [17].
   A measurement policy specification (Pmeas) related to actor's QoS 
   policy (Pqos) can be represented by:

      Pmeas (Pqos) = <meas_condition> <meas_action> <event_signalling>
   where 

    -  <meas_condition> specifies constraints for the values of  
       measured performance parameters in order to detect events,
    -  <meas_action> defines corresponding measurement actions 
       (scenarios);
    -  <event_signalling> specifies the procedures for event 
       characterisation and signalling.
  
   An example for specification of a measurement policy is:

    ippm_loss > 0.2  OR
    ippm_1waydelay > 200 ms
    THEN
    call violation_event_loss_delay

   The measurement policy is used to detect violation of the requirements
   for performance parameter values, in this case delay and packet loss,
   related to the specified QoS policy of the actor and to adapt the 
   operational policy by the QoS provisioning system based on the 
   detected violations. 
   Receiving the policy violation event, the QoS policy provisioning 
   components can change the operational policies according to the SLAs 
   and QoS policy requirements.
   Dependent on the application, network context and actor goals,  
   different performance parameters can be considered for automated
   measurement and monitoring. 
   The requirement for the policy monitoring and optimisation is to
   support flexibly appropriate sets of performance parameters, which can 
   efficiently be assigned to the QoS policy of the actor. 
   Parameters, which are considered currently in the NETQOS QOS policy
   monitoring, include:
    -  One-way packet loss;
    -  Maximum possible Throughput;
    -  Round Trip Time;
    -  Average Throughput;


Miloucheva                Expires April 2009                     [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context     November 24, 2008


    -  Average link occupation on path;
    -  Average router buffer occupation;
    -  SrcIP/DstIP/SrcPort/DstPort/Transport Protocol of connections;
    -  Sharing parts of the data path;
    -  Path Bottleneck (congested router) identification.
   However, dependent on the context in heterogeneous Internet (mobile, 
   sensor, broadcast) and application demands, further parameters can be
   considered for policy monitoring.

3.3. Optimisation of policy monitoring 

   The optimisation of QoS monitoring is aimed at avoidance of redundant 
   measurements. 
   In order to avoid duplication of measurement and monitoring tasks, 
   procedures for filtering and aggregation of policy based monitoring
   are required. 
   The measurement aggregation and filtering procedures have to check 
   dependencies of measured performance parameters and their related 
   QoS policy specifications of the actors.
   Filtering and aggregation of measurements is based on analysis of 
   following parameters:
   - The time interval, for which the QoS policy specification of the 
     actor is valid;
   - Network context (source and destination for performing of the 
     monitoring task);
   - Type of measurement and measured performance parameter;
   - Frequency of measurements;
   - Measurement actions;
   - Measurement conditions;
   - Time scope of the required measurement.
   When a new policy based measurement is required, then measurement
   policies (MP) are built and checked for redundancy (figure 2).   
   +---------------------+   +------------+   +---------------------+
   ! Monitoring data base!   ! Filtering/ !   ! Monitoring data base!                        
   !                     !   ! Aggregation!   !                     !
   +---------------------+   ! of         !   +---------------------+
   ! MP(exec)            !-->! measurement!-->! Updated MP(exec)    ! 
   ! MP(dep)             !   ! policies   !   ! Updated MP(dep)     !
   +---------------------+   +------------+   +---------------------+                                              
    executed Measurement Policies -  MP(exec)
    dependent Measurement Policies - MP(dep)
    
   Figure 2:  Optimisation of policy based measurements   

   Reducing of redundancy of measurements is based on dependency 
   analysis of measurement policies (MPs) related to the QoS specifications
   of the different actors, as well as adaptation of dependent MPs
   and actual executed MPs.
   The dependencies between MPs are updated each time, when a 
   QoS policy with assigned MPs is entered in the system or changed. 


Miloucheva                Expires April 2009                     [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context     November 24, 2008

 
3.4. Context learning   

   The QoS policies on business level are concise specifications of the 
   QoS goals of the particular actors and are related to the SLA 
   objectives. 
   Context aware policy management deals with specification of user 
   policies and their enforcement based on the consideration of context 
   structure and behaviour [8]. Context dependent policy management 
   is required in mobility scenarios [9], sensor [10], 
   ambient networks [11], emergency [12] and other applications.
   The goal of the context learning is to automate the learning of the 
   context based on QoS policy requirements and to signal the context
   changes to the QoS provisioning system in order to adapt the 
   operational policy set according to the changed context. 
   For instance, there are applications in mobile environment, 
   which require adaptation of the QoS policy provisioning (e.g. 
   operational policies) considering the actual location of the user
   of application.

   The context data is detected according to the QoS policy requirements
   of the user and is used for operational policy adaptation, when the
   context is changed. 
   The context learning is to based on obtaining of knowledge in
   appropriate data bases about patterns and events related to the QoS
   policy content and SLAs.

   QoS policy related context can be defined based on: 
   - User location;
   - User access network; 
   - Characteristics of heterogeneous network devices (entities);
   - User end-systems and devices for the delivery of the service 
     (application);
   - Time for service delivery;
   - Network events and their characteristics (anomay, failure, etc);
   - Patterns and models describing traffic, network QoS and routing 
     behaviour.

   Dependent on the policy requirements, the context learning techniques
   can involve facilities for:
   - Detection of structural patterns and events concerning network 
     traffic and other context data;
   - Detection of behaviour patterns characterising performance metrics;
   - Spatio-temporal routing pattern analysis [13]; 
   - Detection of threshold and overload patterns [14];
   - Modelling and prediction of context data (e.g. using of ARIMA and 
     other models).  
   The context learning is supported by context broker infrastructures
   and identity management facilities. 
   The context learning is important component of the identity enabled 
   QoS policy management architectures [15].


Miloucheva             Expires April 2009                       [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Monitoring and learning of context   November 24, 2008


4. Integration of policy monitoring and context learning 

4.1. NETQOS system for autonomous QoS policy management

   The NETQOS architecture is aimed at dynamic and autonomous QoS 
   policy specification and provisioning for heterogeneous Internet 
   environment [1],[2]. 
   Policy abstraction and mapping from business level to
   intermediate,  operational and configuration level policies is  
   used in order to support the technology and vendor dependent 
   configuration of QoS mechanisms.   
   The NETQOS components for automated QoS specification and 
   provisioning (figure 3) include: 
   - Actor Preference Manager (APM) for actor and scenario oriented 
     business level QoS policy specification;
   - Policy Description and Management (POLD) allowing unified policy 
     access / storage;
   - Automated Policy Adaptor (APA) for policy decision, enforcement 
     and adaptation;
   - Monitoring and Measurement (MoMe) for policy performance analysis 
     and assessment of policy performance;
   - NetAgent and TransAgent for policy configuration at the managed 
     entities,  such as router or transport protocols, considering
     their particular capabilities; 
   - Context Manager for control of interactions between different 
     policy management components.  

	   Policy monitoring              Management  
         & context dependency                 of
         of enforced policies            interactions
			   +------+     |-------------| 
			   | MoMe |<--- |     CM      |
			   +------+     |-------------| 
				 		!
 			      		        v
               +------+     +-------+    +-------------+   Policy 
     +-------->| APM  | --->| POLD  |<-->|    APA      |  adaptation, 
     actor's   +------+     +-------+    +-------------+  enforcement 
     business                   !            !        !                     
     QoS  			!	     !        !   
     policies                   !            !        ! 
     interface         Storage  v Access     v        v
                  +---------------------+ +------+ +----------+          
                  | policy repository   | |  Net | | Transport|          
                  |  (unified policies) | |Agent | | Agent    |
                  | policy translation  | +------+ +----------+
                  +---------------------+   Configuration
                                         of operational policies                                         
   Figure 3: Interactions of NETQOS system components for 
                 dynamic QoS policy provisioning

 
Miloucheva             Expires April 2009                       [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Monitoring and learning of context   November 24, 2008



   The QoS policies are designed according the SLAs considering the
   role, knowledge and expertise of the  particular actors 
   (operator, user, customer). 
   At the business level, QoS policies are entered dynamically by the 
   actors using APM GUIs. 
   Ontology is used for QoS policy specification and translation of 
   business QoS policies to intermediate, operational and configuration
   policies.

   The interoperation of the components is based on common policy 
   repository for unified (intermediate) policy specifications.
   The access to the policy repository is performed by the POLD 
   component. 

   POLD functions translate and store the business policies of the 
   actors as intermediate (unified) QoS policies in the repository.
   When the policy enforcement is required (by launching of the actor's 
   policy controlled application), the APA (Automated Policy Adaptor)
   component obtains the intermediate policies and transforms them into 
   operational policies (represented as XACML messages). 

   APA includes functions for:
    - Mapping of intermediate to operational policies; 
    - Adaptation of operation policies considering context and 
      policy monitoring events;
    - Enforcement of operational policy configuration invoking the 
      corresponding agents at transport and network level. 

   The translation of unified QoS policies into operational policies 
   considers SLAs and actor dependencies, as well as monitoring and 
   network context. 
   The operational policies are defined for managed entities and
   allow the mapping of the unified policy requirements to 
   the specific QoS mechanisms of the managed heterogeneous entities 
   (routers, services protocols). 

   Operational policies are expressed by XACML (eXtensible Access 
   Control Markup Language) [16] and applied  for different kind of
   heterogeneous devices (routers and/or Transport level entities)
   taking into account the specific capabilities of the heterogeneous
   entities.         
   Operational policies define QoS mechanisms assigned to user's 
   applications, for instance guaranteed bandwidth allocation per 
   application, QoS class assignment to user's flow, appropriate 
   composition of transport functions for the application.  
   Based on policy monitoring and context learning the content and 
   assignment of operational policies to specific QoS policy can be 
   changed.



Miloucheva             Expires April 2009                       [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Monitoring and learning of context   November 24, 2008



4.2. Integration of policy monitoring in NETQOS

   Automated policy monitoring and context discovery facilities are    
   integrated in the NETQOS system architecture as Measurement and 
   Monitoring (MoMe) component.    
   The purpose of MoMe component is:    
    - To evaluate the policy performance based on measurement policies,
      which are defined considering SLAs and QoS policy 
      specification; 
    - To signal the policy performance degradations, based on which 
      the policy adaptation functions can adapt the parameters of
      the operational policies
    - To filter and aggregate measurement policies in order to avoid
      duplicated measurements. 
   MoMe can detect specific events related to the policy (i.e.  
   congestion, overloaded connection, etc.), and send signalling 
   message to the APA components for adaptation of operational QoS 
   policy mechanisms.  
   After the operational policy for an application is enforced by the 
   NETQOS system, the MoMe component receives a message to trigger
   appropriate measurement policy and actions. 
   The Message Sequence Chart (MSC) describing the integration of 
   policy monitoring functions in NETQOS is shown:

    NETQOS System                          Policy Monitoring 
    (Context Manager)                         (MoMe)

    !                                   !
    ! --------------------------------->! 
    ! 1. QoS policy based               ! Assignment and execution 
    ! application is launched           ! of measurement policies 
    !                                   ! dependent on the context 
    !                                   !
    !                                   !
    !<----------------------------------! 2. Policy violation 
    ! Signalling the NETQOS components   ! is detected 
    ! (APA) about policy violation      !                          
    !                                   !
    !                                   !
    !---------------------------------->! Change of measurement 
    ! 3. Requirements for change of     ! policies for the given 
    ! measurement policy                ! context                                        
    !                                   !
    !                                   !
    !                                   !
 

   Figure 4: MSC describing the integration of policy monitoring in 
              NETQOS policy management system
 
 
Miloucheva             Expires April 2009                      [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Monitoring and learning of context   November 24, 2008
 

  The policy monitoring functions are invoked by a signal message, when 
  a QoS based application is launched and its policies are enforced 
  (Step 1). Through the CM, the MoMe is notified by the APA of the 
  activation of a new operational policy for a given and identified 
  connection.
  Based on the stored QoS policies for the application, the policy 
  monitoring assigns appropriate measurement scenarios and
  actions for evaluation of QoS policy related performance parameters.
  In case that policy violation is detected by the policy monitoring 
  (Step 2), the MoMe tool sends a signal to the NETQOS system (APA). 
  This invokes the adaptation of the operational policy.
  After performing of measurement policies, the APA can in some cases 
  request change of monitored performance parameters assigned to the QoS 
  policy (Step 3). The MoMe is signalled in this case by APA to configure
  the new policy monitoring scenario (e.g. measurement policies).
   
5. Further Work
   
   Automated QoS monitoring and content discovery is used in the
   autonomous QoS policy management for more efficient QoS policy 
   mapping, decision and adaptation based on monitoring and context 
   data. 
   The first prototype of policy measurement and context learning 
   facilities is implemented and integrated in the NETQOS system. 
   Further work is aimed to integrate more powerful context learning 
   facilities considering routing, location, identity management and
   content specific information. The optimisation of measurements - 
   aggregation and filtering is another focus aimed to reduce the 
   measurement overhead in Internet infrastructures. 


6. References 


   [1]     EU IST project, Policy Based Management of Heterogeneous 
           Networks for Guaranteed QoS (NETQOS), www.ist-netqos.org.

   [2]     I. Miloucheva, D. Wagner, Ch. Niephaus, ?User centric QoS 
           policy management for heterogeneous Internet environment?, 
           ICT-Mobile Summit, Stockholm, Sweden, June, 2008.

   [3]     B. Moore, E. Elleson, J. Strassner, A. Westerinen, ?Policy Core 
           Information Model-Version 1 Specification?, RFC 3060, Febr.2001.

   [4]     B. Moore, Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) Extensions, 
           RFC 3460, January 2003.

   [5]     Y. Snir, Y. Ramberg, J. Strassner, R. Cohen, B. Moore, ?Policy
           Quality of Service Information Model?, RFC 3644, Nov. 2003.
  


Miloucheva             Expires April 2009                      [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT    Monitoring and learning of context   November 24, 2008




   [6]     S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
           Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [7]     A. Westerinen, J. Schnizlein, J. Strassner, M. Scherling, 
           R. Quinn, S. Herzog, A. Huynh, M. Carlson, J. Perry,  M.
           Waldbusser, ?Terminology for Policy-based  Management?, IETF 
           RFC 3198, November 2001.

   [8]     US Patent 7072956 - Methods and systems for context-aware 
           policy determination and enforcement, US Patent Issued on 
           July 4, 2006.

   [9]     P. Bellavista, A, Corradi, R. Montanari, C. Stefanelli, "A 
           mobile computing middleware for location- and context-aware
           internet data services", ACM Transactions on Internet 
           Technology (TOIT), Volume 6, Issue 4, November 2006.  

   [10]    S. Schwiderski-Grosche, "Context-Dependent Event Detection in 
           Sensor Networks", Fast Abstract in 2nd Intl. Conf. on  
           Distributed Event-Based Systems (DEBS'08), 2008.

   [11]	   H. Moungla, ?A Context-Aware, Policy-based Framework for 
           Ambient Network", IEEE Workshop on Policies for Distributed
           Systems and Networks, 2008.

   [12]    U.Hofmann, A. Veichtlbauer, I.Miloucheva, "Policy Aware 
           Communication for Emergency Evacuation", International Journal
           of Computer Science and Applications, Technomathematics Research
           Foundation, 2008. 

   [13]    P.A. Guitierres, I.Miloucheva, ?Integrating Inter-domain 
           Routing Analysis in novel management strategies for large scale
           IP networks?, Next Generation Tele-traffics and Wired/Wireless
           Advanced Networking (NEW2AN'04) conference, February 2004.
 
   [14]    D. Hetzer, I. Miloucheva, ?Adaptable bandwidth planning for 
           enhanced QoS support in user-centric broadband architectures?, 
           in Proceedings of World Telecommunications Congress, Budapest, 
           Hungary, May 2006.

   [15]    I. Miloucheva, D.Wagner, Ch. Niephaus, D. Hetzer, "User-centric
           identity enabled QoS policy management for Next Generation 
           Internet", International Review on Computers and Software 
           (IRECOS) Journal, July 2008. 

   [16]    OASIS eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) TC, 
           XACML 2.0 Specification Set, XACML 3.0 Work in Progress.



Miloucheva                Expires April 2009                   [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context    November 24, 2008



   [17]    P. A. A. Gutierrez, D. Wagner, I. Miloucheva, Ch. 
           Brandauer, U. Hofmann, ?Policy based QoS MONITORING, Automated
           Learning Strategies for Policy Enhancement?, International 
           Conference on Wireless Information Networks and Systems 
           (WINSYS'07), Special session on QoS Policy Management, Barcelona,
           Spain, July 2007 




7. Author's Addresses 

   
   Ilka Miloucheva                        
   Fraunhofer Institute, SATCOM FOKUS,Schloss Birlinghoven	
   53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
   Fax: +49-2241-14-1050
   Email: ilka.miloucheva@fokus.fraunhofer.de

   Christof Brandauer
   Salzburg Research,   Austria
   Phone: 0043 662 2288447
   Fax: 0043 662 2288441
   Email: christof.brandauer@salzburgresearch.at

     
   Georg Panholzer
   Salzburg Research,   Austria
   Phone: 0043 662 2288449
   Fax: 0043 662 2288441
   Email: georg.panholzer@salzburgresearch.at


8. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Miloucheva                Expires April 2009                    [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context     November 24, 2008



9. Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Miloucheva               Expires April 2009                    [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT   Monitoring and learning of context    November 24, 2008