



CDNI                                                          J. Seedorf
Internet-Draft                                                       NEC
Intended status: Standards Track                             J. Peterson
Expires: November 21, 2016                                       Neustar
                                                              S. Previdi
                                                                   Cisco
                                                      R. van Brandenburg
                                                                     TNO
                                                                   K. Ma
                                                                Ericsson
                                                            May 20, 2016


       CDNI Request Routing: Footprint and Capabilities Semantics
          draft-ietf-cdni-footprint-capabilities-semantics-20

Abstract

   This document captures the semantics of the "Footprint and
   Capabilities Advertisement" part of the CDNI Request Routing
   interface, i.e., the desired meaning of "Footprint" and
   "Capabilities" in the CDNI context, and what the "Footprint and
   Capabilities Advertisement Interface (FCI)" offers within CDNI.  The
   document also provides guidelines for the CDNI FCI protocol.  It
   further defines a Base Advertisement Object, the necessary registries
   for capabilities and footprints, and guidelines on how these
   registries can be extended in the future.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Design Decisions for Footprint and Capabilities . . . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Advertising Limited Coverage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Capabilities and Dynamic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Advertisement versus Queries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.4.  Avoiding or Handling 'cheating' dCDNs . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Focusing on Capabilities with Footprint Restrictions  . . . .   8
   4.  Footprint and Capabilities Extension  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Capability Advertisement Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.1.  Base Advertisement Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Encoding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.3.  Delivery Protocol Capability Object . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       5.3.1.  Delivery Protocol Capability Object Serialization . .  12
     5.4.  Acquisition Protocol Capability Object  . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.4.1.  Acquisition Protocol Capability Object Serialization   13
     5.5.  Redirection Mode Capability Object  . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       5.5.1.  Redirection Mode Capability Object Serialization  . .  13
     5.6.  CDNI Logging Capability Object  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       5.6.1.  CDNI Logging Capability Object Serialization  . . . .  15
     5.7.  CDNI Metadata Capability Object . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       5.7.1.  CDNI Metadata Capability Object Serialization . . . .  16
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     6.1.  CDNI Payload Types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       6.1.1.  CDNI FCI DeliveryProtocol Payload Type  . . . . . . .  17
       6.1.2.  CDNI FCI AcquisitionProtocol Payload Type . . . . . .  18
       6.1.3.  CDNI FCI RedirectionMode Payload Type . . . . . . . .  18
       6.1.4.  CDNI FCI Logging Payload Type . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       6.1.5.  CDNI FCI Metadata Payload Type  . . . . . . . . . . .  18



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


     6.2.  Redirection Mode Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   Appendix A.  Main Use Case to Consider  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   Appendix B.  Semantics for Footprint Advertisement  . . . . . . .  22
   Appendix C.  Semantics for Capabilities Advertisement . . . . . .  24
   Appendix D.  Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26

1.  Introduction and Scope

   The CDNI working group is working on a set of protocols to enable the
   interconnection of multiple CDNs.  This CDN interconnection (CDNI)
   can serve multiple purposes, as discussed in [RFC6770], for instance,
   to extend the reach of a given CDN to areas in the network which are
   not covered by this particular CDN.

   The goal of this document is to achieve a clear understanding about
   the semantics associated with the CDNI Request Routing Footprint &
   Capabilities Advertisement Interface (from now on referred to as
   FCI), in particular the type of information a downstream CDN (dCDN)
   'advertises' regarding its footprint and capabilities.  To narrow
   down undecided aspects of these semantics, this document tries to
   establish a common understanding of what the FCI needs to offer and
   accomplish in the context of CDNI.

   It is explicitly outside the scope of this document to decide on
   specific protocols to use for the FCI.  However, guidelines for such
   FCI protocols are provided.

   General assumptions in this document:

   o  The CDNs participating in the interconnected CDN have already
      performed a boot strap process, i.e., they have connected to each
      other, either directly or indirectly, and can exchange information
      amongst each other.

   o  The upstream CDN (uCDN) receives footprint and/or capability
      advertisements from a set of dCDNs.  Footprint advertisement and
      capability advertisement need not use the same underlying
      protocol.

   o  The uCDN receives the initial request-routing request from the
      endpoint requesting the resource.





Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   The CDNI Problem Statement [RFC6707] describes the Request Routing
   Interface as: "[enabling] a Request Routing function in a uCDN to
   query a Request Routing function in a dCDN to determine if the dCDN
   is able (and willing) to accept the delegated Content Request".  In
   addition, RFC6707 says "the CDNI Request Routing interface is also
   expected to enable a dCDN to provide to the uCDN (static or dynamic)
   information (e.g., resources, footprint, load) to facilitate
   selection of the dCDN by the uCDN request routing system when
   processing subsequent content requests from User Agents".  It thus
   considers "resources" and "load" as capabilities to be advertised by
   the dCDN.

   The range of different footprint definitions and possible
   capabilities is very broad.  Attempting to define a comprehensive
   advertisement solution quickly becomes intractable.  The CDNI
   requirements draft [RFC7337] lists the specific requirements for the
   CDNI Footprint & Capabilities Advertisement Interface in order to
   disambiguate footprints and capabilities with respect to CDNI.  This
   document defines a common understanding of what the terms 'footprint'
   and 'capabilities' mean in the context of CDNI, and details the
   semantics of the footprint advertisement mechanism and the capability
   advertisement mechanism.

1.1.  Terminology

   This document reuses the terminology defined in [RFC6707].

   Additionally, the following terms are used throughout this document
   and are defined as follows:

   o  Footprint: a description of a CDN's coverage area, i.e., the area
      from which client requests may originate for, and to which the CDN
      is willing to deliver, content.  Note: There are many ways to
      describe a footprint, for example, by address range (e.g., IPv4/
      IPv6 CIDR), by network ID (e.g., ASN), by nation boundaries (e.g.,
      country code), by GPS coordinates, etc.  This document does not
      define or endorse the quality or suitability of any particular
      footprint description method; this document only defines a method
      for transporting known footprint descriptions in Footprint and
      Capabilities Advertisement messages.

   o  Capability: a feature of a dCDN, upon which a uCDN relies on the
      dCDN supporting, when making delegation decisions.  Support for a
      given feature can change over time and can be restricted to a
      limited portion of a dCDN's footprint.  Note: There are many
      possible dCDN features that could be of interest to a uCDN.  This
      document does not presume to define them all; this document
      describes a scheme for defining new capabilities and how to



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


      transport them in Footprint and Capabilities Advertisement
      messages.

2.  Design Decisions for Footprint and Capabilities

   A large part of the difficulty in discussing the FCI lies in
   understanding what exactly is meant when trying to define footprint
   in terms of "coverage" or "reachability."  While the operators of
   CDNs pick strategic locations to situate surrogates, a surrogate with
   a public IPv4 address is reachable by any endpoint on the Internet
   unless some policy enforcement precludes the use of the surrogate.

   Some CDNs aspire to cover the entire world; we refer to these as
   global CDNs.  The footprint advertised by such a CDN in the CDNI
   environment would, from a coverage or reachability perspective,
   presumably cover all prefixes.  Potentially more interesting for CDNI
   use cases, however, are CDNs that claim a more limited coverage, but
   seek to interconnect with other CDNs in order to create a single CDN
   fabric which shares resources.

   Furthermore, not all capabilities need to be footprint restricted.
   Depending upon the use case, the optimal semantics of "footprints
   with capability attributes" vs. "capabilities with footprint
   restrictions" are not clear.

   The key to understanding the semantics of footprint and capability
   advertisement lies in understanding why a dCDN would advertise a
   limited coverage area, and how a uCDN would use such advertisements
   to decide among one of several dCDNs.  The following section will
   discuss some of the trade-offs and design decisions that need to be
   decided upon for the CDNI FCI.

2.1.  Advertising Limited Coverage

   The basic use case that would motivate a dCDN to advertise a limited
   coverage is that the CDN was built to cover only a particular portion
   of the Internet.  For example, an ISP could purpose-build a CDN to
   serve only their own customers by situating surrogates in close
   topological proximity to high concentrations of their subscribers.
   The ISP knows the prefixes it has allocated to end users and thus can
   easily construct a list of prefixes that its surrogates were
   positioned to serve.

   When such a purpose-built CDN interconnects with other CDNs and
   advertises its footprint to a uCDN, however, the original intended
   coverage of the CDN might not represent its actual value to the
   interconnection of CDNs.  Consider an ISP-A and ISP-B that both field
   their own CDNs, which they interconnect via CDNI.  A given user E,



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   who is a customer of ISP-B, might happen to be topologically closer
   to a surrogate fielded by ISP-A, if E happens to live in a region
   where ISP-B has few customers and ISP-A has many.  In this case, is
   it ISP-A's CDN that "covers" E?  If ISP-B's CDN has a failure
   condition, is it up to the uCDN to understand that ISP-A's surrogates
   are potentially available as back-ups - and if so, how does ISP-A
   advertise itself as a "standby" for E?  What about the case where
   CDNs advertising to the same uCDN express overlapping coverage (for
   example, mixing global and limited CDNs)?

   The answers to these questions greatly depend on how much information
   the uCDN wants to use to make a selection of a dCDN.  If a uCDN has
   three dCDNs to choose from that "cover" the IP address of user E,
   obviously the uCDN might be interested to know how optimal the
   coverage is from each of the dCDNs - coverage need not be binary,
   either provided or not provided. dCDNs could advertise a coverage
   "score," for example, and provided that they all reported scores
   fairly on the same scale, uCDNs could use that to make their
   topological optimality decision.  Alternately, dCDNs could advertise
   the IP addresses of their surrogates rather than prefix "coverage,"
   and let the uCDN decide for itself (based on its own topological
   intelligence) which dCDN has better resources to serve a given user.

   In summary, the semantics of advertising footprint depend on whether
   such qualitative metrics for expressing footprint (such as the
   coverage 'score' mentioned above) are included as part of the CDNI
   FCI, or if the focus is just on 'binary' footprint.

2.2.  Capabilities and Dynamic Data

   In cases where the apparent footprints of dCDNs overlap, uCDNs might
   also want to rely on other factors to evaluate the respective merits
   of dCDNs.  These include facts related to the surrogates themselves,
   to the network where the surrogate is deployed, to the nature of the
   resource sought, and to the administrative policies of the respective
   networks.

   In the absence of network-layer impediments to reaching surrogates,
   the choice to limit coverage is necessarily an administrative policy.
   Much policy needs to be agreed upon before CDNs can interconnect,
   including questions of membership, compensation, volumes, and so on.
   A uCDN certainly will factor these sorts of considerations into its
   decision to select a dCDN, but there is probably little need for
   dCDNs to actually advertise them through an interface - they will be
   settled out-of-band as a precondition for interconnection.

   Other facts about the dCDN would be expressed through the interface
   to the uCDN.  Some capabilities of a dCDN are static, and some are



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   highly dynamic.  Expressing the total storage built into its
   surrogates, for example, changes relatively rarely, whereas the
   amount of storage in use at any given moment is highly volatile.
   Network bandwidth similarly could be expressed as either total
   bandwidth available to a surrogate, or based on the current state of
   the network.  A surrogate can at one moment lack a particular
   resource in storage, but have it the next.

   The semantics of the capabilities interface will depend on how much
   of the dCDN state needs to be pushed to the uCDN and qualitatively
   how often that information needs to be updated.

2.3.  Advertisement versus Queries

   In a CDNI environment, each dCDN shares some of its state with the
   uCDN.  The uCDN uses this information to build a unified picture of
   all of the dCDNs available to it.  In architectures that share
   detailed capability information, the uCDN could perform the entire
   request-routing operation down to selecting a particular surrogate in
   the dCDN.  However, when the uCDN needs to deal with many potential
   dCDNs, this approach does not scale, especially for dCDNs with
   thousands or tens of thousands of surrogates; the volume of updates
   to footprint and capability becomes onerous.

   Were the volume of FCI updates from dCDNs to exceed the volume of
   requests to the uCDN, it might make more sense for the uCDN to query
   dCDNs upon receiving requests (as is the case in the recursive
   redirection mode described in [RFC7336]), instead of receiving
   advertisements and tracking the state of dCDNs.  The advantage of
   querying dCDNs would be that much of the dynamic data that dCDNs
   cannot share with the uCDN would now be factored into the uCDN's
   decision. dCDNs need not replicate any state to the uCDN - uCDNs
   could effectively operate in a stateless mode.

   The semantics of both footprint and capability advertisement depend
   on the service model here: are there cases where a synchronous query/
   response model would work better for the uCDN decision than a state
   replication model?

2.4.  Avoiding or Handling 'cheating' dCDNs

   In a situation where more than one dCDN is willing to serve a given
   end user request, it might be attractive for a dCDN to 'cheat' in the
   sense that the dCDN provides inaccurate information to the uCDN in
   order to convince the uCDN to select it over 'competing' dCDNs.  It
   could therefore be desirable to take away the incentive for dCDNs to
   cheat (in information advertised) as much as possible.  One option is
   to make the information the dCDN advertises somehow verifiable for



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   the uCDN.  On the other hand, a cheating dCDN might be avoided or
   handled by the fact that there will be strong contractual agreements
   between a uCDN and a dCDN, so that a dCDN would risk severe penalties
   or legal consequences when caught cheating.

   Overall, the information a dCDN advertises (in the long run) needs to
   be somehow qualitatively verifiable by the uCDN, though possibly
   through non-real-time out-of-band audits.  It is probably an overly
   strict requirement to mandate that such verification be possible
   "immediately", i.e., during the request routing process itself.  If
   the uCDN can detect a cheating dCDN at a later stage, it might
   suffice for the uCDN to "de-incentivize" cheating because it would
   negatively affect the long-term business relationship with a
   particular dCDN.

3.  Focusing on Capabilities with Footprint Restrictions

   Given the design considerations listed in the previous section, it
   seems reasonable to assume that in most cases it is the uCDN that
   makes the decision on selecting a certain dCDN for request routing
   based on information the uCDN has received from this particular dCDN.
   It can be assumed that 'cheating' CDNs will be dealt with via means
   outside the scope of CDNI and that the information advertised between
   CDNs is accurate.  In addition, excluding the use of qualitative
   information (e.g., surrogate proximity, delivery latency, surrogate
   load) to predict the quality of delivery would further simplify the
   use case allowing it to better focus on the basic functionality of
   the FCI.

   Further understanding that in most cases contractual agreements will
   define the basic coverage used in delegation decisions, the primary
   focus of FCI is on providing updates to the basic capabilities and
   coverage by the dCDNs.  As such, FCI has choosen the semantics of
   "capabilities with footprint restrictions".

4.  Footprint and Capabilities Extension

   Other optional "coverage/reachability" types of footprint or
   "resource" types of footprint may be defined by future
   specifications.  To facilitate this, a clear process for specifying
   optional footprint types in an IANA registry is specified in the CDNI
   Metadata Footprint Types registry (defined in the CDNI Metadata
   Interface document [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]).

   This document also registers CDNI Payload Types [RFC7736] for the
   initial capability types (see Section 6):

   o  Delivery Protocol (for delivering content to the end user)



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   o  Acquisition Protocol (for acquiring content from the uCDN or
      origin server)

   o  Redirection Mode (e.g., DNS Redirection vs. HTTP Redirection as
      discussed in [RFC7336])

   o  CDNI Logging (i.e., supported logging fields)

   o  CDNI Metadata (i.e., supported Generic Metadata types)

   Each payload type is prefaced with "FCI.".  Updates to capability
   objects MUST indicate the version of the capability object in a newly
   registered payload type, e.g., by appending ".v2".  Each capability
   type MAY have a list of valid values.  Future specifications which
   define a given capability MUST define any necessary registries (and
   the rules for adding new entries to the registry) for the values
   advertised for a given capability type.

   The "CDNI Logging record-types" registry [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging]
   defines all known record types, including mandatory-to-implement
   record-types Advertising support for mandatory-to-implement record-
   types would be redundant.  CDNs SHOULD NOT advertise support for
   mandatory-to-implement record-types.

   The "CDNI Logging Fields Names" registry [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging]
   defines all known logging fields.  Logging fields may be reused by
   different record-types and be mandatory-to-implement in some record-
   types, but optional in other record-types.  CDNs MUST advertise
   support for optional logging fields within the context of a specific
   record-type.  CDNs SHOULD NOT advertise support for mandatory-to-
   implement logging fields, for a given record-type.  The following
   logging fields are defined as optional for the "cdni_http_request_v1"
   record-type in the CDNI Logging Interface document
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging]:

   o  s-ccid

   o  s-sid

   The CDNI Metadata Interface document [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]
   requires that CDNs be able to parse all the defined metadata objects,
   but does not require dCDNs to support enforcement of non-structural
   GenericMetadata objects.  Advertising support for mandatory-to-
   enforce GenericMetadata types MUST be supported.  Advertising support
   for non-mandatory-to-enforce GenericMetadata types SHOULD be
   supported.  Advertisement of non-mandatory-to-enforce GenericMetadata
   MAY be necessary, e.g., to signal temporary outages and subsequent




Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   recovery.  It is expected that structural metadata will be supported
   at all times.

   The notion of optional types of footprint and capabilities implies
   that certain implementations might not support all kinds of footprint
   and capabilities.  Therefore, any FCI solution protocol MUST define
   how the support for optional types of footprint/capabilities will be
   negotiated between a uCDN and a dCDN that use the particular FCI
   protocol.  In particular, any FCI solution protocol MUST specify how
   to handle failure cases or non-supported types of footprint/
   capabilities.

   In general, a uCDN MAY ignore capabilities or types of footprints it
   does not understand; in this case it only selects a suitable dCDN
   based on the types of capabilities and footprint it understands.
   Similarly, if a dCDN does not use an optional capability or footprint
   which is, however, supported by a uCDN, this causes no problem for
   the FCI functionality because the uCDN decides on the remaining
   capabilities/footprint information that is being conveyed by the
   dCDN.

5.  Capability Advertisement Object

   To support extensibility, the FCI defines a generic base object
   (similar to the CDNI Metadata interface GenericMetadata object)
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata] to facilitate a uniform set of mandatory
   parsing requirements for all future FCI objects.

   Future object definitions (e.g. regarding CDNI Metadata or Logging)
   will build off the base object defined here, but will be specified in
   separate documents.

   Note: In the following sections, the term "mandatory-to-specify" is
   used to convey which properties MUST be included when serializing a
   given capability object.  When mandatory-to-specify is defined as
   "Yes" for an individual property, it means that if the object
   containing that property is included in an FCI message, then the
   mandatory-to-specify property MUST also be included.

5.1.  Base Advertisement Object

   The FCIBase object is an abstraction for managing individual CDNI
   capabilities in an opaque manner.

      Property: capability-type

         Description: CDNI Capability object type.




Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


         Type: FCI specific CDNI Payload type (from the CDNI Payload
         Types registry [RFC7736])

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

      Property: capability-value

         Description: CDNI Capability object.

         Type: Format/Type is defined by the value of capability-type
         property above.

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

      Property: footprints

         Description: CDNI Capability Footprint.

         Type: List of CDNI Footprint objects (as defined in
         [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]).

         Mandatory-to-Specify: No.

5.2.  Encoding

   CDNI FCI objects MUST be encoded using JSON [RFC7159] and MUST also
   follow the recommendations of I-JSON [RFC7493].  FCI objects are
   composed of a dictionary of (key,value) pairs where the keys are the
   property names and the values are the associated property values.

   The keys of the dictionary are the names of the properties associated
   with the object and are therefore dependent on the specific object
   being encoded (i.e., dependent on the CDNI Payload Type of the
   capability or the CDNI Metadata Footprint Type of the footprint).
   Likewise, the values associated with each property (dictionary key)
   are dependent on the specific object being encoded (i.e., dependent
   on the CDNI Payload Type of the capability or the CDNI Metadata
   Footprint Type of the footprint).

   Dictionary keys (properties) in JSON are case sensitive.  By
   convention, any dictionary key (property) defined by this document
   MUST be lowercase.

5.3.  Delivery Protocol Capability Object

   The Delivery Protocol capability object is used to indicate support
   for one or more of the protocols listed in the CDNI Metadata Protocol




Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   Types registry (defined in the CDNI Metadata Interface document
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]).

      Property: delivery-protocols

         Description: List of supported CDNI Delivery Protocols.

         Type: List of Protocol Types (from the CDNI Metadata Protocol
         Types registry [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata])

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

5.3.1.  Delivery Protocol Capability Object Serialization

   The following shows an example of Delivery Protocol Capability Object
   Serialization, for a CDN that supports only HTTP/1.1 without TLS for
   content delivery.

   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.DeliveryProtocol",
         "capability-value": {
           "delivery-protocols": [
             "http/1.1",
           ]
         },
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

5.4.  Acquisition Protocol Capability Object

   The Acquisition Protocol capability object is used to indicate
   support for one or more of the protocols listed in the CDNI Metadata
   Protocol Types registry (defined in the CDNI Metadata Interface
   document [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]).

      Property: acquisition-protocols

         Description: List of supported CDNI Acquisition Protocols.

         Type: List of Protocol Types (from the CDNI Metadata Protocol
         Types registry [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata])




Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

5.4.1.  Acquisition Protocol Capability Object Serialization

   The following shows an example of Acquisition Protocol Capability
   Object Serialization, for a CDN that supports HTTP/1.1 with or
   without TLS for content acquisition.

   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.AcquisitionProtocol",
         "capability-value": {
           "acquisition-protocols": [
             "http/1.1",
             "https/1.1"
           ]
         },
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

5.5.  Redirection Mode Capability Object

   The Redirection Mode capability object is used to indicate support
   for one or more of the modes listed in the CDNI Capabilities
   Redirection Modes registry (see Section 6.2).

      Property: redirection-modes

         Description: List of supported CDNI Redirection Modes.

         Type: List of Redirection Modes (from Section 6.2)

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

5.5.1.  Redirection Mode Capability Object Serialization

   The following shows an example of Redirection Mode Capability Object
   Serialization, for a CDN that supports only iterative (but not
   recursive) redirection with HTTP and DNS.







Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.RedirectionMode",
         "capability-value": {
           "redirection-modes": [
             "DNS-I",
             "HTTP-I"
           ]
         }
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

5.6.  CDNI Logging Capability Object

   The CDNI Logging capability object is used to indicate support for
   CDNI Logging record-types, as well as CDNI Logging fields which are
   marked as optional for the specified record-types
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging].

      Property: record-type

         Description: Supported CDNI Logging record-type.

         Type: String corresponding to an entry from the CDNI Logging
         record-types registry [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging])

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

      Property: fields

         Description: List of supported CDNI Logging fields that are
         optional for the specified record-type.

         Type: List of Strings corresponding to entries from the CDNI
         Logging Field Names registry [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging].

         Mandatory-to-Specify: No.  Default is that all optional fields
         are supported.  Omission of this field MUST be interpreted as
         "all optional fields are supported".  An empty list MUST be
         interpreted as "no optional fields are supported.  Otherwise,
         if a list of fields is provided, the fields in that list MUST
         be interpreted as "the only optional fields that are
         supported".



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


5.6.1.  CDNI Logging Capability Object Serialization

   The following shows an example of CDNI Logging Capability Object
   Serialization, for a CDN that supports the optional Content
   Collection ID logging field (but not the optional Session ID logging
   field) for the "cdni_http_request_v1" record type.

   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.Logging",
         "capability-value": {
           "record-type": "cdni_http_request_v1",
           "fields": [ "s-ccid" ]
         },
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

   The next example shows the CDNI Logging Capability Object
   Serialization, for a CDN that supports all optional fields for the
   "cdni_http_request_v1" record type.

   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.Logging",
         "capability-value": {
           "record-type": "cdni_http_request_v1"
         },
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

5.7.  CDNI Metadata Capability Object

   The CDNI Metadata capability object is used to indicate support for
   CDNI GenericMetadata types [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata].

      Property: metadata

         Description: List of supported CDNI GenericMetadata types.



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


         Type: List of Strings corresponding to entries from the CDNI
         Payload Type registry [RFC7736]) that correspond to CDNI
         GenericMetadata objects.

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.  An empty list MUST be interpreted
         as "no GenericMetadata types are supported", i.e., "only
         structural metadata and simple types are supported"; otherwise,
         the list must be interpreted as containing "the only
         GenericMetadata types that are supported" (in addition to
         structural metadata and simple types) [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata].

5.7.1.  CDNI Metadata Capability Object Serialization

   The following shows an example of CDNI Metadata Capability Object
   Serialization, for a CDN that supports only the SourceMetadata
   GenericMetadata type (i.e., it can acquire and deliver content, but
   cannot enforce and security policies, e.g., time, location, or
   protocol ACLs).

   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.Metadata",
         "capability-value": {
           "metadata": ["MI.SourceMetadata"]
         },
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

   The next example shows the CDNI Metadata Capability Object
   Serialization, for a CDN that supports only structural metadata
   (i.e., it can parse metadata as a transit CDN, but cannot enforce
   security policies or deliver content).














Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   {
     "capabilities": [
       {
         "capability-type": "FCI.Metadata",
         "capability-value": {
           "metadata": []
         },
         "footprints": [
           <Footprint objects>
         ]
       }
     ]
   }

6.  IANA Considerations

6.1.  CDNI Payload Types

   This document requests the registration of the following CDNI Payload
   Types under the IANA CDNI Payload Type registry:

                +-------------------------+---------------+
                | Payload Type            | Specification |
                +-------------------------+---------------+
                | FCI.DeliveryProtocol    | RFCthis       |
                |                         |               |
                | FCI.AcquisitionProtocol | RFCthis       |
                |                         |               |
                | FCI.RedirectionMode     | RFCthis       |
                |                         |               |
                | FCI.Logging             | RFCthis       |
                |                         |               |
                | FCI.Metadata            | RFCthis       |
                +-------------------------+---------------+

   [RFC Editor: Please replace RFCthis with the published RFC number for
   this document.]

6.1.1.  CDNI FCI DeliveryProtocol Payload Type

   Purpose: The purpose of this payload type is to distinguish FCI
   advertisement objects for supported delivery protocols

   Interface: FCI

   Encoding: see Section 5.3





Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


6.1.2.  CDNI FCI AcquisitionProtocol Payload Type

   Purpose: The purpose of this payload type is to distinguish FCI
   advertisement objects for supported acquisition protocols

   Interface: FCI

   Encoding: see Section 5.4

6.1.3.  CDNI FCI RedirectionMode Payload Type

   Purpose: The purpose of this payload type is to distinguish FCI
   advertisement objects for supported redirection modes

   Interface: FCI

   Encoding: see Section 5.5

6.1.4.  CDNI FCI Logging Payload Type

   Purpose: The purpose of this payload type is to distinguish FCI
   advertisement objects for supported CDNI Logging record-types and
   optional CDNI Logging Field Names.

   Interface: FCI

   Encoding: see Section 5.6

6.1.5.  CDNI FCI Metadata Payload Type

   Purpose: The purpose of this payload type is to distinguish FCI
   advertisement objects for supported CDNI GenericMetadata types.

   Interface: FCI

   Encoding: see Section 5.7

6.2.  Redirection Mode Registry

   The IANA is requested to create a new "CDNI Capabilities Redirection
   Modes" registry in the "Content Delivery Networks Interconnection
   (CDNI) Parameters" category.  The "CDNI Capabilities Redirection
   Modes" namespace defines the valid redirection modes that can be
   advertised as supported by a CDN.  Additions to the Redirection Mode
   namespace conform to the "IETF Review" policy as defined in
   [RFC5226].

   The following table defines the initial Redirection Modes:



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


     +------------------+----------------------------------+---------+
     | Redirection Mode | Description                      | RFC     |
     +------------------+----------------------------------+---------+
     | DNS-I            | Iterative DNS-based Redirection  | RFCthis |
     |                  |                                  |         |
     | DNS-R            | Recursive DNS-based Redirection  | RFCthis |
     |                  |                                  |         |
     | HTTP-I           | Iterative HTTP-based Redirection | RFCthis |
     |                  |                                  |         |
     | HTTP-R           | Recursive HTTP-based Redirection | RFCthis |
     +------------------+----------------------------------+---------+

   [RFC Editor: Please replace RFCthis with the published RFC number for
   this document.]

7.  Security Considerations

   This specification describes the semantics for capabilities and
   footprint advertisement objects across interconnected CDNs.  It does
   not, however, specify a concrete protocol for transporting those
   objects.  Specific security mechanisms can only be selected for
   concrete protocols that instantiate these semantics.  This document
   does, however, place some high-level security constraints on such
   protocols.

   All protocols that implement these semantics are REQUIRED to provide
   integrity and authentication services.  Without authentication and
   integrity, an attacker could trivially deny service by forging a
   footprint advertisement from a dCDN which claims the network has no
   footprint or capability.  This would prevent the uCDN from delegating
   any requests to the dCDN.  Since a pre-existing relationship between
   all dCDNs and uCDNs is assumed by CDNI, the exchange of any necessary
   credentials could be conducted before the FCI interface is brought
   online.  The authorization decision to accept advertisements would
   also follow this pre-existing relationship and any contractual
   obligations that it stipulates.

   All protocols that implement these semantics are REQUIRED to provide
   confidentiality services.  Some dCDNs are willing to share
   information about their footprint or capabilities with a uCDN but not
   with other, competing dCDNs.  For example, if a dCDN incurs an outage
   that reduces footprint coverage temporarily, that could be
   information the dCDN would want to share confidentially with the
   uCDN.

   As specified in this document, the security requirements of the FCI
   could be met by transport-layer security mechanisms coupled with
   domain certificates as credentials (e.g., TLS transport for HTTP as



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   per [RFC2818] and [RFC7230], with usage guidance from [RFC7525])
   between CDNs.  There is no apparent need for further object-level
   security in this framework, as the trust relationships it defines are
   bilateral relationships between uCDNs and dCDNs rather than
   transitive relationships.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-logging]
              Faucheur, F., Bertrand, G., Oprescu, I., and R.
              Peterkofsky, "CDNI Logging Interface", draft-ietf-cdni-
              logging-25 (work in progress), April 2016.

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]
              Niven-Jenkins, B., Murray, R., Caulfield, M., and K. Ma,
              "CDN Interconnection Metadata", draft-ietf-cdni-
              metadata-16 (work in progress), April 2016.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5226, May 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5226>.

   [RFC7159]  Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", RFC 7159, DOI 10.17487/RFC7159, March
              2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7159>.

   [RFC7336]  Peterson, L., Davie, B., and R. van Brandenburg, Ed.,
              "Framework for Content Distribution Network
              Interconnection (CDNI)", RFC 7336, DOI 10.17487/RFC7336,
              August 2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7336>.

   [RFC7493]  Bray, T., Ed., "The I-JSON Message Format", RFC 7493,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7493, March 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7493>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2818, May 2000,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2818>.



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   [RFC6707]  Niven-Jenkins, B., Le Faucheur, F., and N. Bitar, "Content
              Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI) Problem
              Statement", RFC 6707, DOI 10.17487/RFC6707, September
              2012, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6707>.

   [RFC6770]  Bertrand, G., Ed., Stephan, E., Burbridge, T., Eardley,
              P., Ma, K., and G. Watson, "Use Cases for Content Delivery
              Network Interconnection", RFC 6770, DOI 10.17487/RFC6770,
              November 2012, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6770>.

   [RFC7230]  Fielding, R., Ed. and J. Reschke, Ed., "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing",
              RFC 7230, DOI 10.17487/RFC7230, June 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7230>.

   [RFC7337]  Leung, K., Ed. and Y. Lee, Ed., "Content Distribution
              Network Interconnection (CDNI) Requirements", RFC 7337,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7337, August 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7337>.

   [RFC7525]  Sheffer, Y., Holz, R., and P. Saint-Andre,
              "Recommendations for Secure Use of Transport Layer
              Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
              (DTLS)", BCP 195, RFC 7525, DOI 10.17487/RFC7525, May
              2015, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7525>.

   [RFC7736]  Ma, K., "Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI)
              Media Type Registration", RFC 7736, DOI 10.17487/RFC7736,
              December 2015, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7736>.

Appendix A.  Main Use Case to Consider

   Focusing on a main use case that contains a simple (yet somewhat
   challenging), realistic, and generally imaginable scenario can help
   in narrowing down the requirements for the CDNI FCI.  To this end,
   the following (simplified) use case can help in clarifying the
   semantics of footprint and capabilities for CDNI.  In particular, the
   intention of the use case is to clarify what information needs to be
   exchanged on the CDNI FCI, what types of information need to be
   supported in a mandatory fashion (and which can be considered
   optional), and what types of information need to be updated with
   respect to a priori established CDNI contracts.

   Use case: A given uCDN has several dCDNs.  It selects one dCDN for
   delivery protocol A and footprint 1 and another dCDN for delivery
   protocol B and footprint 1.  The dCDN that serves delivery protocol B
   has a further, transitive (level-2) dCDN, that serves delivery
   protocol B in a subset of footprint 1 where the first-level dCDN



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   cannot serve delivery protocol B itself.  What happens if
   capabilities change in the transitive level-2 dCDN that might affect
   how the uCDN selects a level-1 dCDN (e.g., in case the level-2 dCDN
   cannot serve delivery protocol B anymore)?  How will these changes be
   conveyed to the uCDN?  In particular, what information does the uCDN
   need to be able to select a new first-level dCDN, either for all of
   footprint 1 or only for the subset of footprint 1 that the transitive
   level-2 dCDN served on behalf of the first-level dCDN?

Appendix B.  Semantics for Footprint Advertisement

   Roughly speaking, "footprint" can be defined as "ability and
   willingness to serve" by a dCDN.  However, in addition to simple
   "ability and willingness to serve", the uCDN could want additional
   information to make a dCDN selection decision, e.g., "how well" a
   given dCDN can actually serve a given end user request.  The "ability
   and willingness" to serve SHOULD be distinguished from the subjective
   qualitative measurement of "how well" it was served.  One can imagine
   that such additional information is implicitly associated with a
   given footprint, due to contractual agreements, SLAs, business
   relationships, or past perceptions of dCDN quality.  As an
   alternative, such additional information could also be explicitly
   tagged along with the footprint.

   It is reasonable to assume that a significant part of the actual
   footprint advertisement will happen in contractual agreements between
   participating CDNs, prior to the advertisement phase using the CDNI
   FCI.  The reason for this assumption is that any contractual
   agreement is likely to contain specifics about the dCDN coverage
   (footprint) to which the contractual agreement applies.  In
   particular, additional information to judge the delivery quality
   associated with a given dCDN footprint might be defined in
   contractual agreements, outside of the CDNI FCI.  Further, one can
   assume that dCDN contractual agreements about the delivery quality
   associated with a given footprint will probably be based on high-
   level aggregated statistics and not too detailed.

   Given that a large part of footprint advertisement will actually
   happen in contractual agreements, the semantics of CDNI footprint
   advertisement refer to answering the following question: what exactly
   still needs to be advertised by the CDNI FCI?  For instance, updates
   about temporal failures of part of a footprint can be useful
   information to convey via the CDNI request routing interface.  Such
   information would provide updates on information previously agreed in
   contracts between the participating CDNs.  In other words, the CDNI
   FCI is a means for a dCDN to provide changes/updates regarding a
   footprint it has prior agreed to serve in a contract with a uCDN.




Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   Generally speaking, one can imagine two categories of footprint to be
   advertised by a dCDN:

   o  Footprint could be defined based on "coverage/reachability", where
      coverage/reachability refers to a set of prefixes, a geographic
      region, or similar boundary.  The dCDN claims that it can cover/
      reach 'end user requests coming from this footprint'.

   o  Footprint could be defined based on "resources", where resources
      refers to surrogates a dCDN claims to have (e.g., the location of
      surrogates/resources).  The dCDN claims that 'from this footprint'
      it can serve incoming end user requests.

   For each of these footprint types, there are capabilities associated
   with a given footprint:

   o  capabilities such as delivery protocol, redirection mode, and
      metadata, which are supported in the coverage area for a
      "coverage/reachability" defined footprint, or

   o  capabilities of resources, such as delivery protocol, redirection
      mode, and metadata, which apply to a "resource" defined footprint.

   "Resource" types of footprints are more specific than "coverage/
   reachability" types of footprints, where the actual coverage/
   reachability are extrapolated from the resource location (e.g.,
   netmask applied to resource IP address to derive IP-prefix).  The
   specific methods for extrapolating coverage/reachability from
   resource location are beyond the scope of this document.  In the
   degenerate case, the resource address could be specified as a
   coverage/reachability type of footprint, in which case no
   extrapolation is necessary.  Resource types of footprints could
   expose the internal structure of a CDN network which could be
   undesirable.  As such, the resource types of footprints are not
   considered mandatory to support for CDNI.

   Footprints can be viewed as constraints for delegating requests to a
   dCDN: A dCDN footprint advertisement tells the uCDN the limitations
   for delegating a request to the dCDN.  For IP prefixes or ASN(s), the
   footprint signals to the uCDN that it should consider the dCDN a
   candidate only if the IP address of the request routing source falls
   within the prefix set (or ASN, respectively).  The CDNI
   specifications do not define how a given uCDN determines what address
   ranges are in a particular ASN.  Similarly, for country codes a uCDN
   should only consider the dCDN a candidate if it covers the country of
   the request routing source.  The CDNI specifications do not define
   how a given uCDN determines the country of the request routing
   source.  Multiple footprint constraints are additive: the



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   advertisement of different types of footprint narrows the dCDN
   candidacy cumulatively.

   Independent of the exact type of a footprint, a footprint might also
   include the connectivity of a given dCDN to other CDNs that are able
   to serve content to users on behalf of that dCDN, to cover cases with
   cascaded CDNs.  Further, the dCDN needs to be able to express its
   footprint to an interested uCDN in a comprehensive form, e.g., as a
   data set containing the complete footprint.  Making incremental
   updates, however, to express dynamic changes in state is also
   desirable.

Appendix C.  Semantics for Capabilities Advertisement

   In general, the dCDN needs to be able to express its general
   capabilities to the uCDN.  These general capabilities could express
   if the dCDN supports a given service, for instance, HTTP vs HTTPS
   delivery.  Furthermore, the dCDN needs to be able to express
   particular capabilities for the delivery in a particular footprint
   area.  For example, the dCDN might in general offer HTTPS but not in
   some specific areas, either for maintenance reasons or because the
   surrogates covering this particular area cannot deliver this type of
   service.  Hence, in certain cases footprint and capabilities are tied
   together and cannot be interpreted independently from each other.  In
   such cases, i.e., where capabilities need to be expressed on a per
   footprint basis, it could be beneficial to combine footprint and
   capabilities advertisement.

   A high-level and very rough semantic for capabilities is thus the
   following: Capabilities are types of information that allow a uCDN to
   determine if a dCDN is able (and willing) to accept (and properly
   handle) a delegated content request.  In addition, Capabilities are
   characterized by the fact that this information can change over time
   based on the state of the network or surrogates.

   At a first glance, several broad categories of capabilities seem
   useful to convey via an advertisement interface, however, advertising
   capabilities that change highly dynamically (e.g., real-time delivery
   performance metrics, CDN resource load, or other highly dynamically
   changing QoS information) is beyond the scope for CDNI FCI.  First,
   out of the multitude of possible metrics and capabilities, it is hard
   to agree on a subset and the precise metrics to be used.  Second, it
   seems infeasible to specify such highly dynamically changing
   capabilities and the corresponding metrics within a reasonable time-
   frame.

   Useful capabilities refer to information that does not change highly
   dynamically and which in many cases is absolutely necessary to decide



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   on a particular dCDN for a given end user request.  For instance, if
   an end user request concerns the delivery of a video file with a
   certain protocol, the uCDN needs to know if a given dCDN has the
   capability of supporting this delivery protocol.

   Similar to footprint advertisement, it is reasonable to assume that a
   significant part of the actual (resource) capabilities advertisement
   will happen in contractual agreements between participating CDNs,
   i.e., prior to the advertisement phase using the CDNI FCI.  The role
   of capability advertisement is hence rather to enable the dCDN to
   update a uCDN on changes since a contract has been set up (e.g., in
   case a new delivery protocol is suddenly being added to the list of
   supported delivery protocols of a given dCDN, or in case a certain
   delivery protocol is suddenly not being supported anymore due to
   failures).  Capabilities advertisement thus refers to conveying
   information to a uCDN about changes/updates of certain capabilities
   with respect to a given contract.

   Given these semantics, it needs to be decided what exact capabilities
   are useful and how these can be expressed.  Since the details of CDNI
   contracts are not known at the time of this writing (and the CDNI
   interface are better off being agnostic to these contracts anyway),
   it remains to be seen what capabilities will be used to define
   agreements between CDNs in practice.  One implication for
   standardization could be to initially only specify a very limited set
   of mandatory capabilities for advertisement and have on top of that a
   flexible data model that allows exchanging additional capabilities
   when needed.  Still, agreement needs to be found on which
   capabilities (if any) will be mandatory among CDNs.

   It is not feasible to enumerate all the possible options for the
   mandatory capabilities listed above (e.g., all the potential delivery
   protocols or metadata options) or anticipate all the future needs for
   additional capabilities.  It would be unreasonable to burden the CDNI
   FCI specification with defining each supported capability.  Instead,
   the CDNI FCI specification should define a generic protocol for
   conveying any capability information (e.g. with common encoding,
   error handling, and security mechanism; further requirements for the
   CDNI FCI Advertisement Interface are listed in [RFC7337]).

Appendix D.  Acknowledgment

   Jan Seedorf is partially supported by the GreenICN project (GreenICN:
   Architecture and Applications of Green Information Centric
   Networking), a research project supported jointly by the European
   Commission under its 7th Framework Program (contract no. 608518) and
   the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
   (NICT) in Japan (contract no. 167).  The views and conclusions



Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
   interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or
   endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the GreenICN project,
   the European Commission, or NICT.

   Martin Stiemerling provided initial input to this document and
   valuable comments to the ongoing discussions among the authors of
   this document.  Thanks to Francois Le Faucheur and Scott Wainner for
   providing valuable comments and suggestions to the text.

Authors' Addresses

   Jan Seedorf
   NEC
   Kurfuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342 221
   Fax:   +49 6221 4342 155
   Email: seedorf@neclab.eu


   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar
   1800 Sutter St Suite 570
   Concord  CA 94520
   USA

   Email: jon.peterson@neustar.biz


   Stefano Previdi
   Cisco Systems
   Via Del Serafico 200
   Rome  0144
   Italy

   Email: sprevidi@cisco.com












Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft  CDNI RR Footprint/Capabilities Semantics        May 2016


   Ray van Brandenburg
   TNO
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft  2612CT
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31-88-866-7000
   Email: ray.vanbrandenburg@tno.nl


   Kevin J. Ma
   Ericsson
   43 Nagog Park
   Acton, MA  01720
   USA

   Phone: +1 978-844-5100
   Email: kevin.j.ma@ericsson.com

































Seedorf, et al.         Expires November 21, 2016              [Page 27]
