


Individual Submission                                          E. Allman
Internet-Draft                                            Sendmail, Inc.
Intended status:  Standards Track                              M. Delany
Expires:  March 3, 2007                                      Yahoo! Inc.
                                                               J. Fenton
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                         August 30, 2006


                     DKIM Sender Signing Practices
                        draft-allman-dkim-ssp-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 3, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) defines a domain-level
   authentication framework for email using public-key cryptography and
   key server technology to permit verification of the source and
   contents of messages by either Mail Transport Agents (MTAs) or Mail
   User Agents (MUAs).  The primary DKIM protocol is described in



Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


   [I-D.ietf-dkim-base].

   This document describes the records that senders may use to advertise
   how they sign their outgoing mail, and how verifiers should access
   and interpret those results.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

(Unresolved Issues/To Be Done)

   Security Considerations needs further work.

   Need to check existing ABNF.

   Text structure of document needs to be examined; this is a quick
   slash-and-burn approach.































Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Language and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Terms Imported from DKIM-Base  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Valid Signature  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Originator Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Alleged Signer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.5.  Alleged Originator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.6.  Sender Signing Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.7.  Originator Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.8.  Suspicious . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.9.  Third-Party Signature  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.10. Verifier Acceptable Third-Party Signature  . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Operation Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Detailed Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  DNS Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Record Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  Sender Signing Practices Check Procedure . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Third-Party Signatures and Mailing Lists . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Mailing List Manager Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.2.  Signer Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.1.  Fraudulent Sender Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.2.  DNS Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.1.  Changes since -01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.2.  Changes since -00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18

















Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


1.  Introduction

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) defines a mechanism by which email
   messages can be cryptographically signed, permitting a signing domain
   to claim responsibility for the introduction of a message into the
   mail stream.  Message recipients can verify the signature by querying
   the signer's domain directly to retrieve the appropriate public key,
   and thereby confirm that the message was attested to by a party in
   possession of the private key for the signing domain.

   However, the legacy of the Internet is such that not all messages
   will be signed, and the absence of a signature on a message is not an
   a priori indication of forgery.  In fact, during early phases of
   deployment it must be expected that most messages will remain
   unsigned.  However, some domains may choose to sign all of their
   outgoing mail, for example, to protect their brand name.  It is
   highly desirable for such domains to be able to advertise that fact
   to verifiers, and that messages claiming to be from them that do not
   have a valid signature are likely to be forgeries.  This is the topic
   for sender signing practices.

   In the absence of a valid DKIM signature on behalf of the "From"
   address [RFC2822], the verifier of a message MUST determine whether
   messages from that sender are expected to be signed, and what
   signatures are acceptable.  In particular, whether a domain signs all
   outbound email must be communicated to the verifier.  Without such a
   mechanism, the benefit of message signing techniques such as DKIM is
   limited since unsigned messages will always need to be considered to
   be potentially legitimate.  This determination is referred to as a
   Sender Signing Practices check.

   Sender Signing Practices MAY be expressed on behalf of an entity
   which may be a domain or an individual address.  Expression of
   signing practices on behalf of individual addresses will, of course,
   entail additional transaction load.

   Conceivably, such expressions might be imagined to be extended in the
   future to include information about what hashing algorithms a domain
   uses, what kind of messages might be sent (e.g., bulk vs. personal
   vs. transactional), etc.  Such concerns are out of scope of this
   standard, because they can be expressed in the key record
   ("Selector") with which the signature is verified.  Expressions of
   signing practice which require outside auditing are out of scope for
   this specification because they fall under the purview of reputation
   and accreditation.

   This document refers extensively to [I-D.ietf-dkim-base], which
   should be read as a prerequisite to this document.



Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


2.  Language and Terminology

2.1.  Terms Imported from DKIM-Base

   Some terminology used herein is derived directly from
   [I-D.ietf-dkim-base].  Briefly,

      o A "Signer" is the agent that signs a message.  In many cases it
      will correspond closely with the original author of the message or
      an agent working on the author's behalf.

      o A "Verifier" is the agent that verifies a message by checking
      the actual signature against the message itself and the public key
      published by the alleged signer.  The Verifier also looks up the
      Sender Signing Practices published by the domain of the Originator
      Address if the message is not correctly signed by the Alleged
      Originator.

      o A "Selector" specifies which of the keys published by a signing
      domain should be queried.  It is essentially a way of subdividing
      the address space to allow a single sending domain to publish
      multiple keys.

2.2.  Valid Signature

   A "Valid Signature" is any signature on a message which correctly
   verifies using the procedure described in section 6.1 of
   [I-D.ietf-dkim-base].

2.3.  Originator Address

   The "Originator Address" is the email address in the From header
   field of a message [RFC2822], or if and only if the From header field
   contains multiple addresses, the first address in the From header
   field.

      NON-NORMATIVE RATIONALE:  The alternative option when there are
      multiple addresses in the From header field is to use the value of
      the Sender header field.  This would be closer to the semantics
      indicated in [RFC2822] than using the first address in the From
      header field.  However, the large number of deployed Mail User
      Agents that do not display the Sender header field value argues
      against that.  Multiple addresses in the From header field are
      rare in real life.







Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


2.4.  Alleged Signer

   An "Alleged Signer" is the identity of the signer claimed in the
   DKIM-Signature header field in a message received by a Verifier; it
   is "alleged" because it has not yet been verified.

2.5.  Alleged Originator

   An "Alleged Originator" is the Originator Address of a message
   received by a Verifier; it is "alleged" because it has not yet been
   verified.

2.6.  Sender Signing Practices

   "Sender Signing Practices" (or just "practices") consist of a
   machine-readable record published by the domain of the Alleged
   Originator which includes information about whether or not that
   entity signs all of their email, and whether signatures from third
   parties are sanctioned by the Alleged Originator.

2.7.  Originator Signature

   An "Originator Signature" is any Valid Signature where the signing
   address (listed in the "i=" tag if present, otherwise the null
   address, representing an unknown user, followed by "@", followed by
   the value of the "d=" tag) matches the address in the "From" header
   field.  If the signing address does not include a local-part, then
   only the domains must match; otherwise, the two addresses must be
   identical.

2.8.  Suspicious

   Messages that do not contain a valid Originator Signature and which
   are inconsistent with a Sender Signing Practices check (e.g., are
   received without a Valid Signature and the sender's signing practices
   indicate all messages from the entity are signed) are referred to as
   "Suspicious".  The handling of such messages is at the discretion of
   the Verifier or final recipient.  "Suspicious" applies only to the
   DKIM layer; a Verifier may decide the message should be accepted on
   the basis of other information beyond the scope of this document.
   Conversely, messages deemed non-Suspicious may be rejected for other
   reasons.

2.9.  Third-Party Signature

   A "Third-Party Signature" is a Valid Signature which is not an
   Originator Signature.




Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


2.10.  Verifier Acceptable Third-Party Signature

   A Verifier Acceptable Third-Party Signature is a Third-Party
   Signature that the Verifier is willing to accept as meaningful for
   the message under consideration.  The Verifier may use any criteria
   it deems appropriate for making this determination.


3.  Operation Overview

   Sender Signing Practices checks MUST be based on the Originator
   Address.  If the message contains a valid Originator Signature, no
   Sender Signing Practices check need be performed:  the Verifier
   SHOULD NOT look up the Sender Signing Practices and the message
   SHOULD be considered non-Suspicious.

   Verifiers checking messages that do not have at least one valid
   Originator Signature MUST perform a Sender Signing Practices check on
   the domain specified by the Originator Address as described in
   Section 4.3.

   The result of a Sender Signing Practices check is one of five
   possible practices:

      (1) Some messages from this entity are not signed; the message
      SHOULD be presumed to be legitimate in the absence of a valid
      signature.  This is the default.

      (2) All messages from this entity are signed; all messages from
      this entity SHOULD have a Valid Signature, either directly on
      behalf of the originator or on behalf of a third party (e.g., a
      mailing list or an outsourcing house) handling the message.

      (3) All valid messages from this entity are signed, and SHOULD
      have a Valid Signature from this entity.  Third-Party Signatures
      SHOULD not be accepted.

      (4) Signing practices for this domain are expressed at the
      individual address level.  A second Sender Signing Practices check
      MUST be performed specifying the individual address.

      (5) The domain does not exist.

   If a message is encountered by a Verifier without a valid Originator
   Signature, the results MUST be interpreted as follows:

      If the result of the check is practice (1) described above, the
      message MUST be considered non-Suspicious.



Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


      If the result of the check is practice (2), and any verifiable
      signature is present from some signer other than the Originator
      Address in the message, the message SHOULD be considered non-
      Suspicious.

      If the result of the check is practice (3) or (5), the message
      MUST be considered Suspicious.

      If the result of the check is practice (4), a second Sender
      Signing Practices check SHOULD be performed based on the entire
      Originator Address and interpreted using the above steps.  If no
      signing practices are published at the user level, the signing
      practices of the domain should be used instead and interpreted as
      described above.

   If the Sender Signing Practices record for the domain does not exist
   but the domain does exist, Verifier systems MUST assume that some
   messages from this entity are not signed and the message SHOULD NOT
   be considered to be Suspicious.


4.  Detailed Description

4.1.  DNS Representation

   Sender Signing Practices records are published using the "DKIMP" DNS
   resource record type.  The numeric record type for DKIMP is [[TBD]].

   The RDATA for DKIMP resource records is textual in format, like that
   of TXT records but with specific syntax and semantics relating to
   their role in describing sender signing practices.  The "Tag=Value
   List" syntax described in section 3.2 of [I-D.ietf-dkim-base] is
   used.  Records not in compliance with that syntax or the syntax of
   individual tags described in Section 4.2 MUST be ignored (considered
   equivalent to a NODATA result) for purposes of message disposition,
   although they MAY cause the logging of warning messages via an
   appropriate system logging mechanism.

   SSP records for a domain are published at the domain's location
   (e.g., example.com) in the DNS hierarchy.  SSP records for individual
   addresses are published at "<user>._user.<domain>" (e.g.,
   jdoe._user.example.com), with any characters not permitted in DNS
   labels removed and with the resulting label truncated, if necessary,
   at 63 characters per section 2.3.1 of [RFC1035].

      NON-NORMATIVE RATIONALE:  Use of a separate resource record allows
      the Verifier to determine whether the domain exists in addition to
      the existence of an SSP record with a single query.  Use of the



Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


      "_user" separator in the user-level query prevents the publication
      of practices for the subdomain jdoe.example.com from conflicting
      with user-level practices for <jdoe@example.com>.

      Since the Domain Name System returns a NODATA, rather than an
      NXDOMAIN (nonexistent domain) response for any record, such as a
      hostname, for which there is a record of any resource record type,
      a query for the signing practices of such a name would indicate
      that there are no signing practices for the address, which might
      be undesirable.  Conversely, the burden of publishing SSP records
      for all such names could be considerable.

   To address this problem, when a domain-level SSP query returns a
   NODATA response, the Verifier MUST repeat the query to the next
   higher level of the domain hierarchy unless the query is already at
   the top-level.  This allows hostnames and other identifiers that may
   be used in Originator Addresses to inherit the signing practices of
   their parent domain.  Bona fide subdomains SHOULD publish separate
   SSP records; otherwise, hostnames and other identifiers in subdomains
   will result in the Verifier not finding the SSP record.

4.2.  Record Syntax

   Signing practices records follow the tag-value syntax described in
   section 3.2 of [I-D.ietf-dkim-base].  Tags used in SSP records are as
   follows.  Unrecognized tags and tags with illegal values MUST be
   ignored.  In the ABNF below, the FWS token is inherited from
   [RFC2822] with the exclusion of obs-FWS.  The ALPHA and DIGIT tokens
   are imported from [RFC4234].

   p= Outbound signing practices for the entity (plain-text; OPTIONAL,
      default is "unknown").  Possible values are as follows:

      unknown  The entity may sign some or all email.

      all  All mail from the entity is signed; unsigned email MUST be
         considered Suspicious.  The entity may send messages through
         agents that may modify and re-sign messages, so email signed
         with a Verifier Acceptable Third-Party Signature SHOULD be
         considered non-Suspicious.

      strict  All mail from the entity is signed; messages lacking a
         valid Originator Signature MUST be considered Suspicious.  The
         entity does not expect to send messages through agents that may
         modify and re-sign messages.






Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


            NON-NORMATIVE RATIONALE:  Strict practices may be used by
            entities which send only transactional email to individual
            addresses and which are willing to accept the consequence of
            having some mail which is re-signed appear suspicious in
            return for additional control over their addresses.  Strict
            practices may also be used by entities which do not send
            (and therefore do not sign) any email.

      ABNF:

   ssp-p-tag     = %x70 [FWS] "=" [FWS] "unknown" / "all" / "strict"

   u= User-level signing practices for the entity (plain-text; OPTIONAL,
      default is "no").  This tag MUST NOT be present in user-level SSP
      records.  Possible values are as follows:

      yes  Repeat query at user level.  The Verifier MUST look up the
         user-level Signing Practices by querying for a DKIMP record at
         "<user>._user.<domain>" where <user> is the local-part of the
         Originator Address (i.e., the portion of the address before the
         "@" character) with any characters not permitted in DNS labels
         removed and with the resulting label truncated, if necessary,
         at 63 characters per section 2.3.1 of [RFC1035] and <domain> is
         the domain-part of the Originator Address (i.e., the portion of
         the address after the "@" character).  If no user-level SSP
         record is found (either a NODATA or NXDOMAIN response is
         received), the practices described in this record should be
         used.

      no Do not repeat the query at user level; use the practices
         described in this record.

      ABNF:

   ssp-u-tag     = %x75 [FWS] "=" [FWS] "yes" / "no"

   t= Flags, represented as a colon-separated list of names (plain-text;
      OPTIONAL, default is that no flags are set).  Flag values are:

      y  The entity is testing signing practices, and the Verifier
         SHOULD NOT consider a message suspicious based on the record.

      s  The signing practices apply only to the named domain, and not
         to subdomains.







Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


      ABNF:

   ssp-t-tag     = %x75 [FWS] "=" [FWS] ssp-t-tag-flag
                           0*( [FWS] ":" [FWS] ssp-t-tag-flag )
   ssp-t-tag-flag = "y" / "s" / hyphenated-word ; for future extension
   hyphenated-word =  ALPHA [ *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-") (ALPHA / DIGIT) ]

      Unrecognized flags MUST be ignored.

4.3.  Sender Signing Practices Check Procedure

   The Sender Signing Practices check SHOULD be performed after DKIM
   signature(s), including any where the Alleged Signer is the Alleged
   Originator, have been verified.  Verifiers MUST produce a result that
   is semantically equivalent to applying the following steps in the
   order listed.  In practice, several of these steps can be performed
   in parallel in order to improve performance.

   1.   If a valid Originator Signature exists, the message is non-
        Suspicious, and the algorithm terminates.

   2.   The Verifier MUST query DNS for a DKIMP record corresponding to
        the domain part of the Originator Address.  If the result of
        this query is a NODATA response, proceed to step 10.  If the
        result of this query is a NXDOMAIN response, the message is
        Suspicious and the algorithm terminates.  Otherwise, proceed to
        the following steps using the record retrieved by the query.

   3.   If the SSP "t" tag exists and any of the flags is "y"
        (indicating testing), the message is non-Suspicious and the
        algorithm terminates.

   4.   If the SSP "u" tag exists and the value is "yes", retain the
        value of the "p" tag; otherwise proceed to step 7.

   5.   The Verifier MUST query DNS for a user-level DKIMP record at the
        location defined in Section 4.1.  If the result of this query is
        a NODATA or NXDOMAIN response, then a user-level SSP record was
        not found; go to step 7 and proceed using the retained value of
        the "p" tag from the domain-level practices.

   6.   Proceed using the value of the "p" tag from the user-level
        query.

   7.   If the value of the SSP "p" tag is "unknown", the message is
        non-Suspicious and the algorithm terminates.





Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


   8.   If the value of the SSP "p" tag is "all", and one or more Valid
        Signatures are present on the message, the message is Not
        Suspicious and the algorithm terminates.

   9.   The message is Suspicious and the algorithm terminates.

   10.  (check for parent domain policy) If the domain of the Originator
        Address is a top-level domain (e.g., a country code), then an
        SSP record was not found and the message is Not Suspicious.

   11.  The Verifier MUST query DNS for a DKIMP record corresponding to
        the immediate parent of the Originator Address.  If the result
        of this query is a NODATA response, then an SSP record was not
        found and the message is non-Suspicious.

   12.  If the SSP "t" tag exists and any of the flags is "y"
        (indicating testing) or "s" (indicating that the record should
        not be used apply to a subdomain), the message is non-Suspicious
        and the algorithm terminates.  Otherwise proceed to step 4.


5.  Third-Party Signatures and Mailing Lists

   There are several forms of mailing lists, which interact with signing
   in different ways.

   o  "Verbatim" mailing lists send messages without modification
      whatsoever.  They are often implemented as MTA-based aliases.
      Since they do not modify the message, signatures are unaffected
      and will continue to verify.  There is no reason for the forwarder
      to re-sign the message.

   o  "Digesting" mailing lists collect together one or more postings
      and then retransmit them, often on a nightly basis, to the
      subscription list.  These are essentially entirely new messages
      which must be independently authored (that is, they will have a
      "From" header field referring to the list, not the submitters) and
      signed by the Mailing List Manager itself, if they are signed at
      all.

   o  "Resending" mailing lists receive a message, modify it (often to
      add "unsubscribe" information or advertising), and immediately
      resend that message to the subscription list.  They are
      problematic because they usually do not change the "From" header
      field of the message, but they do invalidate the signature in the
      process of modifying the message.

   The first two cases act in obvious ways and do not require further



Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


   discussion.  However, the third case is problematic.  The remainder
   of this session applies only to that case.

5.1.  Mailing List Manager Actions

   Mailing List Managers should make every effort to ensure that
   messages that they relay and which have Valid Signatures upon receipt
   also have Valid Signatures upon retransmission.  In particular,
   Mailing List Managers that modify the message in ways that break
   existing signatures SHOULD:

   o  Verify any existing DKIM Signatures.  A DKIM-aware Mailing List
      Manager MUST NOT re-sign an improperly signed message in such a
      way that would imply that the existing signature is acceptable.

   o  Apply regular anti-spam policies.  A Mailing List Manager SHOULD
      apply message content security policy just as they would messages
      destined for an individual user's mailbox.  In fact, a Mailing
      List Manager might apply a higher standard to messages destined to
      a mailing list than would normally be applied to individual
      messages.

         NON-NORMATIVE RATIONALE:  Since reputation will accrue to
         signers, Mailing List Managers should verify the source and
         content of messages before they are willing to sign lest their
         reputation be sullied by nefarious parties.

   o  Add a Sender header field using a valid address pointing back to
      the Mailing List Administrator or an appropriate agent (such as an
      "owner-" or a "-request" address).

   o  Sign the resulting message with a signature that is valid for the
      Sender header field address.  The Mailing List Manager SHOULD NOT
      sign messages for which they are unwilling to accept
      responsibility.

   Mailing List Managers MAY:

   o  Reject messages with signatures that do not verify or are
      otherwise Suspicious.

5.2.  Signer Actions

   All Signers SHOULD:

   o  Include any existing Sender header field in the signed header
      field list, if the Sender header field exists.




Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


   Signers wishing to avoid the use of Third-Party Signatures SHOULD do
   everything listed above, and also:

   o  Include the Sender header field name in the header field list
      ("h=" tag) under all circumstances, even if the Sender header
      field does not exist in the header block.  This prevents another
      entity from adding a Sender header field.

   o  Publish Sender Signing Practices that does not sanction the use of
      Third-Party Signatures


6.  IANA Considerations

   Use of the _user prefix in DKIMP DNS records will require
   registration by IANA.

   The DKIMP RR type must be registered by IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations in the Sender Signing Practices are mostly
   related to attempts on the part of malicious senders to represent
   themselves as other senders, often in an attempt to defraud either
   the recipient or the Alleged Originator.

7.1.  Fraudulent Sender Address

   [[Assuming 3rd party signature is based on Sender header field]] If
   the Sender Signing Practices sanction third-party signing, an
   attacker can create a message with a From header field of an
   arbitrary sender and a legitimately signed Sender header field

7.2.  DNS Attacks

   An attacker might attack the DNS infrastructure in an attempt to
   impersonate SSP records.  However, such an attacker is more likely to
   attack at a higher level, e.g., redirecting A or MX record lookups in
   order to capture traffic that was legitimately intended for the
   target domain.  Domains concerned about this should use DNSSEC
   [RFC4033].


8.  References






Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-dkim-base]
              Allman, E., "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", draft-ietf-dkim-base-05 (work in progress),
              August 2006.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.

   [RFC4234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

8.2.  Informational References

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.


Appendix A.  Change Log

A.1.  Changes since -01

   o  Changed term "Sender Signing Policy" to "Sender Signing
      Practices".

   o  Changed query methodology to use a separate DNS resource record
      type, DKIMP.

   o  Changed tag values from SPF-like symbols to words.

   o  User level policies now default to that of the domain if not
      specified.

   o  Removed the "Compliance" section since we're still not clear on
      what goes here.

   o  Changed the "parent domain" policy to only search up one level
      (assumes that subdomains will publish SSP records if appropriate).





Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


   o  Added detailed description of SSP check procedure.

A.2.  Changes since -00

   From a "diff" perspective, the changes are extensive.  Semantically,
   the changes are:

   o  Added section on "Third-Party Signatures and Mailing Lists"

   o  Added "Compliance" (transferred from -base document).  I'm not
      clear on what needs to be done here.

   o  Extensive restructuring.


Authors' Addresses

   Eric Allman
   Sendmail, Inc.
   6425 Christie Ave, Suite 400
   Emeryville, CA  94608
   USA

   Phone:  +1 510 594 5501
   Email:  eric+dkim@sendmail.org
   URI:


   Mark Delany
   Yahoo! Inc.
   701 First Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Phone:  +1 408 349 6831
   Email:  markd+dkim@yahoo-inc.com
   URI:














Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


   Jim Fenton
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   MS SJ-9/2
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134-1706
   USA

   Phone:  +1 408 526 5914
   Email:  fenton@cisco.com
   URI:









































Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                  DKIM SSP                     August 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Allman, et al.            Expires March 3, 2007                [Page 18]


