





INTERNET DRAFT                             C. Hsu, E.Muramoto, J. Buford
<draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt>                              Panasonic
                                                                 Y. Imai
                                                WIDE Project/Fujitsu Lab
                                                             Ali Boudani
                                                            IRISA-France
                                                               R. Boivie
                                                                     IBM
                                                             April, 2005
                                                   Expires October, 2005

     Best Current Practices of XCAST (Explicit Multi-Unicast) by 2004

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of RFC 3668.
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [rfc2119].
   Allocation policy names Specification Required, IETF Consensus
   Action, and Designated Expert are to be interpreted as described in
   RFC 2434 [rfc2434]

Copyright Notice

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  All Rights Reserved.



Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


Abstract

   XCAST (Explicit Multi-Unicast) is an protocol for small group
   multicasting.  This document summarizes current best practices by
   2004 related with XCAST.

   In 1999, several researchers individually re-invented datagram
   simulcasting protocol focused on small group communications and
   submitted 3 specifications as Internet-Drafts.  They talked and
   evaluated those protocols each other and made a unified protocol
   "XCAST".  They also organized the community for research, develop,
   experiment and standardization in IETF as well as open source
   community.  Their practices cover protocol stack implementations,
   multi party video conference system, group management systems and
   harmonization XCAST with ASM and SSM.

   As the results of these efforts were disclosed publicly, open source
   community applied these technologies in their distributions.  As a
   combined effects of these results, inter-continental XCAST backbone
   for various experiments started to operate.

   First purposes of this document is summarizing these efforts as the
   best current practices to inform broadly in IETF/IRTF community.
   Second and emphasized one is discussion about very big obstacle for
   us, IANA resource allocation, that now prevents us from expanding
   XCAST experimental networks and distributing our software much
   broader. We require IESG and protocol experts to check validity of
   our efforts and make sugestion for IANA necessary to assign
   resources.

Table of Contents

   1. Standardizing efforts

   2. Development
      2.1 Protocol Stacks
      2.2 Applications

   3. Harmonization with ASM and SSM
      3.1 XCAST+
      3.2 SEM

   4. Experimental network

   5. IANA consideration

   6. Security Considerations




Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


   7. References

   8. Authors Addresses

   9. Full Copyright Statement

   10. IPR Notices


1. Standardizing efforts

   XCAST (Explicit Multi-Unicast) is a datagram delivery protocol for
   efficient small group communications.  This protocol is based on the
   idea that a datagram transmitted with "explicit list of unicast
   addresses of receivers" and intermediate routers forward and branch
   if needed, refering unicast routing tables all routers naturally
   maintain.

   In 1999, 3 Internet-Drafts [CLM, SGM, MDO6] were individually
   submitted.  Googling the key words submitters found each other. Then,
   3 groups gathered in Washington DC on 46th IETF and they started the
   effort to realizing their idea, first unifying protocol, next
   standardize in IETF and deploy them on the Internet.

   In 2000, Ooms et al. merged their ideas and submitted it as Internet-
   Draft "XCAST basic specification" [basic-spec].  Unifying them they
   found the original idea was already published by Aguilar [Aguilar].

   They introduced this topic in MADDOGS, Routing Area Meeting and get
   suggestion to have IRTF RG or BoF.  As they considered I-D was
   technically matured by that time and IRTF chair agreed that, they
   requested for BoF and held first one in 2001.  However, they failed
   to get rough consensus of IETF in that time.  One of the reason
   seemed that they could not show there was enough working systems and
   good real demands of the users, operators and servicers.

   After first BoF, they organized community much larger to get more
   nodes, running network and demands of real users. They periodically
   reported to and discussed with IESG members, routing area directors
   (Abha, Bill and Alex) and Allison.

   For these 5 years, they have been keeping I-D updated.  Differences
   of each version were very trivial and mechanism itself was always
   stable.

2. Development

   To proof the concept, validity, interoperability and effectiveness of



Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


   this protocol, community collaborated to make variety of XCAST
   systems from protocol stacks to applications.

2.1 Protocol Stacks

2.1.1 XCAST4

   2 groups made XCAST protocol implementation for IPv4.  IBM made it on
   Linux and Alcatel made it on FreeBSD.  Two connected their nodes via
   inter-continental Internet and exchange text chat messages.  IBM
   version is publicly available.

2.1.2 XCAST6

   2 groups made XCAST protocol implementation for IPv6.  WIDE
   project/Fujitsu Laboratories made one on NetBSD and FreeBSD.
   ETRI/Soongsil University made one on Linux.  Two made
   interoperability demonstration on IETF Yokohama, that include **
   nodes in Japan and ** nodes on Korean side.  They exchanged video and
   audio using modified version of MBone tools, vic and rat.
   [XCAST6-INTEROP-TEST] ETRI/Soongsil University version is publicly
   available[SNU-XCAST6].  WIDE/Fujitsu Lab version was succeeded by
   XCAST fan club in Japan and kept updated for newest stable version of
   NetBSD and FreeBSD which are available at
   sourceforge.net[XCAST6-kit].

2.2 Applications

   2.2.1 MBone tools

   On top of XCAST6 stack, Vic and Rat are modified. We found it's quite
   simple and straight forward to adapt multicast functions to XCASTs'.
   On the sender side, instead of bind() for multicast group address,
   call XcastAddMember() for all unicast destinations. On the receiver
   side, no modification is necessary because payload of XCAST datagram
   can be aquired by ordinal recv() call. So, additional amount of codes
   is less than 200 line for vic and 150 line for rat.

2.2.2 xcgroup

   At the begining of experiments, mbone tool was with simple
   modification as above. Operators must specify long list of IPv6
   addresses as the argument for mbone tools. It is very troublesome to
   keep membership, the set of unicast addresses of XCAST node,
   consitent among the participant.

   To solve the problem very easy way, we quickly hack the CGI script
   for httpd and small client program "xcgroup". Operators invoke



Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


   xcgroup with URL of CGI for membership management and coterie name.
   Client xcgroup periodically send query for CGI script by http. Then
   CGI script keep the IPv6 source address of the http query on the list
   of coterie and reply the list back. xcgroup announce acquired list of
   unicast addresses for mbone tools via mbus.

   It is too simple to signal rapidly like telephone call so much more
   sophisticated system is desired, but good enough for current XCAST6
   experiments.

2.2.3 ping6x, traceroute6x

   Basically, XCAST travels via unicast routing situation, but using
   gradual deployment technology like semi-permeable tunneling, it's
   difficult to check reachability and find the delivery tree of XCAST
   datagram. For this purpose, ping6x and traceroute6x is developed
   modifying based on ping6 and traceroute6. Operators can transmit the
   proving packet for one of specific destination in the list of XCAST
   destination. Since XCAST datagram is treated as ordinal unicast one
   by non-XCAST aware routers, they make ICMP reflection just similar
   way as unicast ping6 and traceroute6. So ping6x and traceroute6x pick
   up and display the ICMP reflection against for branched XCAST
   datagram for designated destination.

2.2.4 Live CDs

   To use XCAST6, kernel re-compile and library installation are
   neccesary. It prevents novice users from start enjoying XCAST. To
   ease such work, collaborators from open source community make and
   distribute Live CD for XCAST6. These are based on NetBSD and FreeBSD
   (FreeSBIE), including pre-install image of XCASTable mbone tools, USB
   camera tools, sound card driviers with utilities and xcgroup. It's
   good for novice users but also for trained users because they can set
   up XCAST node firmly without mis-configuration.

3. Harminization with ASM and SSM

   As they Dirk presented in the 1st BoF in XXth IETF, there are large
   variety of application demands to deliver and share one datagram for
   the number of receivers. He explained with followings figure. For
   demands broadcast like service like live TV program distribution,
   large netowrk conferences like IETF and AccessGrid, ASM and SSM is
   best because it is scalable with the number of receivers. On the
   other hand demand for personal usage like business talks, hobby chats
   and on-line games, XCAST is good because they don't need any routing
   status on the intermediate routers and scalable with the number of
   groups.




Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


   And he also mentioned, potentially, combination usage of ASM, unicast
   and XCAST can be cover the broad demand of such applications,
   choosing method from case to case. In other words of RTM WG, "There
   is no almighty protocol for all RMT needs." Inspired by this aspect,
   researchers make efforts to harmonize ASM, SSM and XCAST.

3.1 Xcast+

   Xcast+ is an extension of Xcast for a more efficient delivery of
   multicast packets [Xcast+]. Every source or destination is associated
   to a Designated Router (DR). Instead of encoding in the Xcast packet
   header the set of group members, Xcast+ encodes the set of their DRs.
   When a new member wants to join the group G of source S, it sends an
   IGMP-join message to its DR. The DR will send a join-request message
   to the source S. The DR of the source intercepts this message and
   analyzes it in order to keep track of all concerned DR addresses.
   When the source S wants to send a message to the group G, it sends a
   multicast packet. This packet is received by its DR and converted to
   an Xcast packet using the Multicast-to-Xcast algorithm (M2X). The
   packet is then forwarded as in Xcast to the DRs, since the
   destination list in the Xcast header contains the DR addresses
   instead of the member addresses. Then, each DR converts the Xcast
   packet to a multicast packet using the Xcast-to-Multicast protocol
   (X2M) and sends it in its subnetworks.

3.2 SEM

   XCAST+ can support large number of midium size gourp. However, since
   delivery mechanism between S for DRs is simillar with XCAST, number
   of DRs is limited as small as XCAST. SEM (Simple Explicit Multicast)
   expand them introducing the help of routers at branching point of
   delivery tree. It has similar mechanism with REUNITE [REUNITE]. Both
   protocols require branching routers to keep status of (S,G) and next
   branching router ISM, SSM should go and looking up this tables, they
   duplicate and forward for next branches, finaly DRs. Difference of
   SEM and REUNITE is how to maintain the status of routers. REUNITE
   periodically send back from DRs to S and check branch status. On the
   other hand, SEM probes forward the path from S to DRs delivering by
   XCAST+ style. By this technique, tree shape is not effected even when
   unicast routing is asymmetric.

4. Experimental network operation

   Using developed systems, they started operational proof of concept of
   XCAST. WIDE XACST WG began weekly video conference using early
   version of XCAST, Multiple Destination Option of IPv6, among 7
   Japanese organizations and 1 US University since 2000 on the WIDE
   6Bone. And change the protocol onto unified IPv6 version of XCAST.



Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


   At that time, delivery path was like daisy chain using semi-permeable
   tunneling technology. To enable collaborators in open source
   community, who are connected narrower ADSL line, join to thier
   experiments, they started X6Bone project. That is a virtual network
   with v6/v4 tunnel connecting HUB branch XCAST router and SOHO router
   via ADSL. Then XCAST datagram are branched on the HUB router and
   daisy chain path is eliminated. By Feburary on 2005, it increased
   upto 9 organizations (BSD User groups, Linux User groups, XCAST
   protocol user groups and IRISA) that is delegated /40 prefix of IPv6
   address space and redistribute /48 for each members.

   Operating the network, they confirmed that only by unicast routing
   control, XCAST works well and that is quite easier than PIM
   operations.

   On this network, they had bi-monthly event "Midnight XCAST party" 14
   times. In order to academically confirm XCAST technology fulfil the
   original basic desire of communication among human being. Various
   kind of collaborators from broad area of Japan are gather to cyber
   space, some one from Japanese style bar, other one from wedding
   ceremony and many from their dining tables putting dishes and drinks.
   They are not from big laboratories neither on the Internet2 nor
   Abiline but from SOHO connected by commercial ADSL. By now, we
   observe very good phenomenon to proof the concept of XCAST, but they
   are not enough. We must continue this event to contribute for next
   development of new-age Internet with much more pints of Sake.  :-)

5. IANA consideration

   Given the growing interest in XCAST and the need to conduct more
   experimentation and testing between research groups, we would like to
   accelerate the deployment of XCAST aware nodes and routers. However,
   we use protocol option values experimentally without IANA assignment.
   Because of IPv6 mechanism for datagram with unknown option, they can
   pass through netowrks unaware of what XCAST is, in almost case. But
   we always ask related netowrk operators to forgive us transmiting the
   datagram with unknown protocol to avoid unexpected accident.

   To ease this notification and ensure to avoid confilict of values, we
   consider that it is better to acquire the IANA resources necessary
   for XCAST experiments.

   We asked IANA on 2000, but they suspended our request because they
   need a suggestion from IANA or protocol experts to allocate those.

   Now, we describe detailed information as separate Internet Draft for
   Informational RFC. It is for asking IESG or protocol experts to check
   validity of our request and make suggestion to IANA.



Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 7]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


6. Security Considerations

   This document has no known security implications.

7. References



[rfc2026]   S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
            BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


[rfc2434]   Narten, T., and Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing an
            IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434, October,
            1998.


[Aguilar]   L. Aguilar. Datagram Routing for Internet Multicasting. In
            ACM SIGCOMM '84 Communications Architectures and Protocols,
            pages 58-63. ACM, June, 1984.


[basic]     R. Boivie, et al., "Explicit Multicast (XCAST) Basic Speci-
            fication",draft-ooms-xcast-basic-spec-07.txt. January 2005
            Submitted for Informational RFC


[CLM]       D. Ooms, W. Livens, CONNECTIONLESS MULTICAST: A novel and
            scaleable method for multipoint-to-multipoint communication
            in IP networks, In "Proceedings of XVII World Telecommunica-
            tions Congress (WTC/ ISS 2000)", Birmingham, England, May,
            2000.


[SGM]       R. Boivie, et al., "Small Group Multicast: A New Solution
            for Multicasting on the Internet.", IEEE Internet Computing
            4(3): 75-79 (2000) http://csdl.com-
            puter.org/dl/mags/ic/2000/03/w3075.htm


[MDO6]      Y. Imai, et al., "MDO6: Multicast delivery system by the
            list of destinations." in Japanese, Internet Conference '99,
            http://www.internetconference.org/ic99/papers/demo05.pdf


[TEST-KRJP] "Xcast6 Interoperability Successfully Tested in Multicast
            Linking Korea and Japan", Press Release, August 2002
            http://pr.fujitsu.com/en/news/2002/08/1.html



Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 8]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


[XCAST6-kit]
            http://sourceforge.net/projects/xcast6/


[Xcast+]    M. Shin, et al., "Multicast Datagram Delivery Using Xcast in
            IPv6 Networks.", ICOIN 2003: 263-272


[REUNITE]   I. Stoica, et al., "REUNITE: A recursive Unicast Approach to
            Multicast", http://www.ieee-infocom.org/2000/papers/613.ps.

8. Authors Addresses


   Chih-Chang Hsu
   Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.
   4-5-15 Higashi-shinagawa, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 140-8632, Japan
   Phone : +81-3-5460-2734
   E-mail: hsu.mike@jp.panasonic.com

   Eiichi Muramoto
   Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.
   4-5-15 Higashi-shinagawa, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 140-8632, Japan
   Phone : +81-3-5460-2734
   E-mail: muramoto.eiichi@jp.panasonic.com

   Yuji Imai
   Fujitsu LABORATORIES Ltd.
   1-1, Kamikodanaka 4-Chome, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki 211-8588, Japan
   Phone : +81-44-754-2628
   Fax   : +81-44-754-2793
   E-mail: kimai@flab.fujitsu.co.jp

   John F. Buford
   Panasonic Digital Networking Laboratory
   Two Research Way, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
   Phone : +1-609-734-7342
   Fax   : +1-609-987-8827
   E-mail: buford@research.panasonic.com

   Ali Boudani
   IRISA/INRIA Rennes
   Campus Universitaire de Beaulieu
   Avenue du General Leclerc 35042 Rennes France
   Phone : (33) 02 99 84 25 37
   Fax : (33) 02 99 84 25 29
   E-mail : aboudani@irisa.fr




Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                  [Page 9]

Internet Draft       draft-hsu-xcast-bcp-2004-00.txt          April 2005


   Rick Boivie
   IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
   19 Skyline Drive
   Hawthorne, NY 10532
   Phone: 914-784-3251
   Email: rhboivie@us.ibm.com

7. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

8. IPR Notices

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to
   rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.







Hsu, et al.               Expires October 2005                 [Page 10]
