

     Internet Engineering Task Force                             Mike Pierce 
     Internet Draft                                                    Artel 
     draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-req-02.txt                 Don Choi 
     January 2004                                                       DISA 
     Expires July 2004 
      
      
          Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice over IP 
                  draft-pierce-ieprep-assured-service-req-02.txt 
      
      
     Status of this memo 
         
        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
        all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. 
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
        Drafts. 
         
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
        at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
        material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
         
        To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
         
         
     Copyright 
      
        Copyright (C) Internet Society 2004. All rights reserved. 
        Reproduction or translation of the complete document, but not of 
        extracts, including this notice, is freely permitted. 
         
         
     Abstract 
      
        Assured Service refers to the set of capabilities used to ensure 
        that critical communications are established and remain connected. 
        This memo describes the requirements for such capabilities in 
        support of real-time communications for voice using specific 
        networks such as those used by government agencies, but they could 
        also be applied in commercial environments. 
      
         
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 1] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

                                Table of Contents 
      
     1.  Introduction.......................................................2 
       1.1.  Changes........................................................3 
     2.  Background.........................................................4 
     3.  High Level Requirements............................................5 
     4.  Functional Requirements............................................6 
       4.1.  Precedence Level Marking.......................................6 
       4.2.  Authentication/Authorization...................................7 
       4.3.  Preferential Treatments........................................7 
         4.3.1. Call/Session Treatment.......... ...........................7 
         4.3.2. Packet Transfer Treatment........ ..........................8 
         4.3.3. Procedural Requirements........... .........................8 
       4.4.  Diversion if Not Answered......................................9 
       4.5.  Notifications..................................................9 
       4.6.  Acknowledge by Preempted Party................................10 
       4.7.  Protection of Signaling/Routing Information from Disclosure...10 
       4.8.  Accounting....................................................10 
       4.9.  Call Control Signaling Precedence.............................11 
       4.10. Interworking..................................................11 
     5.  Security Considerations...........................................11 
       5.1.  Authentication/authorization of User Access...................11 
       5.2.  Security of Signaling Information.............................12 
       5.3.  Security of Routing Data......................................12 
       5.4.  Security of User Data.........................................12 
     6.  IANA Considerations...............................................13 
     7.  References........................................................13 
     8.  Acknowledgements..................................................14 
     9.  Authors' Addresses................................................14 
         
         
      
     1.   Introduction 
         
        Throughout many decades of evolution of the telephony network and 
        its supporting protocols, there has been a need to provide 
        preferential services and functionality to a limited subset of the 
        users and calls within a network or domain in order to ensure 
        completion of important calls that transit congested 
        interconnections. Examples of this need have been in support of 
        emergency traffic for natural disasters, network restoration 
        traffic, and high priority traffic in a private networks. Provision 
        of the required capabilities in the signaling protocols and within 
        the switching systems has been defined in a number of national and 
        international standards, most notably a service referred to as 
        Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption (MLPP) as defined in an 
        American National Standard [T1.619] in the US and in corresponding 
        ITU-T Recommendations [I.255.3, Q.735.3, and Q.955.3]. In addition, 
        a service called High Probability of Completion (HPC) was defined in 
        the US [T1.631] and, most recently, two ITU-T Recommendations define 
        the requirements for the International Emergency Preference Scheme 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 2] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        (IEPS) [E.106] and the International Preference Scheme for 
        Multimedia Service in Support of Disaster Relief Operations [draft 
        F.706]. 
         
        Other drafts submitted to the IETF have addressed aspects of IEPS. 
        Among these are the Framework for ETS for Telephony over IP [ETS]. 
         
        MLPP was the solution for providing Assured Service capabilities 
        within the circuit switched environment. It is essential that 
        equivalent Assured Service capabilities are defined and implemented 
        for the packet-based, connectionless environment of IP, and 
        specifically SIP. Without these capabilities, SIP can not be used 
        for those applications which require these capabilities. 
         
        This memo builds on these references and identifies the specific 
        requirements for Assured Service capabilities for Voice applications 
        in support of these specific types of environments.  Although this 
        memo covers only Voice, there will be similar requirements for 
        "Assured Service" capabilities for all other forms of communication. 
        The term "Assured Service" is used to refer to the required 
        capabilities, rather than the previous term of "MLPP" or the related 
        but different terms of IEPS or ETS, since the envisioned set of 
        capabilities and protocols to achieve them are not expected to be 
        exactly the same as those other services. For example, IEPS/ETS may 
        not have a requirement for preemption at any point in the SIP 
        session, whereas Assured Service may at both the session endpoint 
        and in networks between endpoints. 
         
        Although these requirements are derived from previous government 
        applications, many of the same requirements and capabilities may be 
        applied for non-government networks, for example, in support of 
        commercial network restoration efforts. A presentation in the TEWG 
        during the August 2001 meeting demonstrated real-life situations 
        from the past in which total network failures required extensive 
        efforts, presumably including communication via other unaffected 
        networks, to bring the affected network back on line. If one 
        considered a situation in which the very network which had failed 
        was needed to carry the network management traffic required to get 
        it back on line, it would be hard to imagine how it could ever be 
        brought back up in the face of overwhelming customer attempts. 
        Capabilities would be required to give priority to the network 
        management traffic, even to the extent of blocking all non-emergency 
        traffic for a period of time. 
         
     1.1.   Changes 
         
        Note: This section will be deleted before progressing as an RFC. 
         
        This document has evolved through 2 different working groups: 
        SIPPING and IEPREP. This draft was originally submitted under 
        SIPPING with 2 revisions. It is now in the IEPREP WG in order to 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 3] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        ensure that the Assured Service requirements are considered along 
        with those of the related IEPS discussions 
         
        (SIPPING) -00 Original draft 
         
        (SIPPING) -01 Indicated informative material which would not be a 
        part of final. Moved some to Annex. 
          
        (SIPPING) -02 Removed material to draft-pierce-sipping-pref-treat-
        examples-00 and draft-pierce-sipping-assured-service-arch-00. 
        Added requirement to maintain records of use of service. 
         
        (IEPREP) -00 
        . Updated references. 
        . Added additional requirements related to preferential treatment in 
            4.3. 
        . Added requirement in 4.8 for accounting records. 
        . Added requirement in 4.9 that preferential treatment must be 
            applied to call control signaling as well as to voice packets. 
        . Added requirement in 4.10 for interworking between Assured Service 
            and other priority schemes (e.g., IEPS) 
         
        (IEPREP) -01 
        -   Updated references 
        -   Moved informative material to Annex 
        -   Clarified requirement statements 
         
        (IEPREP) -02 
        -   clarified some text 
        -   made individual requirements into bulleted, named items instead 
            of freeform text 
        -   moved additional informational material to a separate draft 
         
     2.   Background 
         
        In the circuit switched environment, specific circuits or channels 
        are used for each call. These are typically 64 kbps channels which 
        were normally part of a Time Division Multiplexed (TDM) transmission 
        structure. These transmission channels are almost always 
        interconnected and switched by Time Division Switching technology 
        (often referred to as "TDM switching").  
         
        More recent developments use packet/cell based transport instead of 
        dedicated 64 kbps channels, often coupled with packet/cell-based 
        switching, however, the effect is the same. There is still a 
        dedicated transport capacity assigned for each call. 
         
        Assured Service in the circuit switched environment may be provided 
        by one or more of the following techniques. 
         


      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 4] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        .   Giving priority to return of dial tone (IEPS - note) 
             
        .   Marking of signaling messages for better handling, for example, 
            being last to be dropped in case of congestion in the signaling 
            network (HPC) 
             
        .   Extra routing possibilities for higher priority calls (IEPS - 
            note) 
         
        -   Queuing for network resources (HPC) 
             
        .   Exemption from restrictive management controls such as hard-to-
            reach codes and code gapping (IEPS - note) 
             
        .   Reservation of specific facilities (trunks) for higher priority 
            traffic (IEPS - note) 
             
        .   Higher priority calls may preempt existing lower priority calls, 
            causing the network to release the lower priority call to free 
            up resources for immediate reuse by the higher priority call 
            (MLPP) 
             
        (Note: Capabilities included within IEPS [E.106] are listed here for 
        reference only but are not dealt with further in this document.) 
         
        Identification of traffic authorized to use one or more of these 
        techniques may be via the following or similar methods: 
         
        .   Calls placed from physical lines or devices authorized for 
            signaling a higher priority for a call 
             
        .   Calls placed to specific telephone numbers or blocks of numbers 
             
        .   Entry of a special ID code and PIN from any telephone device to 
            identify that this call should receive special service. 
             
        .   Use of a "smartcard" 
      
      
     3.   High Level Requirements 
         
        While the existing requirements and capabilities have been developed 
        with the circuit switched environment in mind, many are directly 
        applicable to the packet environment and specifically the Voice over 
        IP application being defined using SIP. Some of the capabilities 
        need to be adapted or modified for application in the packet mode 
        environment. In addition, there will likely be new techniques which 
        can be defined specifically for the SIP case. 
         



      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 5] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        At a high level, the Assured Service requirements can be stated as 
        the need to ensure that mission critical voice-mode calls get set up 
        and remain connected. 
         
        As a result of this, calls designated as being at a lower precedence 
        level are presumed to be less important and may be adversely 
        affected by various techniques used to provide the preferential 
        treatment to the important, mission-critical calls. For example, the 
        lower precedence calls may temporarily experience reduced quality as 
        their packets are discarded. 
         
        This memo does not address issues related to incorrect assignment of 
        the authority to use precedence levels or the incorrect use of 
        levels, for example, if the user can not or does not specify a high 
        enough precedence level for the nature of the call. 
         
        (While this memo focuses on Voice over IP, there should be a 
        consideration of the impact/solutions for other media flows which 
        carry mission critical communication, for example, file transfers, 
        video, and instant messaging. Most of the functional requirements 
        can be equally applied to these other media.) 
         
         
     4.   Functional Requirements 
         
        While the functional requirements for Assured Service detailed here 
        are specifically those needed to support the US government 
        requirements for the Defense Switched Network (DSN), it is believed 
        that at least a subset of those requirements are applicable to other 
        government networks as well as some commercial (non-government) 
        networks. This memo concentrates on those portions mentioned in 
        Section 2 which are derived from the requirements for MLPP as 
        defined in the American National Standard [T1.619]. 
         
        The basic requirements are defined as follows; 
         
     4.1.   Precedence Level Marking 
         
        Each call or session within an Assured Service network is labeled 
        with a precedence level as determined by the calling party at the 
        beginning of the call. If not chosen by the caller, the default is 
        to the lowest precedence level. The called party does not have any 
        control over the precedence level for a call or session. 
         
        To meet this general functional requirement, the following specific 
        requirements apply: 
         
        Prec-1 It MUST be possible to assign each user the highest 
               precedence level they are entitled to use. 
         
        Prec-2 It MUST be possible for the originator of a call to select 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 6] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

               and signal one of the multiple precedence levels for the 
               call, with the call defaulting to the lowest level if none is 
               specified. The precedence of each call is independent, that 
               is, it is selected for each call. 
                
               Note: One current network for which this is intended uses 
               five levels, but other numbers of levels are possible. In no 
               case is it necessary to support more than 15 levels. 
         
        Prec-3 It MUST be possible to carry this call associated precedence 
               level unchanged though the IP network as a part of the Call 
               Control Signaling (for example, in SIP). 
         
        Prec-4 It MUST be possible to deliver the originally signaled 
               precedence level to the called party. 
         
     4.2.   Authentication/Authorization 
         
        Not all users are allowed to signal higher precedence levels. 
        Therefore, a means is necessary to determine and allow only the 
        authorized users the ability to signal these higher precedence 
        levels. The following specific requirements apply: 
         
        A&A-1  It MUST be possible to verify that the calling party is 
               authorized to use the Assured Service and the requested 
               precedence level value if higher than the lowest. 
         
        A&A-2  It MUST be possible to take the appropriate action if the 
               calling party attempts to use a  level which is higher than 
               authorized. The preferred action is to reject the call, and 
               send an indication of the reason to the caller. 
         
     4.3.   Preferential Treatments 
         
        Since it is expected that congestion may occur in various parts of a 
        network, it is required that one or more preferential treatments can 
        be applied to any call or session which is signaled with a higher 
        precedence level relative to already existing calls or sessions if 
        that call would cause congestion.  This is required to manage the 
        effects of congestion, for example, delay, delay variation, and 
        loss, at key points. The actual measures applied depend on the 
        situation, but support for the following are required: 
         
       4.3.1.  Call/Session Treatment 
         
        Pref-1 It MUST be possible to block setup of a new call if that call 
               would cause congestion. This is called Call Admission Control 
               (CAC). 
         
        Pref-2 It MUST be possible to apply different limits for CAC for 
               various call precedences, that is, in some cases, a higher 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 7] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

               precedence call may be allowed to be established while a 
               lower precedence would not. 
         
        Pref-3 It MUST be possible for an endpoint to release an existing 
               (lower precedence) session in favor of completing a new 
               session signaled to it (at a higher precedence). 
         
        Pref-4 It MUST be possible for a network node to release an existing 
               network resource reservation in favor of a higher precedence 
               session. This might involve releasing one or more 
               reservations in the process of providing enough bandwidth for 
               the new packet flow. 
         
        Pref-5 Preferential treatment SHOULD NOT be provided through any 
               scheme of dedicated or pre-reserved bandwidth or resources.  
         
        Pref-6 In those cases in which such dedication or reservation of 
               bandwidth or resources is used, when such dedicated or pre-
               reserved bandwidth or resources have been consumed by the 
               high precedence traffic, further traffic of that same high 
               precedence MUST NOT be provided worse treatment than any of 
               the lower precedence levels. 
         
       4.3.2. Packet Transfer Treatment 
         
        Pref-7 It MUST be possible at any point of congestion to determine 
               which packets require preferential treatment over other 
               packets, including for voice media packets. 
         
        Pref-8 It MUST be known by the device experiencing congestion what 
               to do with two or more competing packets. 
         
        Pref-9 It MUST be possible for a network node to discard packets for 
               lower precedence calls in favor of those for higher 
               precedence calls. 
         
        Pref-10 Media packets MUST NOT starve all potential bandwidth of a 
               node interface, thus not allowing signaling packets through 
               that same interface. (Note that this requirement is not 
               unique to Assured Service.) 
         
       4.3.3. Procedural Requirements 
         
        Pref-10 It MUST be possible to detect various congestion conditions 
               which might require preferential treatments to be applied. 
         
        Pref-11 Preferential treatment measures used to manage congestion 
               MUST be automatic and MUST NOT have to be manually "turned 
               on" in reaction to a congestion event of any kind. 
         
        Pref-12 The application of preferential treatment MUST not require a 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 8] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

               significant delay to activate (such that it is noticeable to 
               the party originating a precedence call). 
          
        Possible methods of providing Preferential Treatment using the 
        provisions of this memo, as well as other existing IETF protocols, 
        are described in [Pierce1]. 
         
     4.4.   Diversion if Not Answered 
         
        In situations is which the called party is busy and can not be 
        preempted or in which the called party does not answer, it is 
        required to provide a diversion service to a predetermined address 
        for any call signaled with a precedence level above the lowest. The 
        following apply: 
         
        Div-1  If a precedence call (one higher than the lowest level) is 
               blocked by the called party being busy with a call of equal 
               or higher precedence, the call MUST be diverted to a 
               predetermined alternate party. 
         
        Div-2  If a precedence call is not answered within a designated 
               time, the call MUST be diverted to a predetermined alternate 
               party. 
         
        While the actual requirement previously was for a single "diverted-
        to" address for an entire "switch", this is not feasible in the IP 
        case, so the specification of the "diverted-to" address is assumed 
        to be per called user. In general, it is expected that this 
        diversion capability will operate similar to a normal "Call 
        Forwarding on No Answer" service.  
         
     4.5.   Notifications 
         
        It is required that a user who is currently on a call/session and is 
        preempted either at the remote end or in between be notified of this 
        event. Generally a distinct tone is provided, after which the 
        call/session is released. 
         
        Noti-1 All preempted parties MUST be provided with a distinct 
               notification informing them that their call has been 
               preempted. 
         
        Specific notifications are required to inform the calling party of 
        reasons for a precedence call not being successful. They are the 
        following: 
         
        Noti-2 When a user attempts to use a precedence level to which they 
               are not authorized, the caller MUST be notified of this fact. 
               The notification MUST NOT provide an indication of what level 
               is authorized. 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                  [Page 9] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        Noti-3 When a precedence call can not be established due to the 
               called party being busy at an equal or higher precedence with 
               no alternate party diversion possible or due to no 
               preemptable resources in the network, the caller MUST be 
               notified of this fact. The caller MUST NOT be notified what 
               precedence level would be necessary to successfully complete 
               the call. 
         
     4.6.   Acknowledge by Preempted Party 
         
        When a user is involved in a call/session and that call/session is 
        preempted in favor of establishing a higher precedence call/session 
        with that same user, the user is required to actively accept this 
        new call before the media is connected. This is no different from 
        normal calls. 
         
        Ack-1  When an existing call has been preempted for delivery of a 
               higher precedence call to the same party, the party MUST 
               acknowledge the preemption before the new call is connected. 
               That is, there MUST be a positive acknowledgement before any 
               audio information is transferred in either direction. 
      
     4.7.   Protection of Signaling/Routing Information from Disclosure 
         
        Although protection is not actually an integral part of the Assured 
        Service functionality, it is specifically identified here since this 
        capability is generally required in those networks which are assumed 
        to be the primary users of Assured Service. 
         
        Prot-1 Sensitive information MUST NOT be made available to non-
               secure portions of the network or to any non-secure network 
               through which the traffic passes. 
         
        Prot-2 Sensitive information MUST NOT be accessible by users 
               connected to the network. 
         
        Prot-3 Precedence information regarding each call (as well as the 
               other information such as calling/called party identity) 
               SHOULD be protected from disclosure. 
         
        This non-disclosure requirement especially applies to information 
        which is used to control link state routing protocols based on 
        knowledge of the current traffic load at each precedence level on 
        each route or through each router. 
      
     4.8.   Accounting 
         
        Proper administration of the Assured Service capability requires 
        that use of the service can be reviewed after the fact for potential 
        abuse. 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                 [Page 10] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        Acct-1 It MUST be possible for the appropriate records to be kept of 
               calls made, including the calling and called parties' 
               identities, time of the call, duration, and the precedence 
               level used. This is similar to the requirements for Call 
               Detail Recording (CDR) for billing purposes for other 
               services in a commercial environment. 
         
     4.9.   Call Control Signaling Precedence 
         
        Since it competes for the same transport resources as the voice 
        packets, it is essential that preferential treatments can be applied 
        to the call control signaling. Specifically the following apply: 
         
        CC-1   The call control signaling MUST NOT adversely affect the 
               voice (e.g., by introducing excessive packet delay variation 
               due to extremely long messages). 
                
        CC-2   The voice traffic MUST NOT significantly delay important call 
               control signaling (e.g., by preventing release messages from 
               getting through). 
      
     4.10.  Interworking 
         
        Although Assured Service will likely be the only priority scheme 
        within many network using it, it still needs to interwork with other 
        schemes. 
         
        Int-1  Assured Service calls MUST interwork with other priority 
               schemes which are being provided within the same network, 
               such as the one defined for [ETS]. This includes the 
               following two cases: 
                
               a. both types of traffic may exist in a single network, for 
               example, an IEPS call may be originated from within a network 
               which also supports "Assured Service" calls. Procedures to 
               determine the relative priority and the resulting 
               preferential treatment are required. 
                
               b. a network which provides "Assured Service" needs to 
               support interworking of calls to and from a network which 
               provides another scheme such as IEPS as well as another 
               network which provides "Assured Service". Mapping between the 
               precedence levels of the two networks must be supported. 
         
     5.   Security Considerations 
         
     5.1.   Authentication/authorization of User Access 
         
        There is a need within SIP  to authenticate/authorize all access to 
        capabilities, since virtually any function could be misused, 
        resulting in harm to the network or to other users. Because Assured 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                 [Page 11] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

        Service is intended to provide an authorized user with better 
        service than other users, including the potential of actually 
        preempting resources, it is even more important to 
        authenticate/authorize the user's access to the Assured Service 
        capabilities. However, the requirement already exists for all cases, 
        not just Assured Service, therefore the solution is not unique to 
        Assured Service. 
         
     5.2.   Security of Signaling Information 
         
        The need to protect signaling information from disclosure is 
        independent from the provision of Assured Service. Many networks 
        have long been built on the premise that such information needs to 
        be protected. Bulk encryption of signaling links (as well as the 
        user data channels) between secure switches provided much of this 
        protection. In addition, the Signal Transfer Points of the SS#7 
        network could be physically secured against unauthorized access. It 
        should be noted that commercial networks have recognized the need 
        for the same level of protection previously only applied to various 
        government networks. 
         
        In the IP environment, the signaling packets traverse many routers 
        and could be accessed by unauthorized persons at any one of them. 
        While the contents of the individual signaling messages could be 
        hidden by encryption of the request and response for end-to-end 
        protection of information, the IP header must be visible to 
        intermediate routers. It is preferable to not require decryption/ 
        encryption at each router. The approach has been to encrypt the 
        contents of the IP packets (the signaling message) but not the IP 
        headers which are needed by the routers. However, the IP headers 
        themselves may contain sensitive information such as precedence 
        level and ways to identify the called party, or least the location 
        of the called party. 
         
     5.3.   Security of Routing Data 
         
        In IP today, there is no Routing Data to secure. When enhancements 
        are made to provide for route selection, especially to route around 
        congestion, procedures must be developed to prevent unauthorized 
        access to that data. It is presumed that procedures will also be 
        required to prevent unauthorized modifications. 
         
     5.4.   Security of User Data 
         
        While there may typically be a greater need to protect the user data 
        (voice packets) of a call which utilizes priority, since such a call 
        may often be more sensitive than calls for which no priority is 
        specified, this requirement is not unique to the Assured Service, 
        and therefore no specific requirements are given here. The same 
        requirements exist for non-Assured Service traffic. 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                 [Page 12] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

         
     6.   IANA Considerations 
         
        There is no IANA involvement in support of Assured Service beyond 
        what is described for the Resource Priority Header [Resource].  
         
         
     7.   References 
         
        [T1.523] ANSI T1.523-2001, "Telecommunications Glossary". 
         
        [T1.619] ANSI T1.619-1992 (R1999) and ANSI T1.619a-1994 (R1999), 
        "Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption (MLPP) Service, ISDN 
        Supplementary Service Description". 
         
        [T1.631] ANSI T1.631-1993 (R1999), "Telecommunications - Signalling 
        System No. 7 (SS7) - High Probability of Completion (HPC) Network 
        Capability". 
         
        [E.106] ITU-T Recommendation E.106 (2003), "International Emergency 
        Preference Scheme for Telecommunications for Disaster Relief 
        Operations(IEPS)". 
         
        [F.706] ITU-T Recommendation F.706 (draft), "International 
        Preference Scheme for Multimedia Service in Support of Disaster 
        Relief Operations and Mitigation". 
         
        [I.255.3] ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3 (1990), "Multilevel 
        precedence and preemption service (MLPP)". 
         
        [Q.735.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.735.3 (1993), "Description for 
        community of interest supplementary services using SS No. 7 - 
        Multilevel precedence and preemption (MLPP)". 
         
        [Q.955.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.955.3 (1993), "Description for 
        community of interest supplementary services using DSS1 - Multilevel 
        precedence and preemption (MLPP)". 
         
        [RFC3261] "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", J. Rosenberg, et al, 
        June 2002. 
         
        [ETS] draft-ietf-ieprep-framework-06, "Framework for Supporting ETS 
        in IP Telephony", Ken Carlberg, et al, Oct 2003. 
         
        [Pierce1] draft-pierce-ieprep-pref-treat-examples-02, "Examples for 
        Provision of Preferential Treatment in Voice over IP", Mike Pierce, 
        et al, January 2004. 
         
        [Resource] draft-ietf-sip-resource-priority-01, "SIP Communications 
        Resource Priority Header", Henning Schulzrinne and James Polk, July 
        2003. 

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                 [Page 13] 

     Internet Draft     Requirements for Assured Service       January 2004 

         
     8.   Acknowledgements 
         
        The authors would like to thank James Polk and Fred Baker for the 
        many suggestions made to improve this document throughout its 
        development. 
         
     9.   Authors' Addresses 
         
        Michael Pierce 
        Artel 
        1893 Preston White Drive 
        Reston, VA 20191 
        Phone: +1 410.817.4795 
        Email: pierce1m@ncr.disa.mil 
         
        Don Choi 
        DISA 
        5600 Columbia Pike 
        Falls Church, VA 22041-2717 
        Phone: +1 703.681.2312 
        Email: choid@ncr.disa.mil 
         
     Full Copyright Statement 
         
        Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved. 
         
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
        others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
        or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
        and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
        kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
        are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
        document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
        the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
        Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
        developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
        copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
        followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
        English. 
         
        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
        revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
         
        This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
        "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
        TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
        BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
        HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
        MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
         

      
     Mike Pierce               Expires July 2004                 [Page 14] 

