

   Seamoby Working Group                                   J. Kempf, 
   Internet Draft                                          Editor 
   draft-ietf-seamoby-paging-protocol-assessment-01.txt    P. Chitrapu 
   Expires: August, 2002                                   T. Pagtzis 
                                                           S. 
                                                           Sreemanthula 
                                                           H. Wei 
    
    
           Dormant Mode Host Alerting (DMHA) Protocol Assessment 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   The Seamoby Working Group has been working toward specification of 
   an IP-level protocol for Dormant Mode Host Alerting (DMHA), 
   sometimes known as IP-paging or simply paging (the terms IP-DMHA, 
   DMHA, IP Paging, and Paging will be used interchangeably in this 
   document). A problem statement and requirements have been developed, 
   and in response to a request for protocol submissions, five 
   protocols were submitted. The submitted proposals were assessed by 
   comparing them to the requirements by a team of four volunteers from 
   the Seamoby Working Group. This document presents the results of 
   that assessment, describes the procedure by which a recommendation 
   for Working Group draft was selected after the assessment failed to 
   come up with a recommendation. 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 

1.0     Introduction 
    
     
   Kempf,Editor  Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 1] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   As part of its quest to foster standards for seamless mobility, the 
   Seamoby Working Group has been working toward specifying a Dormant 
   Mode Host Alerting (DMHA), or paging, protocol. A call for protocol 
   designs, based on a problem statement [1] and requirements [1] 
   resulted in five protocol submissions [3][4][5][6][7]. Of these, [6] 
   and [7] were from the same team and were treated as one contribution 
   for purposes of assessment. This document presents an assessment of 
   the protocols. 

2.0     Assessment Procedure 
    
   A panel of four volunteers from the Seamoby Working Group was 
   recruited to perform the assessment. Three of the four panel members 
   were assigned one protocol, one panel member was assigned two 
   protocols because we did not get enough volunteers. Input for the 
   assessment was the requirements document, the protocol design 
   itself, and a comparison between the protocol and the requirements 
   which the authors of the protocol themselves were requested to 
   write.  
    
   The team members were asked to use a rating system to compare the 
   protocol they were assigned against the requirements. Each team 
   member wrote up the results of their assessment, and submitted it to 
   the assessment draft editor for assembly into this draft. A 
   teleconference was held to discuss the assessments and normalize 
   assessments between different team members. The assessment team did 
   not make a recommendation about which draft to pick; however, the 
   team did recommend that the next step should be to either go through 
   another round of design in which the authors would attempt to refine 
   their proposals, or to immediately begin the process of harmonizing 
   the protocols to come up with a working group draft. 
    
   The next section contains comments from the assessment team members 
   about where the protocols either under- or overspecified a 
   requirement, and a list of requirements which the protocols were 
   judged to unacceptably specify. 
    

3.0     Comments on Requirements Match 
    
  3.1    draft-koodli-paging-00.txt 
    
   Unacceptable Requirements Match: 
    
        4.21, 4.22 
    
   Under- or Overspecification: 
    
   Requirement 4.2: Scalability 
    
   Location of the PF is ambiguous. A centralized PF is a hot spot for 
   contention and will not scale well.  A distributed PF was mentioned, 
   but there is no indication on how they will interact and communicate 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 2] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   with each other. It may not scale well because of signaling 
   messages. 
    
   Requirement 4.4: Efficient Signaling for Inactive Mode 
    
   The ideas of explicit and implicit dormancy are good. However, in 
   the implicit mode the PF still has to page the MN after the 
   inactivity timer expires. If during that time, the MN has moved to a 
   different paging area, under a different PF, the draft does not 
   state how such cases should be handled. Need more detailed 
   information. 
    
   Requirement 4.6: Multiple Dormant Modes 
    
   Need more explicit information. 
    
   Requirement 4.11: Efficient Utilization of L2 
    
   The draft did not specify how exactly it will utilize L2, let alone 
   the efficient utilization. 
    
   Requirement 4.14: Robustness Against Failure of Network Elements 
    
   The protocol does not address how PF and MN learn about failure and 
   how to recover from network element failure. Since there is only one 
   centralized PF for one Paging area, once a PF or a critical link to 
   PF fail, paging areas need to rearranged. How is the rearrangement 
   achieved? 
    
   Requirement 4.17: Flexibility of Administration 
    
   This requirement is fulfilled since the centralized paging function, 
   thus the topology of paging function can be very flexible. However, 
   the down side is it is impossible to separate Tracking Agent, 
   Dormant Monitoring Agent and Paging Agent. The three functional 
   entities should be in charge of the same set of hosts. This reduces 
   the flexibility of administration.    
    
   Requirement 4.19: Availability of Security Support 
    
   For example, the protocol does not describe Public Key Cryptography 
   techniques.  
    
   Requirement 4.20: Authentication of Paging Location Registration 
    
   This proposal provides procedures for the Paging Function 
   (PF=PA+DMA+TA) to authenticate the MN before accepting the Paging 
   Area Update message from the MN.  
    
   However the procedures do not address authenticating the PF by the 
   MN. In this respect, the protocol is underspecifed, as it is an 
   incomplete solution. Thus, the rating is 2 in this regard. 
    

     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 3] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   Secondly, the procedure for the PF to authenticate the MN prior to 
   accepting a paging update message is overspecified  in that a number 
   of options are described and may prevent interoperability depending 
   upon which option is implemented by a particular vendor. Thus the 
   rating is 3 in this regard. 
    
   Requirement 4.21: Authentication of Paging Area Information 
    
   The protocol does not explicitly provide for authentication of 
   Paging Area information. However, the self-evaluation refers to PAU 
   and PAR authentication as providing Paging Area Information 
   authentication. It is not clear as to how this is true. For, PAU 
   (not explained in the document / assumed to be Paging Area Update) 
   only enables the PF to authenticate the MN and does not enable the 
   MN to authenticate the PA information. Similarly, PAR (not explained 
   in the document / assumed to be Paging Request) authentication only 
   authenticates the sender of the Paging Request message and does not 
   authenticate the Paging Area Information. 
    
    
   Requirement 4.22: Authentication of Paging Messages 
    
   The Paging Messages sent by the Paging Agent (i.e. Paging Function) 
   to dormant mode Hosts are: Paging Area Information advertisement, 
   Paging request. (Paging response and Paging Area update are sent in 
   the opposite direction (MN -> PF) and hence not covered by this 
   requirement.) Paging Area Information advertisement is already 
   covered in 4.21. Therefore, this requirement only covers Paging 
   Request message.  
    
   The protocol provides an authentication procedure for the Paging 
   Request message and thus meets the requirement. However, the 
   document further talks about the use of sequence numbers etc to 
   prevent replay attacks. This is overspecification, leading to a 
   rating of 3. 
    
   The protocol does not address the use of L2 security mechanisms. 
   Rating is 1.  
    
  3.2    draft-renker-paging-ipv6-01.txt 
    
   Unacceptable Requirements Match: 
    
        4.4, 4.6, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21 
    
   Under- or Overspecification: 
    
   Requirement 4.2: Scalability 
    
   Several signaling messages are needed for in and out of idle 
   (dormant) state transitions, and this may lead to unacceptable 
   overhead in the network and over expensive low bandwidth acees 
   links. In addition, when used with paging strategies there may be 
   large amount of information stored for each host. 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 4] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
    
   Requirement 4.4: Efficient Signaling While Inactive 
    
   There is no mechanism to inform the Paging Agent that the host will 
   be inactive or unreachable. 
    
   Requirement 4.6: Multiple Dormant Modes 
    
   Although, there is a discussion of "implicit" and "explicit" dormant 
   modes, they both involve signaling exchanges between the MN and the 
   network, in one case using with Mobile IPv6 and the other with new 
   messages. So, in conclusion, there is no support for multiple 
   dormant modes. 
    
   Requirement 4.7: Independence of Mobility Protocol 
    
   The independence of mobility protocol is valid for "explicit" case 
   only. The design specifies two separate protocols, one for Mobile IP 
   and one without Mobile IP.  
    
   Requirement 4.9: Dormant Mode Termination 
    
   The proposal does not completely define the dormant mode 
   termination. It explains how to de-register from the dormant mode 
   with BU(0) or Idle-Mode-Req(0) but when does the host perform BU 
   with a nCoA to HA and CN?  When and how does the PA forward all the 
   packets to host, is it after receiving BU(0)?  There must be some 
   correlation in order for this to work well.  The signaling messages 
   and the entity's behavior after the paging request is sent are 
   missing in the draft. 
    
   Requirement 4.10: Network Updates 
    
   In Section 9.2.1, it is briefly mentioned that when host is roaming 
   into a new PA, it must send a Idle-State-Request to the Paging Agent 
   to update the new PA-id.  But more description is needed.  How does 
   it work with "implicit" case using BU. 
    
   Requirement 4.11: Efficient Utilization of L2 
    
   In some systems, th mobile hosts may go dormant at L2 based on some 
   L2-timers. But according to this proposal, since there is no support 
   for dormancy based on timeouts where the host can go dormant without 
   having to send any signaling to the network, the MN needs to wake up 
   from L2 dormancy to begin the L3 dormancy. This leads to inefficient 
   usage of L2 dormancy and paging mechanisms, worsening the power 
   saving with respect to L2 only dormancy. 
    
   Requirement 4.12: Orthogonality of PA and Subnets 
    
   In cellular technology, however, the TMSI (not the IMSI) is used to 
   page a particular host and the TMSI is assigned by the Access 
   Network upon registration (or updated during the Routing Area 
   Update). The host will not know the TMSI in advance. So in the 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 5] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   proposed draft, a host can not move from non-cellular to cellular 
   system except if the non cellular and the cellular system 
   (WCDMA/cdma2000) are in different paging areas where upon moving to 
   a new paging area, the host has to send a new BU and the sub-option 
   contain the TMSI. 
    
   Requirement 4.14: Robustness against Failures 
    
   The proposal recommends agent replication but does not specify the 
   details. 
    
   Requirement 4.15: Reliability of Packet Delivery 
    
   The proposal does not describe how the buffered packets at paging 
   agent are sent to host. 
    
   Requirement 4.20: Authentication of PA registration 
    
   The authentication of the registration messages is not described. 
   When relying on MIPv6 messages, the protocol relies on the 
   authentication data of the binding update, but is not mobility 
   protocol independent anymore. 
    
   Requirement 4.21: Authentication of PA Information 
    
   There is no mechanism described for authentication PA information 
   from the paging agent. It is left to the Access Routers in RtAdv, 
   but they are traditionally not authenticated. 
    
   Requirement 4.22: Authentication of PA Messages 
    
   There is no authentication mechanism described for paging requests. 
   There are probably several solutions possible.   
    
   Requirement 4.23: Paging Volume 
    
   After host receives paging request, it sends a high volume of L3 
   messages to de-register from idle state. This may introduce high 
   overhead in the network and hinder the ability of other MNs to 
   access to services, in particular over low bandwidth links. 
    
   Requirement 4.24: Parsimonious Security Messaging 
    
   There is no security definition in the Idle-State-Rqst/Rply 
   messages. Therefore, this is not applicable. 
    
   Requirement 4.25: Non-interference of Host's Security 
    
   Since the proposal does not describe how the messages are secured 
   (e.g. how the authentication data are sent - using AH, or a new 
   security sub-option), we can not know if this IP paging protocol 
   impose any limitations on a Host security policies. 
    
   Requirement 4.26: Non-interference of End-to-End Security 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 6] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
    
   Same as above. 
    
   In addition, the following general concerns were expressed about the 
   protocol design: 
    
      1) How is the PA update performed when the host is in the idle 
         state and moving?   
       
      2) There is no description of how the mobility management is 
         completed after the paging request is received.  There must be 
         some coordination on when the deregistration is sent to PA.  
       
      3) The proposal provides a solution independent of the mobile 
         protocols. A large number of L3 messages needs to be exchanged 
         in the following cases: 
       
        i)   BU/BA to PA, all HA and CN when transitioning into the 
             idle state, 
        ii)  BU/BA to PA, all HA and CN when transitioning out of the 
             idle state (entering active state), 
        iii) Registering with a new CoA for the idle state may be 
             undesirable, this forces BU to all CN. 
       
      4) Excessive signaling in the above cases could lead to too much 
         power consumption on host. 
       
      5) When Paging Area strategies are used, it is not clear how the 
         dynamic paging areas are defined for each user. This mode also 
         requires storage of a lot of state information leading to a 
         not-so scalable network. 
       
      6) Optimization with RH described in section 5.2.2 may not work 
         for security reasons. Binding update are authenticated thanks 
         to AH; but the authentication data carried in AH corresponds 
         to the one between the MN and the HA. How would the 
         authentication data between the MN and the PA be carried? 
       
      7) Unclear use of "implicit" and "explicit" terms. Both involve 
         messaging to indicate the idle state transition. 
       
      8) Use of paging-id to page the host in inter-system is not 
         clear.  For exaample, when the host idle-registers in WLAN 
         coverage and then moves to a cellular system, how does the 
         paging agent know the L2 id of the cellular system? 
       
  3.3    draft-sarikaya-seamoby-mipv6hp-00.txt 
    
   Unacceptable Requirements Match: 
    
        4.4, 4.7, 4.22 
    
   Under- or Overspecification: 
     
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 7] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   Requirement 4.2: Scalability 
    
   This proposal is heavily dependent on HMIPv6 for scalability. The 
   MAP is a bottleneck that could lead to scalability problems.  
    
   Requirement 4.4: Efficient Signaling for Inactive Mode 
    
   No comment. 
        
   Requirement 4.6: Multiple Dormant Modes 
    
   The protocol can support multiple dormant modes. It will become more 
   complete if more descriptions about operation with multiple nodes 
   are added                     
        
   Requirement 4.7: Independence of Mobility Protocol 
    
   Basically, the protocol assumes Hierarchical MIPv6 as the underlying 
   mobility protocol. Extra efforts could be made to eliminate the 
   dependence of HMIPv6 and this protocol. 
        
        
   Requirement 4.8: Support for Existing Mobility Protocols 
   Support MIPv6. However, does not claim any support on MIPv4. 
    
   Requirement 4.10: Network Updates 
    
   Key aspects are missing for network update. 
    
   Requirement 4.14: Robustness against Failures 
    
   The proposal depends on MAP replication, which is, as yet not well 
   specified.  
        
   Requirement 4.18: Flexibility of Paging Area Design 
    
   No special limitation on paging area design. Support both L2 and L3 
   paging area. However, mechanism to support adaptive paging area 
   assignment needs to be further specified. 
    
   Requirement 4.19: Availability of Security Support 
    
   The protocol conducts a security analysis, but it is not clear that 
   it is deep enough.      
        
   Requirement 4.21: Authentication of Paging Area Information 
    
   Does not solve 'Bogus Paging Area' problem 
    
   Requirement 4.22: Authentication of PA Messages 
    
   No authentication is specified in HMIPv6, upon which this protocol 
   depends. 
           
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 8] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   Requirement 4.23: Paging Volume 
    
   Currently handle paging request in per host basis. Future revision 
   about handling several request together is in progress. 
         
   Requirement 4.25: Non-interference of Host's Security 
    
   In the evaluator's judgement, there seems to be no interference, but 
   further analysis is necessary in case some interaction with IPSEC 
   may turn up. 
    
   Requirement 4.26: Non-interference with End to End Security 
    
   Same as 4.25. 
         
  3.4    draft-guri-seamoby-lahap-00.txt 
    
   Unacceptable Requirements Match: 
    
        4.6, 4.8, 4.14, 4.17, 4.27 
    
   Under- or Overspecification: 
    
   Requirement 4.2: Scalability 
    
   Not clearly stated.  
         
   Requirement 4.6: Multiple Dormant Modes 
    
   Is not specified. 
                         
   Requirement 4.8: Support for Existing Mobility Protocols 
    
   Interaction with MIPv4 and MIPv6 are not specified  
        
   Requirement 4.14: Robustness Against Failure of Network Elements 
    
   No comment. 
         
   Requirement 4.17: Flexibility of Administration 
    
   Not specified.        
         
   Requirement 4.18: Flexibility of Paging Area Design 
    
   No special limitation on paging area design. Support both L2 and L3 
   paging area. However, mechanism to support adaptive paging area 
   assignment needs to be further specified.      
        
   Requirement 4.21: Authentication of Paging Area Information 
    
   Does not solve 'Bogus Paging Area' problem. 
    
   Requirement 4.25: Non-interference of Host's Security 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002         [Page 9] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
    
   In the evaluator's judgement, there seems to be no interference, but 
   further analysis is necessary in case some interaction with IPSEC 
   may turn up. 
    
   Requirement 4.26: Non-interference with End to End Security 
    
   Same as 4.25. 
         
   Requirement 4.27: Detection of Bogus Correspondent Nodes 
    
   No specification about authentication of CN.          
        
  3.5    draft-ohba-seamoby-last-hop-dmha-02.txt 
    
   Unacceptable Requirements Match: 
    
        4.18 
    
   Under- or Overspecification: 
   _ 
   Requirement 4.1:  Power Consumption 
    
   Registration to the TA through the DMA may not be optimal in terms 
   of power consumption, since a DMA Reg-ACK cannot be returned to the 
   host until the TA acknowledges the proxy registration request. 
   However, since the author also specified the direct communication of 
   the host with the TA, this requirement is overspecified to the 
   degree that can detract from efficiency. 
   _ 
   Requirement 4.2: Scalability 
    
   The protocol tends to describe its operation with one DMA per link, 
   one TA (primarily) and multiple PAs, as shown in Figure 3. When the 
   protocol suggests that more than one TA can be present and each one 
   manages a specific set of hosts, it fails to specify how this is 
   achieved. 
    
   Requirement 4.4: Efficient Signaling Inactive Mode 
    
   The protocol underspecifies the requirement because it suggests that 
   successive paging operations are to follow a paging interval that 
   increases exponentially, but does not specify an initial and final 
   value that the exponential figure is allowed to reach. Is it 
   persistent in the paging retry? Does it time-out at all?  
   _ 
   Requirement 4.6: Multiple Dormant Modes 
    
   The type of dormant modes that the protocol attempts to support is 
   based on a particular technology, while the protocol does not affect 
   the operation of the MAC layer at all. While one can claim that the 
   protocol combines L2 power saving features that contribute to power 
   conservation, this is not owed to or couple with the proposed 
   protocol. It is simply a manifestation of power savings through 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002        [Page 10] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   special forms of MPDU scheduling. Any protocol can claim such 
   cooperation. Important aspect of dormancy like slotted dormant for 
   non-L2 layer has not been considered by the protocol. 
    
   Requirement 4.12: Orthogonality of PA and Subnets 
    
   The description of the protocol, although it mentions paging areas, 
   does not specify clearly how this is achieved since there is no 
   specific description of how the page message diffuses over an 
   topology of multiple subnets that are controlled by a single PA. 
   _ 
   _ 
   Requirement 4.14: Robustness against Failures 
    
   While the protocol specifies keep-alive signals between the peer 
   agents, it does not specify a scheme that allows recovery from 
   failure.  
   _ 
   Requirement 4.15: Reliability of Packet Delivery 
    
   The transport used in this protocol is UDP. The protocol does not 
   describe how the packet is forwarded to the host. In particular, it 
   does not describe what is the situation when the packet received at 
   the DMA is TCP. 
   _ 
   Requirement 4.17: Administrative Flexibility 
    
   The configuration of the paging areas is not quite automatic as 
   claimed. In particular the protocol does not specify how the page 
   area identifiers are assigned/allocated such that they can be 
   distributed to the individual paging agents.  
   _ 
   Requirement 4.18: Flexibility of PA Design 
    
   With respect to the claimed flexibility, the design is not clear in 
   Fig. 3. The TA propagates paging requests, why? 
   _ 
   Requirement 4.19: Availability of Security Support 
    
   The protocol does not support encryption services. It only supports 
   authentication. For ESP security, it relies on mechanisms such as 
   IPsec.  
    
   In addition, the following general concerns were expressed about the 
   protocol design: 
    
     1) The protocol utilizes the DMA like the TA in the functional 
        architecture draft, but does not specify a method for the DMA 
        to discover an appropriate TA. The assumption seems to be that 
        there will be a single TA per administrative domain or multiple 
        TAs with the TA to DMA mapping manually configured.  
      
     2) The protocol assumes the dormant host can detect a paging area 
        change, which implies that time-slotted paging must be used if 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002        [Page 11] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
        there is no L2 paging channel support. However, the protocol 
        does not explicitly mention how it would support time-slotted 
        paging. 
 
     3) The proxy interactions between the DMA and TA on behalf of the 
        dormant host incur extraneous signaling and may lead to 
        inefficient power consumption.  
 
     4) The assumption that the DMA is located on the last hop subnet, 
        which is the foundation of the design, means that the PA is 
        unnecessary, and links the paging area directly to the subnet. 
 
     5) The protocol specifies heartbeat messages between agent peers. 
        This method can identify a failed agent, but it cannot specify 
        how to recover from failure. 
 
     6) The protocol does not specify how a host chooses between DMAs 
        nor how a DMA chooses between TAs. 
 

4.0     Decision Process 
 
   Given that the assessment team's recommendation about which draft to 
   accept was indeterminate, a decision team was formed by the two 
   Working Group co-chairs, with the Area Director providing advice. 
   The decision team decided to proceed toward selecting a draft for 
   recommendation to the Working Group as the basis of a harmonized 
   protocol, in order to avoid further delay in starting on the process 
   of designing the Seamoby paging protocol. This procedure is entirely 
   consistent with RFC 2418 [8], since the Working Group co-chairs' 
   decision is subject to working group concensus, so the Working Group 
   has the final say on whether the selected draft actually becomes the 
   working group draft. 
 
   The decision about which draft to select was difficult, because each 
   draft had particular aspects that were well thought out and 
   recommended themselves for inclusion in the final result, but none 
   of the drafts exhibited the maturity of implementation and design 
   that immediately suggested it as the only possible candidate for 
   selection. Some drafts had particular aspects that mitigated 
   strongly against selection. A good example of this difficulty is 
   Requirement 4.6, Multiple Dormant Modes. This requirement was 
   intended to foster support for hosts that have no explicit L2 paging 
   support, basically time-slotted paging. Draft-sarikaya has an 
   excellent discussion of time-slotted paging mode, but the basis of 
   that draft is a protocol (HMIPv6) that has been proposed in another 
   working group for a problem that is still  in the requirements 
   phase, and the proposed paging protocol supports only Mobile IPv6. 
   The other proposals had varying degrees of support for time-slotted 
   paging, but none was sufficient to recommend itself on this 
   particular requirement. 
 


     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002        [Page 12] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
   The assessment team's work allowed the decision team to reduce the 
   number of drafts under consideration from five to two. The decision 
   team quickly decided to rule out draft-koodli because the draft is 
   lacking in specifics and is vague on many requirements, as mentioned 
   in the assessment team's report. Draft-sarikaya was ruled out 
   because it is based on a protocol that is currently under evaluation 
   in another working group, setting up an unacceptable dependency 
   between the Seamoby paging protocol design and the other working 
   group's process. Also, draft-sarikaya exclusively supports Mobile 
   IPv6, and a primary requirement of all Seamoby work is that the 
   protocols be independent of mobility protocol. While the assessment 
   of draft-guri was positive, draft-guri is explicitly concerned with 
   utilizing Layer 2 support for paging, and was therefore not 
   sufficiently broad enough as a base for IP paging. However, the 
   ideas expressed in draft-guri were felt to be valuable and necessary 
   for including in the final Seamoby paging protocol for those cases 
   where Layer 2 paging support is available. 
 
   The decision between the remaining two drafts, draft-renker and 
   draft-ohba, was especially difficult because they were judged to be 
   about of equal quality. The decision team decided to focus on three 
   primary requirements that were thought to be crucial to the 
   successful acceptance of IP paging: independence of mobility 
   protocol, support for existing mobility protocols, and independence 
   of paging area from subnet topology.  
 
   Of these, both draft-renker and draft-ohba provided adequate support 
   for the first two, independence of mobility protocol and support for 
   existing mobility protocols. Draft-renker was judged by the 
   assessment team to be overspecific in these areas, in the sense that 
   it contained two modes, explicit mode and implicit mode, depending 
   on whether Mobile IP was supported or not. However, considering the 
   relatively immature state of the paging protocol design, the 
   decision team felt that providing the working group with choices, 
   where the benefits and drawbacks of each choice could be clearly 
   weighed, was preferable to providing a fixed decision, so draft-
   renker was judged to be better in this regard. 
 
   On the requirement for independence of paging area from subnet 
   topology, the support described in draft-ohba was very sketchy and 
   did not provide the decision team with a clear idea about how this 
   could be achieved, particularly with regard to the movement of a 
   mobile host while the host is in dormant mode. Draft-renker has a 
   much clearer description of how this could be achieved, and was 
   judged to be better in this regard.  
 
   Additional aspects of draft-renker that recommended it as the 
   selection were attention to details of interaction with existing IP 
   routing, and a survey of paging strategies. While probably not 
   essential to the final protocol design, the material on paging 
   strategies showed that the authors had given some thought to 
   separating policy from mechanism, and were familiar with the 
   somewhat extensive academic literature on paging, and IP paging in 
   particular. 
     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002        [Page 13] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
 
   While draft-renker was selected by the decision team as the basis 
   for continued Seamoby paging protocol work, the decision team feels 
   that it is important to incorporate the outstanding contributions of 
   the other authors into the final protocol design, in particular, the 
   time-slotted paging discussion in draft-sarikaya, the Layer 2 
   interface work in draft-guri, the paging state machine discussion in 
   draft-koodli, and the security protocol work in draft-ohba. 
   Additional aspects of the other drafts that address issues which 
   were weakly addressed or not addressed at all in draft-renker should 
   also be incorporated, as well as ideas from other working group 
   members that address requirement which none of the draft addressed 
   particularly well. 

5.0     Acknowledgements 
    
   The Working Group Chairs would like to thank Prabhakar Chitrapu, of 
   InterDigital, Theo Pagtzis, of UCL, Hung-yu Wei, of Columbia 
   University, and Sirinivas Sreemanthula, of the Nokia Dallas Research 
   Center, for helping perform the protocol assessment. 

6.0     References 
    
   [1]  Kempf, J., Editor, "Dormant Mode Host Alerting ("IP Paging") 
        Problem Statement," RFC 3132, June, 2001. 
   [2]  Kempf, J., et. al. "Requirements and Functional Architecture 
        for an IP Host Alerting Protocol," RFC 3154, August, 2001. 
   [3]  Faccin, S., et. al., "Dormant Mode Handover Support in Mobile 
        Networks," draft-koodli-paging-00.txt, a work in progress. 
   [4]  Liebsch, M., Renker, G., and Schmitz, R., "Paging Concept for 
        IP based Networks," draft-renker-paging-ipv6-01.txt, a work in 
        progress. 
   [5]  Ohba, Y., Nakajima, N., and Zhang, T., "LH-DMHA - Last Hop DMHA 
        (Dormant Mode Host Alerting) Protocol," draft-ohba-seamoby-
        last-hop-dmha-02.txt, a work in progress. 
   [6]  Sarikaya, B., et. al., "Mobile IPv6 Hierarchical Paging," 
        draft-sarikaya-seamoby-mipv6hp-00.txt, a work in progress. 
   [7]  Gurivireddy, S., et. al., "Layer-2 aided mobility independent 
        dormant host alerting protocol," draft-guri-seamoby-lahap-
        00.txt, a work in progress. 
   [8]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures," 
        RFC 2418, September, 1998. 

7.0     Authors' Address 
    
   James Kempf 
   DoCoMo Communications Labs USA 
   181 Metro Drive, Suite 300    
   San Jose, CA, 95110           
   USA 
   Phone:  +1 408 451 4711 
   Email:  kempf@docomolabs-usa.com 

     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002        [Page 14] 
                       DMHA Protocol Assessment          Feburary 2002 
                                    
    
   Prabhakar Chitrapu 
   InterDigital Communications Corp.     
   781 Third Avenue 
   King of Prussia, PA, 19406 
   USA 
   Phone: +1 610 878 5730 
   Email: Prabhakar.Chitrapu@InterDigital.com 
     
   Theo Pagtzis 
   Dept. of Computer Science 
   University College London 
   Gower Street 
   WC1E 6BT, London 
   UK 
   Phone: +44 (0) 20 7679 3666 
   Email: t.pagtzis@cs.ucl.ac.uk 
    
   Sirinivas Sreemanthula 
   Nokia Research Center                       
   6000 Connection Drive         
   Irving, TX, 75039 
   USA 
   Phone:  +1 972 894 4356  
   Fax:    +1 972 894 4589 
   Email:  srinivas.sreemanthula@nokia.com 
    
   Hung-yu Wei 
   Columbia University           
   Room 710, Schapiro Res        
   530 West 120th Street 
   New York, NY, 10027 
   USA 
   Phone: +1 212 854 7477 
   Email: hywei@ctr.columbia.edu 
     
    
    
















     
   Kempf, Editor Informational - Expires August, 2002        [Page 15] 