






Network Working                                  S.E. Hardcastle-Kille
Group                                                 ISODE Consortium
INTERNET-DRAFT                                           November 1992
                                                   Expires:  June 1993

              A simple profile for MHS use of Directory



Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet Drafts.
Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months.
Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts
as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working draft"
or "work in progress."
Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet Draft
directory to learn the current status of this or any other Internet
Draft.

Abstract
The document ``MHS Use of Directory to support MHS Routing'' describes
a comprehensive approach to MHS use of directory to support routing
[HK92].  This document defines a strict subset of this document, which
is intended to solve the most pressing problems.  It also defines a
practical first step for implementation, such that this subset can be
deployed prior to fuller implementation.
This document does not repeat information in the other document.
Duplication would only lead to the possibility of inconsistency.


WARNING: This document must be read in the contex of the document it
    profiles.  It is meaningless as a standalone document.

This draft document will be submitted to the RFC editor as a protocol
standard.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.  Please send
comments to the author or to the discussion group
<mhs-ds@mercury.udev.cdc.com>.




INTERNET--DRAFT     Profile for MHS use of Directory     November 1992


1  Service Goals

The following goals are identified:


 o  No routing table configuration for simple MTAs in a PRMD (WEPs and
    gateways may do manual things).

 o  Single entry configuration for most sites.

 o  Do not replace function that is working reasonably well using
    existing approaches.

 o  Ignore issues which are not yet operational concerns.  These can
    be handled by the full specification in due course.


2  Approach

The approach to routing is to use the single routing tree associated
with the open community.  MTAs will reference this tree.  Simple MTAs
need only do this, plus ad hoc configuration to route to a suitable
MTA with a fuller manual configuration (e.g., a WEP). This document
goes through section by section, referencing the full document, noting
what support is needed.


3  Profile

3.1  General Table Handling


Support for subtrees, but not flat tables is needed.

3.2  O/R Address Hierarchy


Support for all attributes is needed, except:

mHSX121

mHSDomainDefinedAttribute



Hardcastle-Kille                          Expires:  June 1993   Page 1




INTERNET--DRAFT     Profile for MHS use of Directory     November 1992


3.3  Local Addresses

This is supported.


3.4  MTA Naming

All MTAs are named within the O/R Address tree.  The attributes which
must be supported are:

responderAuthenticationRequirements

transportCommunity

remotePresentationAddress


3.5  Routing Trees

Only the single open community routing tree must be used.  A variant
on this profile might relax this restriction, perhaps to support a
small number of routing trees.  This relaxation should be noted in any
statment referencing this specification.


3.6  Routing Information

The following attributes are used:


 o  authoritativeAddress

 o  mTAInfo

Routing action is always the default.


3.7  Indirect Connectivity

This is not used.





Hardcastle-Kille                          Expires:  June 1993   Page 2




INTERNET--DRAFT     Profile for MHS use of Directory     November 1992


3.8  Protocol Mismatches

The transport community approach is used.


3.9  Supported Protocols

This approach is used, but only P1(88) and P1(84) are considered.

3.10  Capability Restrictions


These are not handled.

3.11  Pulling Messages


This is not done.

3.12  Authentication


For 1988 usage, the distinguished name is used to identify the remote
MTA. Authentication will be by network address.  Password will always
be ASN.1 NULL.
For 1984 usage, no authentication is done.
The attribute must be supported, but only the
responderAuthenticationRequirements attribute is used.  For MTAs
following this specification, the following values must be set if
bilateral-agreement-needed is false.


mta-name-present true

aet-present true

aet-valid true

network-address true

simple-authentication false

strong-authentication false


Hardcastle-Kille                          Expires:  June 1993   Page 3




INTERNET--DRAFT     Profile for MHS use of Directory     November 1992


If bilateral-agreement-needed is true, there are no restrictions on
value.  Where a WEP uses this scheme, information on the bilateral
agreement will be determined locally (by private means).
The remotePresentationAddress attribute will always be present.


3.13  Policy

Policy will not be used.

3.14  Protocol Extensions


These will not be used.

3.15  Format Conversion


All issues relating to format conversion will be ignored.

3.16  RFC 822 Support


There is no support for RFC 822 or RFC 822/X.400 mappings by use of
directory.

3.17  Distribution Lists

This will not be supported.


3.18  Redirects

Not supported.


3.19  Bad Addresses

The mechanisms will not be supported.






Hardcastle-Kille                          Expires:  June 1993   Page 4




INTERNET--DRAFT     Profile for MHS use of Directory     November 1992


References

[HK92] S.E. Hardcastle-Kille. MHS use of the directory to support MHS
       routing, April 1992. Internet Draft.


4  Security Considerations

Security considerations are not discussed in this INTERNET--DRAFT .


5  Author's Address

    Steve Hardcastle-Kille
    ISODE Consortium
    PO Box 505
    London
    SW11 1DX
    England


    Phone:  +44-71-223-4062

    EMail:  S.Kille@ISODE.COM


    DN: CN=Steve Hardcastle-Kille,
    O=ISODE Consortium, C=GB

    UFN: S. Hardcastle-Kille, ISODE Consortium, GB















Hardcastle-Kille                          Expires:  June 1993   Page 5
