Internet Engineering Task Force                       Hari Balakrishnan
Internet Draft                                                      MIT
Document: draft-ietf-pilc-asym-00.txt            Venkata N. Padmanabhan
                                                     Microsoft Research

Category: Informational                                  September 1999


           TCP Performance Implications of Network Asymmetry


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

1. Abstract

   This document describes the problems to TCP performance that arise
   because of asymmetric effects. These problems arise in several
   access networks, including bandwidth-asymmetric networks and packet
   radio networks, for different underlying reasons. However, the net
   effect on TCP performance is the same in both cases: performance
   degrades significantly because of imperfections and variabilities in
   the ACK feedback from the receiver to the sender. This document
   details several solutions to these problems, which use a combination
   of local link-layer techniques and end-to-end mechanisms. Solutions
   to the problem of asymmetry are two-pronged: (i) techniques to
   manage the reverse channel used by ACKs, typically using header
   compression or reducing the frequency of TCP ACKs, and (ii)
   techniques to handle this reduced ACK frequency to retain the TCP
   senderÆs acknowledgment-triggered self-clocking.

2. Conventions used in this document

   <Add any conventions that you use in your document here.  Common
   conventions are listed below.>

   FORWARD DIRECTION: The dominant direction of data transfer over an
   asymmetric network. It corresponds to the direction with better link


Expires March 2000                                            [page 1]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   characteristics in terms of bandwidth, latency, error rate, etc. We
   term data transfer in the forward direction as a ôforward transferö.

   REVERSE DIRECTION: The direction in which acknowledgments of a
   forward TCP transfer flow. Data transfer could also happen in this
   direction (and it is termed ôreverse transferö), but it is typically
   less voluminous than that in the forward direction. The reverse
   direction typically exhibits worse link characteristics than the
   forward direction.

   DOWNSTREAM: Same as the forward direction.

   UPSTREAM: Same as the reverse direction.

   ACK: A cumulative TCP acknowledgment.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].


3. Motivation

   Asymmetric characteristicsare exhibited by several network
   technologies, including cable modems, direct broadcast satellite,
   ADSL, and several packet radio networks. Given that these networks
   are increasingly being deployed as high-speed access networks, it is
   highly desirable to achieve good TCP performance over such networks.
   However, the asymmetry of the networks often makes this challenging.
   For example, when bandwidth is asymmetric such that the reverse path
   used by TCP ACKs is constrained, the slow or loss-prone ACK feedback
   degrades TCP performance in the forward direction. Even when
   bandwidth is symmetric, ACK feedback can be variable, as in several
   packet radio networks. Here, traffic flowing simultaneously in
   different directions adversely affect performance, especially if the
   radios used are half-duplex (as is commonly the case); these radios
   cannot transmit and receive data frames at the same time and rely on
   an RTS/CTS-based handshake to synchronize communicating nodes before
   a transmission. The interactions between TCP and the media-access
   (MAC) protocols in these networks cause significant ACK queues to
   build up, leading to highly variable communication latencies and
   round-trip times (RTT). This degrades TCP performance because the
   retransmission timeout (RTO), which includes the linear deviation of
   the RTT to avoid spurious retransmissions [Jacobson88], becomes
   excessively large.

   Despite the technological differences between asymmetric-bandwidth
   and packet radio networks, TCP performance suffers in both these
   kinds of networks for the same fundamental reason: the imperfection
   and variability of ACK feedback. This document discusses the problem
   in detail and describes several solutions from the research
   literature to overcome these problems [BPK97, BPK99, CR98, LMS97,
   KVR98].

Expires December 1999                                         [page 2]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999



   We generalize the various phenomena and examples described above to
   the following general, technology-independent definition of
   asymmetry: a network is said to exhibit network asymmetry with
   respect to TCP performance, if the throughput achieved is not solely
   a function of the link and traffic characteristics of the forward
   direction, but depends significantly on those of the reverse
   direction as well. (XXX need to tighten this definition) This
   general definition immediately permits classification of different
   types of asymmetry. In addition to the bandwidth asymmetry described
   above, this definition extends to other types of asymmetry,
   including latency, media-access, and packet loss (error) rate
   asymmetry. All of these have the potential to degrade TCP
   performance.

4. How does asymmetry degrade TCP performance?

   This section describes the implications of network asymmetry on TCP
   performance. We refer the reader to [BPK99, B98, P98] for more
   details and experimental results.

   4.1  Bandwidth asymmetry

   We first discuss the problems that degrade unidirectional transfer
   performance in bandwidth-asymmetric networks. Depending on the
   characteristics of the reverse path, two types of situations arise
   for unidirectional traffic over such networks: when the reverse
   bottleneck link has sufficient queueing to prevent packet (ACK)
   losses, and when the reverse bottleneck link has a small buffer. We
   consider each situation in turn.

   If the reverse bottleneck link has deep queues so that ACKs do not
   get dropped on the reverse path, then performance is a strong
   function of the normalized bandwidth ratio, k, defined by Lakshman,
   Madhow, and Suter [LMS97]. k is the ratio of the raw bandwidths
   divided by the ratio of the packet sizes used in the two directions.
   For example, for a 10 Mbps forward channel and a 50 Kbps reverse
   channel, the raw bandwidth ratio is 200. With 1000-byte data packets
   and 40-byte ACKs, the ratio of the packet sizes is 25. This implies
   that k is 200/25 = 8. Thus, if the receiver acknowledges more
   frequently than one ACK every k = 8 data packets, the reverse
   bottleneck link will get saturated before the forward bottleneck
   link does, limiting the throughput in the forward direction.

   If k > 1 and ACKs are not delayed (in the sense of TCP's delayed ack
   algorithm) or dropped (at the reverse bottleneck router), TCP ACK-
   clocking breaks down. Consider two data packets transmitted by the
   sender in quick succession. En route to the receiver, these packets
   get spaced apart according to the bottleneck link bandwidth in the
   forward direction. The principle of ACK clocking is that the ACKs
   generated in response to these packets preserve this temporal
   spacing all the way back to the sender, enabling it to transmit new
   data packets that maintain the same spacing. However, the limited

Expires December 1999                                         [page 3]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   reverse bandwidth and queuing at the reverse bottleneck router
   alters the inter-ACK spacing observed at the sender. When ACKs
   arrive at the bottleneck link in the reverse direction at a faster
   rate than the link can support, they get queued behind one another.
   The spacing between them when they emerge from the link is dilated
   with respect to their original spacing, and is a function of the
   reverse bottleneck bandwidth. Thus the sender clocks out new data at
   a slower rate than if there had been no queuing of ACKs. No longer
   is the performance of the connection dependent on the forward
   bottleneck link alone; instead, it is throttled by the rate of
   arriving ACKs. As a side-effect, the senderÆs rate of congestion
   window growth slows down too.

   A different situation arises when the reverse bottleneck link has a
   relatively small amount of buffer space to accommodate ACKs. As the
   transmission window grows, this queue fills and ACKs are dropped. If
   the receiver acknowledges every packet, only one of every k ACKs
   gets through to the sender, and the remaining (k-1) are dropped due
   to buffer overflow at the reverse channel buffer (here k is the
   normalized bandwidth ratio as before). In this case, the reverse
   bottleneck link capacity and slow ACK arrival are not directly
   responsible for any degraded performance. However, there are three
   important reasons for degraded performance in this case because ACKs
   are infrequent.

   1. First, the sender transmits data in large bursts. If the sender
   receives only one ACK in k, it transmits data in bursts of k (or
   more) segments because each ACK shifts the sliding window by at
   least k (acknowledged) segments. This increases the likelihood of
   data loss along the forward path especially when k is large, because
   routers do not handle large bursts of packets well.

   2. Second, TCP sender implementations increase their congestion
   window by counting the number of ACKs they receive and not on how
   much data is actually acknowledged by each ACK. Thus fewer ACKs
   implies a slower rate of growth of the congestion window, which
   degrades performance over long-delay connections.

   3. Third, the senderÆs fast retransmission and recovery algorithms
   are less effective when ACKs are lost. The sender may not receive
   the threshold number of duplicate ACKs even if the receiver
   transmits more than the required number. Furthermore, the sender may
   not receive enough duplicate ACKs to adequately inflate its window
   during fast recovery.

   4.2  MAC protocol interactions

   Variable delays and ACK queueing are the main symptoms of this
   problem. The need for the communicating peers to first synchronize
   via the RTS/CTS protocol before communication and the significant
   turn-around time for the radios result in a high per-packet
   overhead. Furthermore, since the RTS/CTS exchange needs to back-off
   exponentially when the polled radio is busy (for example, engaged in

Expires December 1999                                         [page 4]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   a conversation with a different peer), this overhead is variable.
   This leads to large and variable communication latencies in packet-
   radio networks. In addition, with an asymmetric workload with most
   data flowing in one direction to clients, ACKs tend to get queued in
   certain radio units (especially in the client modems), exacerbating
   the variable communication latencies.

   These variable latencies and queueing of ACKs adversely affect
   smooth data flow. In particular, TCP ACK traffic interferes with the
   flow of data and increases the traffic load on the system.
   Experiments conducted on Metricom's Ricochet packet radio network
   clearly demonstrated the effect of the radio turnarounds and
   increased RTT variability, which  degrade TCP performance. Its is
   not uncommon for TCP connections to experience timeouts that last
   between 9 and 12 seconds each. As a result, a connection may be idle
   for a very significant fraction of its lifetime. (We have seen
   instances in the context of the Ricochet network where the idle time
   is 35% of the total transfer time!) Clearly, this leads to gross
   under-utilization of the available bandwidth.

   Why are these timeouts so long in duration? Ideally, the round-trip
   time estimate (srtt) of a TCP data transfer will be relatively
   constant (i.e., have a low linear deviation, rttvar). Then the TCP
   retransmission timeout, set to srtt + 4*rttvar, will track the
   smoothed round-trip time estimate and respond well when multiple
   losses occur in a window. Unfortunately, this is not true for
   connections in the Ricochet network. Because of the high variability
   in RTT, the retransmission timer is on the order of 10 seconds,
   leading to the long idle timeout periods.

   In general, it is correct for the retransmission timer to trigger a
   segment retransmission only after an amount of time dependent on
   both the round-trip time and the linear (or standard) deviation. If
   only the mean or median round-trip estimates were taken into
   account, the potential for spurious retransmissions of segments
   still in transit is large.

   Connections traversing multiple wireless hops are especially
   vulnerable to this effect, because it is now more likely that the
   radio units may already be engaged in conversation with other peers.

   4.3  Loss rate asymmetry

   Error rate @ poor performance even if only ack loss, not data loss

   4.4  Bi-directional traffic

   We now consider the case when TCP transfers simultaneously occur in
   opposite directions over an asymmetric network. An example scenario
   is one in which a user sends out data upstream (for example, an e-
   mail message) while simultaneously receiving other data downstream
   (for example, Web pages). For ease of exposition, we restrict our
   discussion to the case of one connection in each direction.

Expires December 1999                                         [page 5]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999



   In the presence of bi-directional traffic, the effects discussed in
   Section 4.1 are more pronounced, because part of the reverse
   direction bandwidth is used up by the reverse transfer. This
   effectively increases the degree of bandwidth asymmetry for the
   forward transfer. In addition, there are other effects that arise
   due to the interaction between data packets of the reverse transfer
   and acks of the forward transfer. Suppose the reverse connection is
   initiated first and that it has saturated the reverse channel and
   buffer with its data packets at the time the forward connection is
   initiated. There is then a high probability that many acks of the
   newly initiated forward connection will encounter a full reverse
   channel buffer and hence get dropped. Even after these initial
   problems, acks of the forward connection could often get queued up
   behind large data packets of the reverse connection, which could
   have long transmission times (e.g., it takes about 280 ms to
   transmit a 1 KB data packet over a 28.8 Kbps line). This causes the
   forward transfer to stall for long periods of time. It is only at
   times when the reverse connection loses packets (due to a buffer
   overflow at an intermediate router) and slows down that the forward
   connection gets the opportunity to make rapid progress and quickly
   build up its window.

   In summary, the presence of bi-directional traffic exacerbates the
   problems due to bandwidth asymmtery because of the adverse
   interaction between data packets of an upstream connection and the
   acks of a downstream connection.


5. Improving TCP performance over asymmetric networks

   It should be clear by now that there are two key issues that need to
   be addressed in order to improve TCP performance over asymmetric
   networks. The first issue is to manage bandwidth usage on the
   reverse link, used by ACKs (and possibly other traffic). Many of
   these techniques work by reducing the number of ACKs that flow over
   the reverse channel, which has the potential to destroy the
   desirable self-clocking property of the TCP sender where new data
   transmissions are strobed by incoming ACKs. Thus, the second issue
   is to avoid any adverse impact of infrequent ACKs.

   Each of these issues can be handled by local link-layer solutions
   and/or by end-to-end techniques. In this section, we discuss several
   proposed solutions of both kinds.

   5.1 Reverse-link bandwidth management

   5.1.1 TCP header compression

   RFC 1144 describes TCP header compression for use over low-bandwidth
   links running SLIP or PPP. Because it greatly reduces the amortized
   size of ACKs on the reverse link when losses are infrequent (a
   situation that ensures that the state of the compressor and

Expires December 1999                                         [page 6]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   decompressor are synchronized), we recommend its use over low-
   bandwidth reverse links where possible.

   Unfortunately, there are many situations where this alone does not
   solve the problem. First, if the reverse link is loss-prone because
   of channel errors or network congestion, then the resulting
   desynchronization between the compressor and decompressor makes the
   benefit less significant. While RFC XXX does propose a technique
   (called ôtwiceö) to counter single packet loss, many studies have
   shown both wireless and congestion losses to occur in bursts [refs
   here]. Second, adverse interactions with the MAC protocol in packet
   radio networks arises because of the number of packets (ACKs) rather
   than their size. And finally, the reduced size of ACKs does not
   prevent the adverse interaction with large upstream data packets
   discussed in Section 4.4.

   5.1.2 ACK filtering

   ACK filtering (AF) is a TCP-aware link-layer technique that reduces
   the number of TCP ACKs sent on the reverse channel. The challenge is
   to ensure that the sender does not stall waiting for ACKs, which can
   happen if ACKs are removed indiscriminately on the reverse path. AF
   removes only certain ACKs without starving the sender by taking
   advantage of the fact that TCP ACKs are cumulative. As far as the
   senderÆs error control mechanism is concerned, the information
   contained in an ACK with a later sequence number subsumes the
   information contained in any earlier ACK.(XXX need to tighten this
   statement in view of SACKs)

   When an ACK from the receiver is about to be enqueued at a reverse
   direction router, the router or the end-hostÆs link layer (if the
   host is directly connected to the constrained link) checks its
   queues for any older ACKs belonging to the same connection. If any
   are found, it removes them from the queue, thereby reducing the
   number of ACKs that go back to the sender. The removal of these
   ôredundantö ACKs frees up buffer space for other data and ACK
   packets.

   The policy that the filter uses to drop packets is configurable and
   can either be deterministic or random (similar to a random-drop
   gateway, but taking the semantics of the items in the queue into
   consideration). State needs to be maintained only for connections
   with at least one pkt in the queue (akin to FRED). However, this
   state is soft, and if necessary, can easily be reconstructed from
   the contents of the queue.

   5.1.3 Drop-from-front

   XXX to be filled in from [LMS97]

   5.1.4 ACK congestion control



Expires December 1999                                         [page 7]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   ACK congestion control (ACC) is an alternative to ACK filtering and
   drop-from-front which operates end-to-end rather than at the
   upstream bottleneck router. The key idea in ACC is to extend
   congestion control to TCP acks, since they do make non-negligible
   demands on resources at the bandwidth-constrained upstream link.
   Acks occupy slots in the reverse channel buffer, whose capacity is
   often limited to a certain number of packets (rather than bytes).

   ACC has two parts: (a) a mechanism for the network to indicate to
   the receiver that the ack path is congested, and (b) the receiver's
   response to such an indication. One possibility for the former is
   the RED (Random Early Detection) algorithm [11] at the upstream
   bottleneck router. The router detects incipient congestion by
   tracking the average queue size over a time window in the recent
   past. If the average exceeds a threshold, the router selects a
   packet at random and marks it, i.e. sets an Explicit Congestion
   Notification (ECN) bit in the packet header. This notification is
   reflected back to the upstream TCP end host by its downstream peer.

   It is important to note that with ACC, both data packets and TCP
   acks are candidates for being marked with an ECN bit. Therefore,
   upon receiving an ACK packet with the ECN bit set, the TCP receiver
   reduces the rate at which it sends ACKs. The TCP receiver maintains
   a dynamically varying delayed-ack factor, d, and sends one ack for
   every d data packets. When it receives a packet with the ECN bit
   set, it increases d multiplicatively, thereby decreasing the
   frequency of acks also multiplicatively. Then for each subsequent
   round-trip time (determined using the TCP timestamp option) during
   which it does not receive an ECN, it linearly decreases the factor
   d, thereby increasing the frequency of acks. Thus, the receiver
   mimics the standard congestion control behavior of TCP senders in
   the manner in which it sends acks.

   There are bounds on the delayed-ack factor d. Obviously, the minimum
   value of d is 1, since at most one ack should be sent per data
   packet. The maximum value of d is determined by the senderÆs window
   size, which is conveyed to the receiver in a new TCP option. The
   receiver should send at least one ack (preferably more) for each
   window of data from the sender. Otherwise, it could cause the sender
   to stall until the receiverÆs delayed-ack timer (usually set at 200
   ms) kicks in and forces an ack to be sent.

   Despite RED+ECN, there may be times when the upstream router queue
   fills up and it needs to drop a packet. The router can pick a packet
   to drop in various ways. For instance, it can drop from the tail
   (ACC-D), or it can drop a packet that is already enqueued at random
   (ACC-R).

   5.1.5 Acks-first scheduling

   In the case of bi-directional transfers, data as well as ack packets
   compete for resources in the reverse direction (Section 
                                                          4.4). In
   this case, a single FIFO queue for both data and acks could cause

Expires December 1999                                         [page 8]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   problems. For example, if the reverse channel is a 28.8 Kbps dialup
   line, the transmission of a 1 KB sized data packet would take about
   280 ms. So even if just two such data packets get queued ahead of
   ack packets (not an uncommon occurrence since data packets are sent
   out in pairs during slow start), they would shut out acks for well
   over half a second. And if more than two data packets are queued up
   ahead of an ack, the acks would be delayed by even more.

   A possible approach to alleviating this problem is to schedule data
   and ack packets differently from FIFO. One algorithm, in particular,
   is acks-first scheduling, which always accords a higher priority to
   acks over data packets. The motivation for sich scheduling is that
   it minimizes the idle time for the forward connection by minimizing
   the amount of time that its acks spend queued behind upstream data
   packets. At the same time, with techniques such as header
   compression [RTC1144], the transmission time of acks becomes small
   enough that its impact on subsequent data packets is minimal.
   (Networks in which the per-packet overhead of the reverse channel is
   large, e.g. packet radio networks, are an exception.)

   Note that as with ACC, this scheduling scheme does not require the
   gateway to explicitly identify or maintain state for individual TCP
   connections.

   5.2 Handling infrequent ACKs

   This can be done either end-to-end or locally at the constrained
   reverse link.

   5.2.1 TCP sender adaptation

   ACC and AF alleviate the problem of congestion on the reverse
   bottleneck link by decreasing the frequency of acks, with each ack
   potentially acknowledging several data packets. As discussed in
   Section 4.1, this can cause problems such as sender burstiness and a
   slowdown in congestion window growth.

   Sender adaptation is an end-to-end technique for alleviating this
   problem. A bound is placed on the maximum number of packets the
   sender can transmit back-to-back, even if the window allows the
   transmission of more data. If necessary, more bursts of data are
   scheduled for later points in time computed based on the
   connectionÆs data rate. The data rate is estimated as the ratio
   cwnd/srtt, where cwnd is the TCP congestion window size and srtt is
   the smoothed RTT estimate. Thus, large bursts of data get broken up
   into smaller bursts spread out over time.

   The sender can avoid a slowdown in congestion window growth by
   simply taking into account the amount of data acknowledged by each
   ack, rather than the number of acks. So, if an ack acknowledges s
   segments, the window is grown as if s separate acks had been
   received. (One could treat the single ack as being equivalent to s/2
   instead of s acks to mimic the effect of the TCP delayed ack

Expires December 1999                                         [page 9]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   algorithm.) This policy works because the window growth is only tied
   to the available bandwidth in the forward direction, so the number
   of acks is immaterial.


5.2.2 ACK reconstruction

   ACK reconstruction is a technique to reconstruct the ACK stream
   after it has traversed the reverse direction bottleneck link. AR is
   a local technique designed to prevent the reduced ACK frequency from
   adversely affecting the performance of standard TCP sender
   implementations (i.e., those that do not implement sender
   adaptation). This enables us to use schemes such as ACK filtering or
   ACK congestion control without modifying TCP senders to perform
   sender adaptation. This solution can be easily deployed by Internet
   Service Providers (ISPs) of asymmetric access technologies in
   conjunction with AF to achieve good performance.

   AR deploys a soft-state agent called the ACK reconstructor at the
   upstream end of the constrained ACK bottleneck. The reconstructor
   does not need to be on the forward data path. It carefully fills in
   the gaps in the ACK sequence and introduces ACKs to smooth out the
   ACK stream seen by the sender. However, it does so without violating
   the end-to-end semantics of TCP ACKs, as explained below.

   Suppose two ACKs, a1 and a2 arrive at the reconstructor after
   traversing the constrained reverse link at times t1 and t2
   respectively. Let a2 - a1 = delta_a > 1. If a2 were to reach the
   sender soon after a1 with no intervening ACKs, at least delta_a
   segments are burst out by the sender (if the flow control window is
   large enough), and the congestion window increases by at most 1,
   independent of delta_a. ACK reconstruction remedies this problematic
   situation by interspersing ACKs to provide the sender with a larger
   number of ACKs at a consistent rate, which reduces the degree of
   burstiness and causes the congestion window to increase at a rate
   governed by the forward bottleneck.

   How is this done? One of the configurable parameters of the
   reconstructor is ack_thresh, the ACK threshold, which determines the
   spacing between interspersed ACKs at the output. Typically,
   ack_thresh is set to 2, which follows TCPÆs standard delayed-ACK
   policy. Thus, if successive ACKs arrive at the reconstructor
   separated by delta_a, it interposes ceil(delta_a/ack_thresh) - 2
   ACKs, where ceil() is the ceiling operator. The other parameter
   needed by the reconstructor is ack_interval, which determines the
   temporal spacing between the reconstructed ACKs. To do this, it
   measures the rate at which ACKs arrive at the input to the recon-
   structor. This rate depends on the output rate from the constrained
   reverse channel and on the presence of other traffic on that link.
   The reconstructor uses an exponentially weighted moving average
   estimator to monitor this rate; the output of the estimator is
   delta_t, the average temporal spacing at which ACKs are arriving at


Expires December 1999                                        [page 10]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   the reconstructor (and the average rate at which ACKs would reach
   the sender if there were no further losses or delays).
   If the reconstructor sets ack_interval equal to delta_t, then we
   would essentially operate at a rate governed by the reverse
   bottleneck link, and the resulting performance would be determined
   by the rate at which unfiltered ACKs arrive out of the reverse
   bottleneck link. If sender adaptation were being done, then the
   sender behaves as if the rate at which acks arrive us
   delta_a/delta_t. Therefore, a good method of deciding the temporal
   spacing of reconstructed ACKs, ack_interval, is to equate the rates
   at which increments in the ACK sequence happen in the two cases.
   That is, the reconstructor sets ack_interval such that
   delta_a/delta_t = ack_thresh/ack_interval, which implies that
   ack_interval = (ack_thresh/delta_a)*delta_t. Therefore, the latest
   ACK in current sequence, a2, is held back for a time roughly equal
   to delta_t, and ceil(delta_a/ack_thresh) - 2 ACKs are evenly
   interposed in this time.
   Thus, by carefully controlling the number of and spacing between
   ACKs, unmodified TCP senders can be made to increase their
   congestion window at the right rate and avoid bursty behavior. ACK
   reconstruction can be implemented by maintaining only ôsoft stateö
   [Clark88] at the reconstructor that can easily be regenerated if
   lost. Note that no spurious ACKs are generated by the reconstructor
   and the end-to-end semantics of the connection are completely
   preserved. The trade-off in AR is between obtaining less bursty
   performance, a better rate of congestion window increase, and a
   reduction in the round-trip variation, versus a modest increase in
   the round-trip time estimate at the sender. We believe that it is a
   good trade-off in the asymmetric environments we are concerned with.

   Construct matrix of proposed solution versus kinds of asymmetry it
   addresses


6. Security Considerations

   <Every draft should have a security section.>

   Security considerations in the context of this Internet Draft arise
   primarily from the possible use of IPSEC by the end hosts:

   1. With IPSEC ESP, the TCP header can neither be read nor modified
   by intermediate entities. This rules out header compression, ACK
   filtering, and ACK reconstruction.
   2. With IPSEC AH or TF-ESP, the TCP header can be read but not
   modified by intermediaries. This rules out ACK reconstruction but
   allows ACK filtering (can header compression be made to work with
   AH?).

   Another security consideration is that the very mechanisms used by
   ACK filtering and ACK reconstruction to address performance problems
   could be used by malicious intermediaries to launch denial-of-
   service attacks. For instance, the successful progression of a TCP

Expires December 1999                                        [page 11]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999


   connection can be halted either by withholding ACKs or by generating
   spurious ones that acknowledge data that has not gotten to the
   receiver yet. In our opinion, this security consideration is not
   tied so much to the mechanisms listed in this Internet Draft as to
   the broader question of whether is safe or worthwhile to allow
   intermediate entities to modify packet headers on-the-fly.

7. Summary

   In this Internet Draft, we have considered TCP performance problems
   that arise from asymmetry in network links and have listed possible
   solutions. We have considered asymmetry in bandwidth, latency, and
   media-access. We have discussed techniques that alleviate congestion
   due to ACKs and others that help a sender deal with infrequent ACKs.
   Some of the techniques operate end-to-end while others operate
   locally at the asymmetric link.

8. References

   [Bal98] H. Balakrishnan, "Challenges to Reliable Data Transport over
   Heterogeneous Wireless Networks", Ph.D. Thesis, University of
   California at Berkeley, USA, August 1998
   http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~hari/thesis/

   [BPK97] H. Balakrishnan, V. N. Padmanabhan, R. H. Katz, "The Effects
   of Asymmetry on TCP Performance", Proc. ACM/IEEE Mobicom, Budapest,
   Hungary, September 1997

   [BPK99] H. Balakrishnan, V. N. Padmanabhan, R. H. Katz, "The Effects
   of Asymmetry on TCP Performance", ACM Mobile Networks and
   Applications (MONET), 1999 (to appear). This is an expanded journal
   version of the Mobicom '97 paper.

   [CR98] R. Cohen, S. Ramanathan, "TCP for High Performance in Hybrid
   Fiber Coaxial Broad-Band Access Networks", IEEE/ACM Transactions on
   Networking, February 1998.

   [KVR97] L. Kalampoukas, A. Varma, K. K. Ramakrishnan, "Performance
   of Two-Way TCP Traffic over Asymmetric Access Links", Proc. Interop
   '97 Engineers' Conference, May 1997.

   [LMS97] T. V. Lakshman, U. Madhow, B. Suter, "Window-based Error
   Recovery and Flow Control with a Slow Acknowledgement Channel: A
   Study of TCP/IP Performance", Proc. IEEE Infocom, Kobe, Japan, April
   1997.

   [Pad98] V. N. Padmanabhan, "Addressing the Challenges of Web Data
   Transport", Ph.D. Thesis, University of California at Berkeley, USA,
   September 1998 (also Tech Report UCB/CSD-98-1016)
   http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~padmanab/phd-thesis.html

   [RFC1144] V. Jacobson, "Compressing TCP/IP Headers for Low-Speed
   Serial Links", RFC, February 1990

Expires December 1999                                        [page 12]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999



   XXX more refs?

   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997



   < Your references will be listed here. View "Page Layout" if they
   are not currently visible. >



9. Acknowledgments

   We are grateful to Randy Katz (UC Berkeley) for supervising our
   research on asymmetric networks and contributing to some of the
   ideas described in this document. We thank Metricom Inc. and Hybrid
   Networks Inc. for providing us equipment to conduct experiments at
   Berkeley, especially Mike Ritter (Metricom), Ed Moura (Hybrid), and
   Subir Varma (Hybrid) for their support and comments.

   We thank Spencer Dawkins, Aaron Falk, and Mark Allman for their
   constant persuasion that forced us to write this up (albeit later
   than promised)!


10. Authors' Addresses

   Hari Balakrishnan
   Laboratory for Computer Science
   545 Technology Square
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology
   Cambridge, MA 02139
   USA
   Phone: +1-617-253-8713
   Fax: +1-617-253-0147
   Email:  
          hari@lcs.mit.ed
                         
                         u
   Web: http://wind.lcs.mit.edu/~hari/

   Venkata N. Padmanabhan
   Microsoft Research
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA 98052
   USA
   Phone: +1-425-705-2790
   Fax: +1-425-936-7329
   Email: padmanab@microsoft.com
   Web: http://www.research.microsoft.com/~padmanab/


Expires December 1999                                        [page 13]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999
























































Expires December 1999                                        [page 14]


INTERNET DRAFT         PILC - Asymmetric Links         September 1999



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into INCOMPLETE! XXX







































Expires December 1999                                        [page 15]

