

SIPPING                                                                 
   Internet Draft                                             Roni Even 
   Document: draft-even-sipping-conference-                     Polycom 
             scenarios-00.txt                            Nermeen Ismail 
                                                                  Cisco 
                                                          Andrew Zmolek 
                                                                  Aaaya 
   Expires: February 2003                                   August 2002 
    
    
                         SIP Conferencing Scenarios 

             draft-even-sipping-conference-scenarios-00.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
Abstract 
   This document describes SIP conferencing scenarios. It will describe 
   basic and advance conferencing scenarios. These conferencing 
   scenarios will help with definition and evaluation of the 
   requirements for SIP conferencing work frame. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even et al.            Expires - February 2003               [Page 1] 
                      SIP Conferencing Scenarios           August 2002 
 
 
Table of Contents 
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Simple Conferencing scenarios..................................2 
   3. Advance Conferencing scenarios.................................3 
   4. IANA Considerations............................................6 
   5. Security Considerations........................................6 
   6. References.....................................................6 
   7. Author's Addresses.............................................6 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
    
   This document describes SIP conferencing scenarios. It will describe 
   basic and advance conferencing scenarios. These conferencing 
   scenarios will help with The definition and the evaluation of the 
   requirements for SIP conferencing work frame. 
   The advanced scenarios will assume the UA functionality based on 
   relevant SIP RFCs that will be needed in order to participate in the 
   conference and take advantage of the conference functionality. The 
   entities composing the conference will be the "focus" that is the 
   center point for signalling and the members. A special member is the 
   member who initiated the conference. 
   The scenarios described are to demonstrate different conferencing 
   services that can be offered in the SIP environment that will benefit 
   from having some support in the UAs that will enable more robust and 
   easier to use conferencing services. It will be up to the 
   conferencing bridge manufacturers and the service provider to decide 
   what services can be built and which services will be offered to the 
   end users. 
    
    
    
    
2. Simple Conferencing scenarios 
    
   These scenarios will assume a UA that support basic SIP functionality
   as described in RFC3261 [3] and RFC3264 [4]. The reason for these 
   scenarios is to enable a basic UA without any specific conferencing 
   extensions to create, join and participate in a conference. The UA 
   may use an out of band signalling to participate in a conference but 
   this is not a mandatory requirement. The focus will have all the 
   functionality it needs in order to supply the service offered to the 
   members. The UA shall be able to provide DTMF tones. 
    
   2.1. Ad-hoc conference - a member has a service provisioned to him 
   that enables him to start an ad-hoc conference when he calls the 
   focus. When the member wants to start a conference he calls the 
   conference service. The member may be identified by different means 
   including the called number, the calling number or an IVR system 
 
Even et al.            Expires - February 2003               [Page 2] 
                      SIP Conferencing Scenarios           August 2002 
 
 
   using in-band DTMF tones. The conference is created automatically 
   with the predefined functionality. The member who has such a service 
   notifies the other participants how to call the conference via an 
   external mean like email. The member may have the functionality of a 
   focus and thus can create ad-hoc conference using his own UA 
   functionality. An example of such a conference is an audio conference 
   initiated by one of the members who has a conference service that 
   enables him to start a conference when he calls a specific number (or 
   URI). The conference may be created by the first person calling this 
   number or it may be created only after the owner is authenticated 
   using an IVR system, the other participants may get an announcement 
   and are placed on hold if they call the conference before the owner.  
    
   2.2. Extension of a Point to point calls to a multipoint call - This 
   is a simple case. The initiating member is in a call with one party 
   and wants to add another party to the call. The initiating member 
   cannot handle the focus on his UA nor can the other member. Both of 
   them cannot support call transfer. The way to do this conference is 
   by disconnecting and using the above method.  The information about 
   the conference will be conveyed in the point-to-point call. The focus 
   may support dial out allowing the initiating member to call the third 
   party. 
    
   2.3. Reserved conference - the reservation was done by out of band 
   mechanism. The conference identification is allocated by the 
   reservation system. It is sent to all participants. The participants 
   join using the conference identification. The conference 
   identification must be routable enabling the allocation of a focus 
   with free resources at the time when the conference will actually 
   run. The focus can also dial out to the conference members. The UAs 
   will not be aware that they are in a conference. The participants may 
   know via announcement from the conference that they are in a 
   conference and who are the other members 
    
    
3. Advance Conferencing scenarios 
    
    
   These scenarios will assume UAs that support at least call transfer 
   service and a way to communicate information on events from the focus 
   to the UA. The focus will be able to know the capabilities of the 
   members to identify if they support the call transfer. The section 
   will specify in each scenario the dependencies. An advance conference 
   can be initiated by a UA that has advanced features but some UAs in 
   the conference may have lesser functionality.  
    
   3.1 Extending a point-to-point call to a multipoint call. The 
   initiating member is in a point-to-point call and want to add a third 
   member. The initiating member can start a multipoint call on a 
   conferencing bridge known to him. The extension can be without 
 
Even et al.            Expires - February 2003               [Page 3] 
                      SIP Conferencing Scenarios           August 2002 
 
 
   consultation, which means that he moves the point-to-point call to 
   the focus and then adds the third party (this can be done in various 
   ways). The extension can be done with consultation, which means that 
   he puts his current party on hold calls, the third party and asks him 
   to join the conference and then transfers all the members to the 
   conferencing bridge.  
    
    
    
   3.2 Lecture mode conferences - enable a conference with a lecturer 
   that present a topic and can allow questions. The lecturer needs to 
   know who are the participants and to be able to give them the right 
   to speak. The right to speak can be based on floor control but can 
   also be based on out of band mechanism.  
    
   3.3 Conference with non-SIP members - A focus can include 
   participants that are not SIP UAs that are joining the focus via a 
   gateway function. Those members may be basic participants or the GW 
   function will proxy the advanced functionality between the different 
   protocols and the SIP focus. 
    
   3.4 A reserved or ad-hoc conference with conference aware members. 
   The initiating member will call the focus using for example a unique 
   identifier in order to start the conference. The focus may use some 
   authenticating method to qualify the member. The other participants 
   may call the focus and join the conference. The focus will be able to 
   find the capabilities of the members.  
   In case of a reserved conference the focus will start the conference 
   at the scheduled time. The members may join by call the conference ID 
   or the focus may call them. The conference may have privilege levels 
   associated with a specific conference or member. The privileges will 
   be for the initiating member and for a regular member; the initiating 
   member may delegate privileges to the other members. The privileges 
   will allow functionalities as defined in the next section. 
    
   3.5 The following scenarios can be used in all the advance 
   conferencing scenarios. In the examples given in this section, when 
   referring to a member that has a functionality it means a member with 
   the right privileges. These scenarios may be available in the 
   advanced conferencing scenarios and are common in many conferencing 
   applications. These are not a requirement list but some examples of 
   how specific functionality is being used in a conference. 
    
   Add Participants - A member may add a new member to the focus. This 
   can be done, for example, by instructing the focus to call the 
   participant or by the member calling the participant and pointing him 
   to the conference. The member may delete participants from the focus 
   if he can identify them. 
    

 
Even et al.            Expires - February 2003               [Page 4] 
                      SIP Conferencing Scenarios           August 2002 
 
 
   Authenticate participants - A member can authenticate members that 
   want to join the focus. This can be done implicitly by assigning a 
   password to the conference and letting the focus authenticate the new 
   members or explicitly by directing the authentication requests to the 
   initiating member who will authenticate each user. 
    
   Controlling the presentation of media - during the conference the 
   member may be able to manage whose media is being sent to each 
   participant. For example the member may be able to decide that he 
   wants to be the speaker and all the rest are listeners he may also 
   specify whose media he wants to receive.  The member may be able to 
   mute a media stream during the conference. 
    
   Giving privileges - the member may want, during the conference, to 
   give a privilege to another member. The assigning of privileges may 
   be implicit when requested or explicit by asking the member to grant 
   a privilege. 
    
   Side conferences or sidebars - the member may want to create a side 
   conference that include some of the participants and when the side 
   conference is done the members will return to the main conference. A 
   side bar may have the same functionalities as the main conference. 
   There can be some sidebars scenarios. The simple one will be based on 
   capabilities of two participants to have two calls at the same time 
   and they will have a point to point call in parallel to the main 
   conference, it is an end point implementation to decide if to mix 
   both calls streams or to enable the user to switch between them. The 
   sidebar scenario that will use the focus will use the same call he is 
   in and let the focus create the sidebar and compose the relevant 
   sidebar stream mixes. These mixes can include the main conference as 
   an incoming stream to the mix. The way to signal the creation of the 
   sidebar and how to invite members and control the mixes should be 
   available.  
    
   Focus information - When a member joins the focus he is announced to 
   the members. An announcement may be available when he leaves the 
   focus. The members may query the focus for its current members.  
    
   Extending of a conference - Reserved conferences and ad-hoc 
   conferences may have a time limit. The focus will inform the members 
   when the limit is close and may allow the extension of the 
   conference. 
    
   Adding and removing a media type to the conference - a member may 
   want to start a power point presentation during a conference. He may 
   want to distribute this new media to all the members. The member will 
   request from the focus to start the new media channel and to allow 
   him to send data in the new channel.  
    
    
 
Even et al.            Expires - February 2003               [Page 5] 
                      SIP Conferencing Scenarios           August 2002 
 
 
    
    
4. IANA Considerations 
    
   No IANA considerations in this specification 
    
    
5. Security Considerations 
    
   No specific security considerations for this draft. Security 
   consideration will be available in the relevant drafts that will 
   compose the suggested solution 
    
6. References 
    
   [1]S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9 
   ,RFC 2026, October 1996 
    
   [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
   Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [3] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, et al.  , "SIP: Session initiation 
      protocol," RFC 3261, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 2002. 
    
   [4] J.Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model with Session 
      Description Protocol (SDP)" RFC 3264, Internet Engineering Task 
      Force. June 2002. 
    
    
7. Author's Addresses 
    
   Roni Even 
   Polycom Network Systems 
   94 Derech Em Hamoshavot          Phone:  +972-3-9251200 
   Petach Tikva, Israel             Email:  roni.even@polycom.co.il 
    
   Nermeen Ismail 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive            Phone: +1 408 853 8714 
   San Jose, CA 95134-1706, USA     Email: nismail@cisco.com 
    
   Andrew Zmolek 
   Avaya, Inc. 
   8740 Lucent Blvd.                        Phone +1 720 444 4001 
   Highlands Ranch, CO, USA        Email: zmolek@avaya.com 
    




 
Even et al.            Expires - February 2003               [Page 6] 

