


v6ops Working Group                                      G. Van de Velde
Internet-Draft                                                  O. Troan
Intended status: Informational                             Cisco Systems
Expires: March 4, 2011                                          T. Chown
                                               University of Southampton
                                                         August 31, 2010


              Non-Managed IPv6 Tunnels considered Harmful
            <draft-vandevelde-v6ops-harmful-tunnels-01.txt>

Abstract

   IPv6 is ongoing and natively being deployed by a growing community
   and it is important that the quality perception and traffic flows are
   as optimal as possible.  Ideally it would be as good as the IPv4
   perceptive experience.

   This paper looks into a set of transitional technologies where the
   actual user has IPv6 connectivity through the means of IPv6-in-IPv4
   tunnels.  A subset of the available tunnels has the property of being
   non-managed (i.e. 6to4 [RFC3056] and Teredo [RFC4380] ).

   While native IPv6 deployments will keep growing it is uncertain or
   even expected that non-managed IPv6 tunnels will be providing the
   same user experience and operational quality as managed tunnels or
   native IPv6 connectivity.

   This paper will detail some considerations around non-managed tunnels
   and will document the harmful element of these for the future growth
   of networks and the Internet.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 4, 2011.



Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

























Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Managed Tunnelling Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Tunnel User Experience Views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Why do non-managed tunnels exist?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Non-Managed Tunnelling Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  Performance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Topological Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.3.  Operational Provisioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.4.  Operational Troubleshooting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.5.  Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.6.  Content Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






























Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


1.  Introduction

   While the Internet and networks continue to grow, it is found that
   the deployment of IPv6 within these networks is an ongoing activity
   due to global IPv4 address pool depletion.  An important aspect is
   that the quality, availability and security of the IPv6 connectivity
   is as good as possible, and when possible even more advanced as the
   IPv4 connectivity.

   Historically IETF has been facilitating a variety of technologies and
   procedures to deploy IPv6 successfully in addition to existing IPv4
   connectivity.  In general and for the sake of this draft these
   procedures and technologies can be divided into three major groups:
   (1) native (dual-stack) IPv6, (2) Tunnelled IPv6 and (3) Translation.
   While native IPv6 deployments has been steadily growing, the value
   and the drawbacks of some tunnelling mechanisms can be investigated.
   Translational techniques provide a total different aspect of
   considerations and applicability and is beyond the scope of this
   paper.  Transition techniques have been and still are in many cases
   important for the bootstrapping of IPv6, this paper will look into a
   range of property aspects of non-managed IPv6 tunnelling techniques.
   Areas of perverse traffic paths, security considerations, lack of
   business incentives to run tunnel relays/gateways, black holing and
   ownership of supportability will be analysed.  Finally the paper will
   conclude that for the growth of IP connectivity, non-managed
   tunnelling techniques are considered harmful especially for those
   that want to access applications over the network through pervasive
   IPv6 connectivityand have no particular interrest on how connectivity
   to the applications is established (IPv4, translation, IPv6, etc...)


2.  Managed Tunnelling Properties

   A managed tunnel is a tunnel has a few properties supporting the
   ownership and quality of the tunnel.

   When using a managed service, there tends to be an administrative
   entity which provides quality assurance and can take action if users
   of the service are experiencing a degraded service.  An example would
   be 6rd tunnels [RFC5969]

   In addition there is a general trust awareness and agreement between
   the user of the managed tunnel service and the provider of the
   managed tunnel service.







Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


3.  Tunnel User Experience Views

   The tunnel experience can be divided into three distinct segments:
   (1) the End-user view, (2) the Enterprise View and (3) the Service
   Provider View.

   The End-user view exists mainly out of two different user profiles.
   The technical power user and the general user mainly trying to reach
   their favourite application on the network.  The technical power user
   may have a particular interrest to run IPv6 as a transport mechanism,
   and if his upstream service provider has no native IPv6 connectivity
   available, then non-managed tunneling mechanisms may provide a
   solution satisfying to the immediate needs of the technical power
   user.  Alternatively, the general user trying to reach his favourite
   network application, may have no interest or awareness of his IPv6
   usage, particulary when non-managed tunnels are utilized.

   The Enterprise View is a more traffic flows and network oriented
   possitioning.  When the upstream service provider does not have an
   IPv6 offer, then the enterprise may start to rely upon a technology
   as 6to4 [RFC3056].  However this technology has the potential of
   creating quite perverse traffic paths when user want to reach
   applications on the Internet.  When user would like to reach other
   6to4 [RFC3056] users, then more optimized traffic paths, generally
   following the IPv4 traffic paths are realized

   The final view is how a Internet service provider looks into non-
   managed tunnel usage.  A service provider may decide to deploy a 6to4
   relay to increase the IPv6 quality of their customers.  This a
   service which require resources (money, maintenance, etc...).  Often
   the 6to4 relay service is not just (always) restricted to only the
   service providers customers, which as result provides often results
   in a demotivation to provide quality tunnel relay devices.  From a
   content service provider perspective the usage of non-managed tunnel
   often results in measurable differences in RTT and reliability in
   some cases, and hence are reluctant to bring all services to
   mainstream IPv6 for all users 'just yet'.


4.  Why do non-managed tunnels exist?

   Non-managed tunnels exist due to a variety of reasons.

   Early adopters: people and organisations with a desire to use new and
   potentially market disrupting technologies and applications may have
   a desire to use the latest IP even when the upstream provider doesn't
   have an available service offering.




Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


   Lock-step process to implement IPv6: It is not trivial to move a
   system or an organisation in lock-step towards IPv6 and the aid of
   tunnels help in this process.

   The utilisation of tunnels aid in providing a de-coupling between
   infrastructure readiness and application readiness, and hence
   contribute to the development of both elements.


5.  Non-Managed Tunnelling Properties

   The properties of Non-managed tunnels span many different areas.  In
   this section the properties are analysed and segmented within
   different areas of impact.  In each case the comparison is made
   between native IPv6 connectivity and connectivity through a non-
   managed tunnel.  A common property of non-managed tunnels is that
   they often use well-known anycast addresses or other well known
   addresses and anticipate upon the goodwill of middleware (typically a
   relay or gateway) device to serve as a tunnel termination point.  In
   some cases, for example a 6to4 relay can be provided by a connected
   responsible service provider, and hence good quality operation can be
   guaranteed.

   Non-managed tunnels often have asymmetric behaviour.  There is an
   outbound and an inbound connectivity behaviour from the tunnel
   initiator.  It is possible to influence the good quality tunnel
   behaviour of the outbound connectivity (e.g. by explicit setting of
   the 6to4 relay), however, influencing good inbound connectivity is
   often an issue.

5.1.  Performance

   Deploying a tunnelling mechanism mostly results in encapsulation and
   de-capsulation efforts.  Often this activity has a performance impact
   on the device, especially when the device does not use hardware
   acceleration for this functionality.  If the performance impact is
   scoped into the device its lifetime through performance capacity
   management then the actual impact is predictive.  Non-deterministic
   tunnels tend to have a non-predictive behaviour for capacity, and
   hence application and network performance is non-predictive.  The key
   reason for this is the decoupling of the capacity management of the
   tunnel aggregation devices from the capacity desired by users of the
   aggregation devices.

   During initial IPv6 deployment there have been mainly technical savvy
   people that have been using non-managed tunnel technologies and it
   has for many been working well.  However, if non-managed tunnelling
   would be deployed in mass and especially when enabled by default by



Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


   CPE vendors or host vendors then those aggregation points could
   become overloaded and result in bad performance.  There are a few
   measures that can be taken, i.e. upgrade the CPU power of the
   aggregation device or its bandwidth available, however this may not
   happen without the right motivation for the operator of the
   aggregation device (i.e. cash flows, reputation, competitive reasons,
   etc... ).

5.2.  Topological Considerations

   Due to non-managed IPv6 tunnels the traffic flows may result in sub-
   optimal flows through the network topology between two communicating
   devices.  The impact for example can cause increase of the RTT and
   packet loss, especially considering the availability (or better non-
   availability) of tunnel aggregation/de-aggregation points of certain
   topological areas or realms.  The increase of non-managed tunnel
   usage would amplify the negative impact on good quality connectivity.
   For many operators of tunnel aggregation/de-aggregation devices there
   is little motivation to increase the quality and number of available
   devices within a topological area or logistical realm.

5.3.  Operational Provisioning

   Some elements regarding provisioning of both managed and non-managed
   tunnels can be controlled, while others are beyond control or
   influence of people and applications using tunnels.  To make
   applications highly reliable and performing, all elements within the
   traffic path must provide an expected quality service and
   performance.  For managed tunnels, the user or provider of the tunnel
   can exercise a degree of operational management and hence influence
   good quality behaviour upon the tunnel especially upon the
   aggregation and de-aggregation devices.  In some cases even the
   traffic path between both aggregation and de-aggregation can be
   controlled.  Non-managed tunnels however have less good quality
   behaviour of both tunnel aggregation and de-aggregation devices
   because often good quality behaviour is beyond the control or
   influence of the tunnel user.  For non-managed tunnels the tunnel
   aggregator and/or tunnel de-aggregator are operated by a 3rd party
   which may have a conflicting interest with the user of the non-
   managed tunnel.  An exception is where the use of the tunnel
   mechanism is all within one ISP, or ISPs who are 'well coupled', e.g.
   as happens between many NRENs.

5.4.  Operational Troubleshooting

   When one is using non-managed tunnels, then these tunnels may get
   aggregated or de-aggregated by a 3rd party or a device outside the
   control of a contracted service provider.  Troubleshooting these



Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


   devices these devices will be pretty hard for the tunnel user or to
   work around the issue.

   Also some tools like traceroute don't work too well on asymmetric
   paths.  Another aspect is that tunnels show as one hop in a
   traceroute, not indicating where problems may be.

5.5.  Security

   For an aggregating or de-aggregating tunnel device it is a non-
   trivial issue to separate the valid traffic from non-valid traffic
   because it is from the aggregation device perspective almost
   impossible to know -from- and -towards- about the tunnel traffic.
   This imposes potential attacks on the available resources of the
   aggregating/de-aggregating router.  A detailed security analysis for
   6to4 tunnels can be found in [RFC3964].

   For the user of the non-managed IPv6 tunnel there is an underlying
   trust that the aggregating/de-aggregating device is a trustworthy
   device.  However, some of the devices used are run by anonymous 3rd
   parties outside the trusted infrastructure from the user perspective,
   which is not an ideal situation.  The usage of non-managed tunnels
   increases the risk of rogue aggregation/de-aggregation devices and
   may be open to malicious packet analyses or manipulation.

   From the operator perspective, managing the aggregating/
   de-aggregating tunnel device, there is a trust assumption that no-one
   abuses the service.  Abuse may impact preset or assumed service
   quality levels, and hence the quality provided can be impacted

   There is also an impact caused by ipv4 firewalling upon non-managed
   tunnels.  Common firewall policies recommend to block tunnels,
   especially non-managed tunnels, because there is no trust that the
   traffic within the tunnel is not of mallicious intend.  This
   restricts the applicability of some non-managed tunnel mechanisms
   (e.g. 6to4).  Other tunnel mechanisms have found manners to avoid
   traditional firewall filtering (e.g.  Teredo) and open the local
   network infrastructure for mallicious influence (e.g. virus, worms,
   infrastructure attacs, etc..).

5.6.  Content Services

   When providing content services a very important related aspect is
   that these services are accessible with high reliability, are
   trustworthy and have a high performance.  Using non-managed tunnels
   makes this a much harder equation and can result in all three
   elements to suffer negatively, without the ability to uniquely
   identify and resolve the root cause.  The statistical impact of non-



Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


   mnaged tunnels has been measured by some Internet Content providers
   and is often an additional delay of O(100msec) (need to add reference
   here)

   This reduces the interest of content providers to provide content
   services over IPv6 when non-managed tunnels are used.


6.  Conclusion

   Non-managed tunnels have properties impacting the growth of networks
   and the Internet in a negative way.  Consequences regarding black-
   holing, perverse traffic paths, lack of business incentive and
   operational management influence and security issues are a real
   pragmatic concern, while universal supportability for the tunnel
   relay services appear to be non-trivial.  Due to these elements the
   usage of non-managed tunnelling can be considered harmful for the
   growth of networks and the Internet.


7.  IANA Considerations

   There are no extra IANA consideration for this document.


8.  Security Considerations

   There are no extra Security consideration for this document.


9.  Acknowledgements


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3056]  Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains
              via IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC3964]  Savola, P. and C. Patel, "Security Considerations for
              6to4", RFC 3964, December 2004.

   [RFC4380]  Huitema, C., "Teredo: Tunneling IPv6 over UDP through
              Network Address Translations (NATs)", RFC 4380,
              February 2006.



Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Non-Managed Tunnels are Harmful         August 2010


   [RFC4798]  De Clercq, J., Ooms, D., Prevost, S., and F. Le Faucheur,
              "Connecting IPv6 Islands over IPv4 MPLS Using IPv6
              Provider Edge Routers (6PE)", RFC 4798, February 2007.

   [RFC5214]  Templin, F., Gleeson, T., and D. Thaler, "Intra-Site
              Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP)", RFC 5214,
              March 2008.

   [RFC5969]  Townsley, W. and O. Troan, "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd) -- Protocol Specification",
              RFC 5969, August 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Gunter Van de Velde
   Cisco Systems
   De Kleetlaan 6a
   Diegem  1831
   Belgium

   Phone: +32 2704 5473
   Email: gvandeve@cisco.com


   Ole Troan
   Cisco Systems
   Folldalslia 17B
   Bergen  N-5239
   Norway

   Phone: +47 917 38519
   Email: ot@cisco.com


   Tim Chown
   University of Southampton
   Highfield
   Southampton,   SO17 1BJ
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 23 8059 3257
   Email: tjc@ecs.soton.ac.uk








Van de Velde, et al.      Expires March 4, 2011                [Page 10]


