Network Working Group                                       Jutta Degener
Internet Draft					           Sendmail, Inc.
Expires: July 2004                                           January 2004


                      Sieve -- "editheader" extension
		  <draft-degener-sieve-editheader-01.txt>


Status of this memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all
   provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Abstract

   This document defines two new actions for the "sieve"
   language that add and delete e-mail header fields.


1. Introduction

   Email headers are a flexible and easy to understand means
   of communication between email processors.
   This extension enables sieve scripts to interact with other
   components that consume or produce header fields by allowing
   the script to delete and add header fields.


2. Conventions used.

   Conventions for notations are as in [SIEVE] section 1.1, including
   use of [KEYWORDS] and "Syntax:" label for the definition of action
   and tagged arguments syntax.

   The term "header field" is used here as in [RFC-2822] to mean a
   logical line of an e-mail message header.

   The capability string associated with extension defined in this
   document is "editheader".


3. Action addheader

   Syntax:
   	"addheader" [":last"] <name: string> <value: string>

   The addheader action adds a header field to the existing
   message header.  The name MUST be a valid 7-bit US-ASCII header
   field name as described by [RFC-2822] "field-name" nonterminal.

   If the specified field value does not match the RFC 2822
   "unstructured" nonterminal or exceeds a length limit set by
   the implementation, the implementation MUST either flag an
   error or encode the field using folding white space and the
   encodings described in RFC 2047 or RFC 2231 to be compliant
   with RFC 2822.

   An implementation MAY impose a length limit onto the size of
   the encoded header field; such a limit MUST NOT be less
   than 998 characters, not including the terminating CRLF
   supplied by the implementation.

   By default, the header field is inserted at the beginning of
   the existing header.  If the optional flag ":last" is
   specified, it is appended at the end.

   Example:
	/* Don't redirect if we already redirected */
	if not header :contains "X-Sieve-Filtered"
		["<kim@job.tld>", "<kim@home.tld>"]
	{
   		addheader "X-Sieve-Filtered" "<kim@job.tld>";
		redirect "kim@home.tld";
	}


4. Action deleteheader

   Syntax:
   	"deleteheader"
		[":index" <fieldno: number> [":last"]]
		[COMPARATOR] [MATCH-TYPE]
		<field-name: string>
		[<value-patterns: string-list>]

   By default, the deleteheader action deletes all occurrences
   of the named header field.

   The field-name is mandatory and always matched as a
   case-insensitive us-ascii string.  The value-patterns,
   if specified, are matched according to the match type and
   comparator.  If none are specified, all values match.

   The field-name MUST be a valid 7-bit header field name as
   described by the [RFC-2822] "field-name" nonterminal.

   If :index <fieldno> is specified, the attempts to match 
   a value are limited to the header field <fieldno> (beginning
   at 1, the first named header field).  If :last is specified,
   the count is backwards; 1 denotes the last named header field,
   2 the second to last, and so on.  The counting happens
   before the <value-patterns> match, if any;
   
   	deleteheader :index 2 :contains "Received" "via carrier-pidgeon"

   deletes the second "Received:" header field if it contains
   the string "via carrier-pidgeon" (not the second Received: field
   that contains "via carrier-pidgeon").


5. Interaction with Other Sieve Extensions

   Tests and actions such as "exist" or "header" that examine
   header fields MUST examine the current state of a header as
   modified by any actions that have taken place so far.
   
   As an example, the "header" test in the following fragment will
   always evaluate to true, regardless of whether the incoming
   message contained an "X-Hello" header field or not:

	addheader "X-Hello" "World";
	if header :contains "X-Hello" "World"
	{
		fileinto "Hi";
	}

   Actions that create messages in storage or in transport to
   MTAs MUST store and send messages with the current set of
   header fields.

   A message modified by addheader or deleteheader MUST NOT
   be considered the same as the original message unless it
   matches the original message exactly.
   
   For example, the following code fragment

   	keep;
	addheader "X-Flavor: vanilla"
	keep;

   files two messages, not one.

   The "implicit keep" is thought to be executed at the end of
   the script, after the headers have been modified.


6. Security Considerations

   Someone with write access to a user's script storage may use this
   extension to generate headers that a user would otherwise be
   shielded from (by a gateway MTA that removes them).

   A sieve filter that removes headers may unwisely destroy
   evidence about the path a header has taken.

   Any change in a message content may interfere with digital
   signature mechanisms that include the header in the signed
   material.

   Any decision mechanism in a user's filter that is based
   on headers is vulnerable to header spoofing.  For example,
   if the user adds an APPROVED header or tag, a malicious sender
   may add that tag or header themselves.  One way to guard against
   this is to delete or rename any such headers or stamps prior
   to processing the message.


7. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Eric Allman, Ned Freed, Philip Guenther, Simon Josefsson,
   Will Lee, Chris Markle, Randall Schwartz, Kjetil Torgrim Homme, 
   and Rand Wacker for extensive corrections and suggestions.


8. Author's Address

   Jutta Degener
   Sendmail, Inc.
   6425 Christie Ave, 4th Floor
   Emeryville, CA 94608

   Email: jutta@sendmail.com


9. Discussion

   This section will be removed when this document leaves the
   Internet-Draft stage.

   This draft is intended as an extension to the Sieve mail filtering
   language.  Sieve extensions are discussed on the MTA Filters mailing
   list at <ietf-mta-filters@imc.org>.  Subscription  requests can
   be sent to <ietf-mta-filters-request@imc.org> (send an email
   message with the word "subscribe" in the body).

   More information on the mailing list along with a WWW archive of
   back messages is available at <http://www.imc.org/ietf-mta-filters/>.

9.1 Changes from the previous version

   Removed "replaceheader" action and reference to variables.
   Expanded discussion of interactions with existing sieve primitives.
   Referenced RFC 2822's definition of "header field".
   Changed insertion position default to beginning of header,
   and added :last parameter to restore the original default. 

Appendices

Appendix A.  References

   [RFC-2822] Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822, April
              2001.

   [SIEVE]    Showalter, T.,  "Sieve: A Mail Filtering Language", RFC 3028,
   	      January 2001.

   [KEYWORDS] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

Appendix B. Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2004. All Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
    or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
    and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
    kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
    are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
    the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
    developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
    copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
    followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
    English.

    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
    BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
    HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
    MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

