


                                                          Siva Sivabalan 
                                                    Francois Le Faucheur  
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                         
                                                           Raymond Zhang
                                            Infonet Services Corporation 
                                                                         
 
   
IETF Internet Draft 
Expires: December, 2003                                                
Document: draft-sivabalan-diff-te-bundling-02.txt             June, 2003 
 
 
 
                        Link Bundling support for  
                   Diff-Serv aware Traffic Engineering 
 
Status of this Memo 
   
  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are 
  Working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
  areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
  distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
   
   
Abstract 
   
  This document describes how bandwidth-related MPLS Traffic 
  Engineering parameters need to be advertised for a bundled link in 
  order to support Diff-Serv aware Traffic Engineering. 
   
Summary for Sub-IP related Internet Drafts  
    
  RELATED DOCUMENTS:  
  See references. 
   
  WHERE DOES IT FIT IN THE PICTURE OF THE SUB-IP WORK  
  This ID is intended for the TEWG. 
 
  



                   Link Bundling Support for DS-TE            June 2003 

  
  WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG(s)  
  TEWG is responsible for specifying protocol extensions for support of 
  Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering. 
 
  
  JUSTIFICATION  
  The TEWG charter states that "This will entail verification and 
  review of the Diffserv requirements in the WG Framework document and 
  initial specification of how these requirements can be met through 
  use and potentially expansion of existing protocols." 
  In line with this, the TEWG is progressing a Working Group document 
  specifying protocol extensions for Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic 
  Engineering. 

  This ID discusses how these protocol extensions need to be used in 
  the particular case of bundled links, which are not currently covered 
  by the Working Group document. 
   
   
1.      Introduction 
 
  As defined in [BUNDLE], a Traffic Engineering (TE) link bundle is a 
  logical entity that represents a group of physical and/or logical TE 
  links connecting Label Switching Routers (LSRs). The TE links making 
  up a TE bundle link are called component links. As with ordinary TE 
  links, TE parameters associated with a bundled TE link are advertised 
  (e.g., via OSPF) to allow Constraint Based Routing. However, TE 
  parameters for individual component links are not flooded. As such, 
  an LSR that is not directly attached to a bundled link views that 
  bundled link as a single link for path computation purpose.  
   
  As stated in [DSTE-REQ] and [DSTE-PROTO], Diff-Serv Traffic 
  Engineering (DS-TE) provides the capability to engineer network 
  traffic on a per "class" basis instead of on an aggregate basis. With 
  DS-TE, CSPF and admission control are done on a per class basis 
  instead of on an aggregate basis as with ordinary TE. Consequently, 
  DS-TE requires that certain bandwidth parameters are advertised on a 
  per class basis. [DSTE-PROTO] specifies how those TE parameters are 
  advertised on a per class basis on non-bundled links. 
   
  [BUNDLE] specifies how to derive TE parameters for a bundled link 
  from those of its component links. Currently, [BUNDLE] assumes that 
  traffic engineering is performed on an aggregate basis only.  
   
  This document captures the relevant enhancements to [BUNDLE] so that 
  the necessary TE parameters are advertised on a per-class basis for a 
  TE link bundle. This allows DS-TE to be supported over bundled links. 
   
   


Sivabalan, Le Faucheur, and Zhang                                     2



                   Link Bundling Support for DS-TE             June 2003 


2.      Terminology 
   
  For readability a number of definitions from [DSTE-REQ] are repeated 
  here:
   
  Class-Type (CT): the set of Traffic Trunks crossing a link that is 
  governed by  a specific set of Bandwidth constraints. CT is used for 
  the purposes of link bandwidth allocation, constraint based routing 
  and admission control. A given Traffic Trunk belongs to the same CT 
  on all links. 
   
  TE-Class: A pair of: 
             i. a Class-Type 
            ii. a preemption priority allowed for that Class-Type. This 
                means that an LSP transporting a Traffic Trunk from 
                that Class-Type can use that preemption priority as the 
                set-up priority, as the holding priority or both. 
   
   
3.      Bandwidth-related TE parameters 
   
  In this section we refine the definitions provided in [BUNDLE] for 
  bandwidth-related TE parameters that are advertised for bundled 
  links, in order to support DS-TE on these bundled links.    
       
3.1.    Bandwidth Constraints
  
  [DSTE-PROTO] specifies that the existing Maximum Reservable Bandwidth
  parameter for a link is retained but its semantic is generalized and
  interpreted as the aggregate bandwidth constraints across all Class
  Types, independently of the Bandwidth Constraint Model in use (see 
  [DSTE-REQ] for definition and examples of Bandwidth Constraints 
  Model). Thus, for DS-TE over bundle link, the Maximum Reservable 
  Bandwidth for the bundled link in [BUNDLE] is also retained and its 
  semantic is also generalized and interpreted as the aggregate 
  bandwidth constraints across all Class Types over bundled link, 
  independently of the bandwidth constraint model in use.
 
  DS-TE provides support for up to 8 Bandwidth Constraints. Those are 
  referred to as BC0, BC1, ..., BC7. 
   
  For a bundle link, the value of BCi (7 >= i >= 0) can be configured 
  either separately for each of the component links or for the whole 
  bundle link. In the former case, the value of BCi for the bundle 
  equals to the sum of the BCi value for each of the component link.  
  
  The set of Bandwidth Constraints applicable to a particular TE-Class 
  depends on the Bandwidth Constraints Model in use on the link. 
  

Sivabalan, Le Faucheur, and Zhang                                     3


                   Link Bundling Support for DS-TE             June 2003
 

  The values of BCi for the bundled link MAY be advertised. When 
  advertised for a bundled link, they MUST be advertised as specified 
  in [DSTE-PROTO]. In particular, a DS-TE LSR which does advertise 
  bandwidth Constraints MUST use the new "Bandwidth Constraints" sub-TLV
  to do so (in addition to the "Maximum Reservable Bandwidth" sub-TLV). 

3.2.    Unreserved Bandwidth for TE-class
   
  DS-TE requires that unreserved bandwidth be advertised on a per TE-
  class basis.  
   
  Unreserved Bandwidth of a bundle link for a given TE-class i (where
  7 >= i >= 0) is the sum of the Unreserved Bandwidth for that TE-class
  on all the associated component links. 
 
  The Unreserved Bandwidth for every active TE-class MUST be advertised 
  for a bundled link as specified in [DSTE-PROTO] using the Unreserved 
  Bandwidth sub-TLV (with a generalized definition). 

   
3.3.    Maximum LSP Bandwidth 
  
  For a simple (unbundled) link its Maximum LSP Bandwidth at priority p
  is defined to be the smaller of its unreserved bandwidth at priority 
  p and a locally configured parameter which we call "Maximum LSP Size".
  The default value of Maximum LSP Size is equal to the Max Link 
  Bandwidth. Maximum LSP Size is not advertised separately because it is 
  factored into the advertised Maximum LSP Bandwidth. This parameter may 
  exist merely to enforce an upper bound on the amount of bandwidth 
  available to a single LSP over a link.
 
  [Editor's notes: we are in discussion with the [GMPLS-ROUTE] authors 
  in order to update the current Maximum LSP Bandwidth definition in
  [GMPLS-ROUTE]in alignment with the text of the previous paragraph. 
  We hope to get a resolution at the upcoming IETF meeting].
   
  [BUNDLE] defines Maximum LSP Bandwidth for a bundled link on a per 
  priority basis. It is assumed that Maximum LSP Bandwidth value is 
  available for each component link, and the Maximum LSP Bandwidth for
  a bundle is defined as the Maximum of Maximum LSP Bandwidth among all
  component links.

  For supporting DS-TE, Maximum LSP Bandwidth must be computable on a 
  per TE-class basis. Extending the above definitions, we define Maximum
  LSP Bandwidth for TE class i (where 7 >= i >= 0) for a component link 
  as the smaller of the Unreserved Bandwidth for TE class i and the 
  Maximum LSP Size applicable to TE-class i on that component link. The
  method of enforcing Maximum LSP Size for a component link for a given
  TE-class is a matter of local policy. 
  

Sivabalan, Le Faucheur, and Zhang                                     4



                     Link Bundling Support for DS-TE           June 2003 


  The Maximum LSP Bandwidth for an active TE-class i (where 7 >=i >=0)
  on a bundled link is the maximum of the Maximum LSP Bandwidth for the 
  TE-class i across all of the associated component links.
   
  [GMPLS-ISIS] and [GMPLS-OSPF] currently specify how the Maximum LSP 
  Bandwidth for each of the 8 preemption priorities are advertised, 
  respectively in ISIS and OSPF, inside the Interface Switching 
  Capability Descriptor sub-TLV. For support of DS-TE, each of the 
  "Maximum LSP bandwidth at preemption i" field (7 >= i >= 0) in that 

  sub-TLV has its semantic generalized into the "Maximum LSP Bandwidth 
  for TE-class i". This generalization MAY be used for advertising the
  Maximum LSP Bandwidth for each TE-class both on simple (unbundled) 
  links and on bundled links. Note that when DS-TE is not used, the 8 
  TE-classes revert to the 8 preemption priorities (of the single 
  bandwidth constraint) so that the generalized definition above reverts 
  to the one currently defined in [GMPLS-ISIS] and [GMPLS-OSPF]. 
   
4. Bandwidth Accounting 
   
  An LSP belonging to TE-class i (where 7 >= i >= 0) with a bandwidth 
  requirement b fits in a bundled link if at least one component link 
  has its Maximum LSP bandwidth for TE-class i >= b. If there are 
  several such links, the choice of which link is used for the LSP is 
  up to the implementation.    
   
  In order to know the Maximum LSP bandwidth for each TE-class on each 
  component link, the unreserved bandwidth for each TE-class must be   
  tracked on each component link. 
   
5.      Security Considerations 
   
  No new security considerations are raised by this document. Those are 
  the same as the ones discussed in [DSTE-REQ] and in [BUNDLE]. 
   
6.      Normative References 
   
  [BUNDLE] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Berger, L., "Link Bundling in 
  MPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-ietf-mpls-bunle-04.txt, work in 
  progress.
   
  [DSTE-REQ] Le Faucheur et al, Requirements for support of Diff-Serv-
  aware MPLS Traffic Engineering, draft-ietf-tewg-diff-te-reqts-07.txt,
  work in progress. 
   
  [DSTE-PROTO] Le Faucheur et al, Protocol extensions for support of  
  Diff-Serv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering, draft-ietf-tewg-diff-te-
  proto-04.txt, June 2003. 
 

Sivabalan, Le Faucheur, and Zhang                                     5



                  Link Bundling Support for DS-TE              June 2003

  
  [GMPLS-ROUTE] Kompella et al, Routing Extensions in Support of 
  Generalized MPLS, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing-05.txt, work in
  progress.  

  [GMPLS-ISIS] Kompella et al, IS-IS Extensions in Support of 
  Generalized MPLS, draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-16.txt, work in
  progress.

  [GMPLS-OSPF] Kompella et al, OSPF Extensions in Support of 
  Generalized MPLS, draft-ietf-ccamp-ospf-gmpls-extensions-09.txt, 
  work in progress. 
 

7.      Informative References 
  
  [DSTE-RDM] Le Faucheur et al, Russian Dolls Bandwidth Constraint
  Model for DS-TE, draft-ietf-tewg-diff-te-russian-03.txt, June 2003.

  [DSTE-MAM] Le Faucheur et al, Maximum Allocation Bandwidth Constraint
  Model for DS-TE, draft-ietf-tewg-diff-te-mam-01.txt, June 2003.


Authors' Address: 
   
Siva Sivabalan 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   2000 Innovation Drive 
   Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8 
   Canada 
   msiva@cisco.com 
   
  
Francois Le Faucheur 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Village d'Entreprise Green Side - Batiment T3 
   400, Avenue de Roumanille 
   06410 Biot-Sophia Antipolis 
   France 
   Email: flefauch@cisco.com 
   

Raymond Zhang
   Infonet Services Corporation
   2160 E. Grand Ave.
   El Segundo, CA 90025
   USA
   Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com




Sivabalan, Le Faucheur, and Zhang                                     6
