
 


Network Working Group                                     C. Jacquenet 
Internet Draft                                      France Telecom R&D 
Document: draft-jacquenet-tunman-reqts-01.txt                June 2002 
Category: Informational                                                
Expires December 2002                                                  
 
 
             Requirements for dynamic tunnel configuration 
                   <draft-jacquenet-tunman-rqts-01.txt> 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   In today's Internet, tunnels are established and activated to provide 
   a facility for conveying a specific traffic from one point to 
   another, or from one point to several others. This draft aims at 
   describing the requirements for the specification and the 
   standardization of the configuration information that will be used to 
   define, establish, activate and maintain such facilities. From this 
   standpoint, this document complements the statements introduced by 
   RFC 3139 ([2]). 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Introduction................................................2 
   2.      Conventions used in this document...........................3 
   3.      Changes since the previous version of the draft.............3 
   4.      Terminology.................................................3 
   5.      A proposed taxonomy for classifying tunnel 
             configuration information.................................4 
   6.      Tunnel configuration information requirements...............6 
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 1] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   6.1.    Architectural considerations................................6 
   6.1.1.  Tunnel identification information...........................6 
   6.1.2.  Tunneling protocol configuration information................6 
   6.1.3.  Routing and forwarding configuration information............6 
   6.1.4.  Traffic engineering configuration information...............7 
   6.2.    Quality of service considerations...........................7 
   6.2.1.  Tunnel configuration information for QoS policy 
             enforcement...............................................7 
   6.2.2.  QoS parameters as (part of) tunnel configuration 
             information...............................................8 
   6.3.    Security considerations.....................................8 
   6.4.    Management considerations...................................9 
   7.      Functional requirements for a protocol to convey tunnel 
             configuration information.................................9 
   8.      Consistency with some IETF standardization efforts.........10 
   9.      Security Considerations....................................10 
   10.     Acknowledgements...........................................11 
   11.     References.................................................11 
   12.     Author's Addresses.........................................11 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   In today's Internet, tunnels are established and activated to provide 
   a facility for conveying a specific traffic from one point to 
   another. The use of such facilities is motivated by the deployment of 
   a range of IP service offerings, like IP VPN (Virtual Private 
   Networks, [3]) or IP multicast-based services ([4]), such as 
   videoconferencing. 
     
   The implicit complexity of these value-added services is due to the 
   manipulation of a large set of configuration information for the 
   actual engineering, establishment, activation and maintenance of such 
   tunnels.  
    
   This configuration information includes the definition of forwarding 
   and routing schemes (i.e. what kind of traffic should be conveyed by 
   the tunnel, to which destination, etc.), security considerations 
   (identification and authentication of the users who are granted to 
   access the tunnel facility), as well as Quality of Service (QoS) 
   considerations, like the DSCP (DiffServ Code Point, [5]) marking 
   associated to the IP datagrams that are entitled to be forwarded 
   through the tunnel. 
     
   Because of the wide variety of devices that may support the 
   aforementioned capabilities, it is important that an interface exists 
   such that tunnel management configuration information can be 
   dynamically provided in a vendor-independent manner, and for a number 
   of services, whatever the underlying technology, and whatever the 
   nature of such services. 
    
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 2] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   This document is organized into the following sections: 
    
   - Section 4 is the terminology section of the document, where 
     several basic notions have been defined, 
   - Section 5 aims at defining a taxonomy for the various kinds of 
     configuration information that is needed to design, establish, 
     activate and maintain a tunnel, 
   - Section 6 proposes a list of requirements according to the above-
     mentioned taxonomy, 
   - Finally, section 7 aims at describing the functional requirements 
     for a communication protocol that would be a privileged vector for 
     conveying tunnel configuration information. 
 
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [6]. 
    
3. Changes since the previous version of the draft 
    
   This new version of the draft introduces the following changes: 
    
   - Section 3 is introduced to reflect the evolution of the document, 
    
   - Slight re-wording of the introduction section 
    
   - Correction of remaining typos 
    
4. Terminology 
    
   This section aims at providing a set of basic definitions for the 
   terms that will be used by this document. 
    
   -  Endpoint: one of the extremities of a tunnel. 
 
   -  Participating device: any networking equipment that will 
      participate in the establishment, the activation and the 
      maintenance of a tunnel. Such devices may include routers and 
      hosts, whatever the tunneling technique to be used for tunnel 
      construction. 
    
   -  Subscriber: A subscriber (or a customer) is a legal 
      representative who has the (legal) ability to subscribe to a 
      service offering. 
    
   -  Tunnel: a tunnel is a transport facility that is designed to 
      convey (IP) data traffic between one endpoint and another (point-
      to-point tunnels), or between one endpoint and several others 
      (point-to-multipoint tunnels). Tunnels can be used for different 
      purposes, e.g.: 
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 3] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
    
          - Access IP multicast networks over IP clouds that do not 
            support multicast forwarding capabilities, 
          - Access IPv6 networks over IPv4 clouds, 
          - Deploy IP Virtual Private Networks, 
          - Deploy Mobile IP ([7]) architectures. 
    
   -  Tunnel activation: the configuration tasks that position a tunnel 
      facility into an activated state, so that it can be used to 
      convey traffic. Obviously, a tunnel must not (and, hopefully, 
      cannot) be activated before it has been established. 
    
   -  Tunnel establishment: all the configuration tasks that lead to 
      the configuration of a tunnel facility. Once the tunnel is 
      established, it needs to be activated in order to be able to 
      convey traffic. 
    
   -  Tunnel maintenance: the period of time during which a tunnel 
      facility remains activated. 
    
   -  User: A user is an entity (a human being or a process, from a 
      general perspective) who has been identified (and possibly 
      authenticated) by a service provider, and whose traffic will be 
      conveyed through a tunnel facility, according to his associated 
      rights and duties. 
    
   -  VPN: Virtual Private Network. A collection of switching resources 
      (e.g. routers) and transmission resources that will be used over 
      an IP backbone thanks to the establishment and the activation of 
      tunnels. These tunnels will convey the IP traffic that 
      characterizes the data oriented-communication service of a 
      customer (VPNs that are designed to support intranet-based 
      applications) or a set of customers (VPNs that are designed to 
      support extranet-based applications). Thus, IP VPN networks are 
      an applicability example of tunnel configuration and management 
      activities. 
    
5. A proposed taxonomy for classifying tunnel configuration information 
    
   For the last decade, the deployment of value-added IP service 
   offerings has yielded the tremendous development of complex 
   configuration information, from IP address assignment to security 
   management, not to mention routing strategies and QoS policy 
   enforcement.  
    
   There is a wide variety of advanced IP service offerings - IP VPNs, 
   IP multicast-based services, multimedia services like IP 
   videoconferencing - that rely upon the use of tunnels, because of 
   various motivations: 
    

 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 4] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
     1. The need for isolating the traffic that corresponds to the 
        deployment of these services from other traffics, 
     2. The need for preserving the confidentiality of the traffic that 
        will be conveyed over a public IP infrastructure, 
     3. The need for enforcing specific forwarding and routing schemes, 
        because of the (non)-support of specific capabilities such as IP 
        multicast, 
     4. The need for servicing customers according to specific QoS 
        parameters, 
     5. Etc. 
    
   Because of the crucial importance of such tunnels, it seems 
   reasonable to clearly identify what are the elementary components of 
   the configuration information for the design, the establishment, the 
   activation and the maintenance of these transport facilities. To do 
   so, this document proposes the following taxonomy, while the next 
   sub-sections will elaborate on each of these domains. 
    
   - Architectural considerations: the corresponding tunnel 
     configuration information refers to the very basic information 
     that is needed for the establishment and the activation of the 
     tunnel - namely the identification of the endpoints, the 
     forwarding and routing schemes (including possible traffic 
     engineering capabilities) to be processed by the devices that will 
     participate in the forwarding of the traffic conveyed by the 
     tunnel. Such information may also include the identification of 
     the tunnel facility itself. 
    
   - QoS considerations: the corresponding configuration information 
     deals with any QoS parameter that may characterize the tunnel. 
     This may include the classification of the traffic that will be 
     forwarded through the tunnel, the marking parameters associated to 
     such traffic, the Per-Hop Behavior (PHB, [8]) that will be 
     enforced by the participating routers, etc. 
    
   - Security considerations: any tunnel that may be established and 
     activated by a service provider to convey a specific traffic 
     yields the need for identification and authentication 
     capabilities. Such capabilities relate to user identification and 
     authentication, but also to the possible identification and 
     authentication of the resources that participate in the 
     establishment, the activation and the maintenance of a tunnel. 
     Indeed, the establishment and the activation of a tunnel between 
     two or more endpoints imply that the corresponding devices are 
     granted for supporting tunnel capabilities, but also for any 
     related capability, including route announcement. 
    
   - Management considerations: it is assumed that the exploitation of 
     tunnels is part of the basic management tasks, and there is 
     therefore a need for collecting all the relevant statistical 

 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 5] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
     information about the tunnels that are under establishment, those 
     that are under activation, those that are up and running, etc. 
    
   Thus, the tunnel configuration information can be classified into the 
   following domains: 
    
     1. Architecture, 
     2. Quality of service, 
     3. Security, 
     4. Management. 
    
   The following sections provide elaboration on the corresponding 
   requirements. 
    
6. Tunnel configuration information requirements 
    
6.1. Architectural considerations 
    
6.1.1. Tunnel identification information 
    
   The identification of a tunnel should be globally unique, especially 
   if the tunnel is to be established and activated across autonomous 
   systems. The tunnel identification schemes (e.g. endpoint numbering) 
   should be left to service providers, given that the corresponding 
   formalism may be commonly understood, whatever the number of 
   autonomous systems the tunnel may cross. 
    
   The tunnel identification information should at least be composed of 
   the tunnel endpoint identification information. The tunnel 
   identification information may also be composed of an informal 
   description of the tunnel, e.g. the purpose of its establishment, the 
   customer(s) who may use this tunnel, etc.  
    
   There may be cases where this additional information is irrelevant, 
   e.g. in the case where the tunnel has been designed to convey public 
   Internet traffic, where a user wishes to access IP multicast-based 
   services through non-multicast capable clouds. 
    
6.1.2. Tunneling protocol configuration information 
    
   Any participating device must be provided with the configuration 
   information related to the tunneling technique to be used for the 
   establishment and the activation of the tunnel. Such techniques 
   include Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE, [9]), IP Secure in tunnel 
   mode (IPSec, [10]), Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP, [11]), etc. 
    
6.1.3. Routing and forwarding configuration information 
    
   Routing and forwarding configuration information deals with the 
   decision criteria that should be taken by a participating device to 
   forward an incoming IP datagram into the tunnel, according to a given 
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 6] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   tunnel routing policy. From this perspective, the participating 
   devices should be provided with the following information: 
    
   - In the case of the activation of dynamic routing protocols for the 
     computation and the selection of routes that will be considered 
     for forwarding traffic through the tunnel, the participating 
     router should be provided with the relevant metric information so 
     that the router (dynamically) assigns the metric values 
     accordingly, 
    
   - In the case where the tunnel is expected to convey traffic across 
     domains, the participating devices should be provided with the 
     relevant BGP-4 (Border Gateway Protocol, version 4, [12])-based 
     reachability information, including the BGP-4 attribute-related 
     information that will be taken into account by the route selection 
     process of the router to decide whether the corresponding traffic 
     should be conveyed by the tunnel or not, 
    
   - Also, the participating routers should be provided with the 
     configuration information related to any static route that may 
     identify a tunnel endpoint as the next hop to reach a given 
     destination prefix. 
    
6.1.4. Traffic engineering configuration information 
    
   Traffic engineering is an important task of tunnel configuration 
   management: within this context, the participating devices should be 
   provided with the configuration information that will help them to 
   choose the appropriate tunnel that leads to a given destination, 
   according to specific constraints. 
    
   These constraints may be expressed in terms of time duration (e.g. 
   the use of a tunnel on a weekly basis), traffic characterization 
   (e.g. all the IP multicast traffic should be conveyed by a specific 
   tunnel), security concerns (e.g. use IPSec tunnels whenever 
   possible), and/or QoS considerations (e.g. EF (Expedited Forwarding, 
   [13])-marked traffic should always use a subset of activated and 
   well-identified tunnels). 
    
   The enforcement of an IP traffic engineering policy would therefore 
   yield the use of specific tunnels that will be constructed according 
   to the above-mentioned type of configuration information. 
    
6.2. Quality of service considerations 
    
   Tunnels may be established to enforce a QoS policy, and/or tunnels 
   may be established according to QoS parameters. 
    
6.2.1. Tunnel configuration information for QoS policy enforcement 
    

 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 7] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   Service providers may decide to rely upon the use of tunneling 
   techniques to enforce a given QoS policy within a domain. For 
   example, the implementation of an EF PHB by the routers of a DiffServ 
   domain may be tightly related to the establishment and the activation 
   of (a set of) tunnels that will be dedicated to the transportation of 
   EF-marked traffic over the whole domain. 
    
   Therefore, the participating devices should be provided with the PHB-
   related configuration information, DSCP marking, policing and 
   scheduling configuration information that will be associated to the 
   establishment of such tunnels. 
    
6.2.2. QoS parameters as (part of) tunnel configuration information 
    
   On the other hand, a tunnel may be established and activated once the 
   associated QoS-related information has been provisioned to the 
   participating devices. Without any QoS policy consideration, such 
   devices should indeed be provided with the configuration information 
   that may consist of: 
    
   - The DSCP marking associated to the datagrams that may be conveyed 
     by the tunnel, 
    
   - The scheduling algorithm parameters that will be used by the 
     participating devices to enforce a tunnel-based buffering policy 
     accordingly, 
    
   - The policing algorithm parameters that will be used by the 
     participating devices to enforce a tunnel-based traffic shaping 
     policy accordingly, 
    
   - Etc. 
    
   While these parameters may very well be the same as those that have 
   been identified in sub-section 6.2.1.of this draft, the actual usage 
   of these parameters as tunnel configuration information may 
   dramatically differ, depending on domain-wide policy enforcement 
   considerations, or locally-processed configuration information. 
    
6.3. Security considerations 
    
   This section aims at listing the basic requirements for the 
   provisioning of the configuration information related to the security 
   associated to the establishment and the activation of tunnels. By 
   "security", this draft basically means: 
    
   - The identification and the authentication of the users who may 
     access the tunnel facility, 
    
   - The identification and the authentication of the switching 
     resources that will not only participate in the establishment and 
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 8] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
     the activation of the tunnel, but also in the route information 
     propagation that may be used by the participating devices to 
     appropriately forward traffic into the tunnels, 
   - Finally, the preservation of the confidentiality of the 
     information that may be conveyed by the tunnel. 
    
   Therefore, the participating devices should be provided with all the 
   configuration information related to the aforementioned topics. This 
   does not mean that the routers will have to maintain a dynamically 
   updated user database, but rather, they should be provided with the 
   following configuration information: 
    
   - The knowledge of the IP networks that may exchange data through 
     the tunnel and/or the configuration information needed for the 
     activation of an identification/authentication mechanism such as 
     RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service, [14]), 
    
   - The knowledge of the participating devices that support the other 
     endpoint(s) of the tunnel and possibly the configuration 
     information related to the activation of a mechanism for 
     identifying and authenticating such peers (based upon the use of 
     an MD5 (Message Digest type 5, [15]) digital signature, for 
     example), 
    
   - The knowledge of the configuration information needed in the case 
     of using encryption techniques. 
    
6.4. Management considerations 
    
   Service providers who rely upon the use of tunneling techniques for 
   the deployment of a range of IP service offerings will naturally have 
   requirements as far as the usage of these tunnels is concerned. From 
   this perspective, the participating devices should be able to give 
   access to any statistical information related to: 
    
   - The volume of traffic that has been conveyed by the tunnel on a 
     given period of time, including a distinction between incoming and 
     outgoing traffic, 
    
   - The volume of tunneled traffic that has been dropped by the 
     participating devices on a given period of time,  
    
   - The IPPM (IP Performance Metrics, [16])-related information that 
     is relevant to the tunnel usage: such information includes the 
     one-way packet delay, the inter-packet delay variation, etc. 
 
7. Functional requirements for a protocol to convey tunnel configuration 
   information 
    
   Although this draft focuses on the motivation for providing 
   configuration information related to tunnel establishment, activation 
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002             [Page 9] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   and maintenance, it is assumed that this configuration information 
   should be provided to the participating devices by means of a 
   communication protocol that would be used between the aforementioned 
   participating devices and a presumably centralized entity that would 
   aim at storing, maintaining and updating this configuration 
   information, as well as making appropriate decisions at the right 
   time and under various conditions. 
    
   This communication protocol should have the following 
   characteristics: 
    
     1. The protocol should use of a reliable transport mode, given the 
        importance of configuration information, 
     2. The protocol architecture should provide a means for dynamically 
        provision the configuration information to the participating 
        devices, so that it may introduce/contribute to a high level of 
        automation in the actual negotiation and invocation of the 
        corresponding IP service offerings (e.g. the configuration of 
        thousands of IPSec tunnels for the deployment of an IP VPN for a 
        large banking company should NOT be manual anymore), 
     3. The protocol should support a reporting mechanism that may be 
        used for statistical information retrieval, 
     4. The protocol should support the appropriate security mechanisms 
        to provide some guarantees as far as the preservation of the 
        confidentiality of the configuration information is concerned. 
    
8. Consistency with some IETF standardization efforts 
    
   It is required that the specification work that may be launched 
   because of an interest of the IETF community for the tunnel 
   configuration topic, should be as consistent as possible with any 
   work item of any relevant IETF working group that has identified 
   tunneling techniques as a means for deploying a specific architecture 
   and/or conveying IP traffic. Such working groups include ppvpn, 
   mobileip, and ngtrans. 
    
9. Security Considerations 
    
   This draft has identified a set of configuration information that 
   would be required for the establishment, the activation and the 
   management of tunnels to be deployed over public IP infrastructures. 
   As such, it raises the issue of the security associated to the 
   provisioning of such information, by means of a protocol whose some 
   basic characteristics have been discussed in section 7. 
    
   There are also security concerns associated with the propagation of 
   the tunnel provisioning data to the network elements that will 
   participate in the tunnel establishment and activation procedures, 
   and also to the customers (including service providers within an 
   inter-domain context) who may access such data. 
    
 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002            [Page 10] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   A basic recommendation therefore consists in using the resources of 
   the IPSec protocol suite whenever possible. 
    
10. Acknowledgements 
    
   The author would like to thank the "tunman" ([17]) community for the 
   useful discussion that yielded the publication of this draft. 
    
11. References 
     
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
   [2]  Sanchez, L., McCloghrie, K., Saperia, J., "Requirements for 
        Configuration Management of IP-based Networks", RFC 3139, June 
        2001. 
   [3]  Gleeson, B. et al., "A Framework for IP Based Virtual Private 
        Networks", RFC 2764, February 2000. 
   [4]  Quinn, B., Almeroth, K., "IP Multicast Applications: Challenges 
        and Solutions", RFC 3170, September 2001. 
   [5]  Nichols K., Blake S., Baker F., Black D., "Definition of the 
        Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 
        Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998. 
   [6]  Bradner, S., "Keywords for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
   [7]  Perkins, C., et al., "IP Mobility Support", RFC 2002, October 
        1996. 
   [8]  Blake, S., et al., "An Architecture for Differentiated 
        Services", RFC 2475, December 1998. 
   [9]  Farinacci, D., et al., "Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE)", 
        RFC 2784, March 2000. 
   [10] Atkinson R., "Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol", 
        RFC 2401, August 1998. 
   [11] Townsley, W., et al., "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP"", 
        RFC 2661, August 1999. 
   [12] Rekhter Y., Li T., "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 
        1771, March 1995. 
   [13] Jacobson, V., et al., "An Expedited Forwarding PHB", RFC 2598, 
        June 1999. 
   [14] Rigney, C., et al., "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service 
        (RADIUS)", RFC 2138, April 1997. 
   [15] Rivest, R., " The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm", RFC 1321, 
        April 1992. 
   [16] Paxson, V. et al., "Framework for IP Performance Metrics", RFC 
        2330, May 1998. 
   [17] tunman@external.cisco.com. 
    
12. Author's Addresses 
    
   Christian Jacquenet 
   France Telecom R & D 

 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002            [Page 11] 
 
 
Internet Draft   Rqts. for dynamic tunnel configuration        June 2002 
                                     
                                     
   DMI/SIR 
   42, rue des Coutures 
   BP 6243 
   14066 Caen Cedex 4 
   France 
   Phone: +33 2 31 75 94 28 
   E-Mail: christian.jacquenet@rd.francetelecom.com 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright(C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    















 
Jacquenet            Informational - Exp. Dec. 2002            [Page 12] 
 
 