                                  - 1 -



Network Working Group                                Jack Houldsworth
INTERNET DRAFT                                 ICL Enterprise Systems
                                                         October 1993



                 SC6 Documents on Liaison with the IETF
                        in the CIDR Environment


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
   ``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
   nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
   current status of any Internet Draft.


1   Introduction


   This document includes the following documents produced by the
   ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6 at its meeting in Seoul, October 1993:


      - "ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6 Liaison Contribution to the Internet Society"
        (SC6 N8419)

      - "Statement of Expected Benefits Resulting From Liaison Between
        ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6 and the Internet Society" (SC6 N8420)

   Section 2 contains the first document. Section 3 contains the second
   document.


2 ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6 Liaison Contribution to the Internet Society









Expiration Date April 1994                                      [Page 1]


                           - 2 -



   Attached to this liaison statement is SC 6 N 8420 entitled "Statement
   of Expected Benefits Regarding Liaison between the Internet Society
   and ISO/TEC JTC 1/SC 6", which SC 6 is sending to JTC 1 in support of
   its liaison initiative with the Internet Society and its principal
   Internet standards-making body (the IETF).

   It is apparent to SC 6 that there are clear benefits to be obtained
   from identifying and agreeing on common goals and objectives from
   both the ISO and Internet perspectives.  SC 6 offers a draft set of
   goals and benefits in N 8420.  In order for the current liaison
   initiative to succeed, it is essential for the Internet Society and
   JTC 1, in particular its SC 6, to adopt a common "memorandum of
   understanding (MOU)" that expresses and agreement between affected
   parties concerning the expected goals and benefits of liaison.  SC 6
   hopes to pursue such an MOU with the Internet Society, with the
   objective of making the MOU the basis of a liaison relationship.  It
   is expected that such an MOU would also address the change control
   mechanisms.  SC 6 views favourably granting Category A liaison to the
   Internet Society, but the nature and terms of the liaison
   relationship will of course be matters of agreement between the ITTF,
   JTC 1 and the Internet Society.

   Identification of Issues Concerning Effective Liaison between the
   Internet Society and SC6


     1.  SC 6 recognizes the existence of a multiprotocol environment
         that includes both open and proprietary standards and that
         TCP/IP forms an essential component of this environment.


     2.  SC 6 observes that there are a number of different initiatives
         which have either been taken or may be undertaken:


          - The IETF is working on issues related to the deployment and
            operations of CLNP in the Internet ("Guidelines for NSAP
            allocation"; NOOP WG0.  CLNP was adopted by SC 6 in 1988
            because it was the best available protocol for
            connectionless internetworking in the context of OSI.  SC 6,
            therefore, strongly encourages this initiative and views it
            as a very positive development.

          - The IETF is considering the use of TUBA as its IPng
            protocol.  SC 6 encourages fair consideration of this
            approach.

          - The IETF is already working on adapting the use of OSI
            routeing protocols (ISIS, IDRP) in the Internet.







Expiration Date April 1994                                      [Page 2]


                           - 3 -



          - Both SC6 and the IETF are working on the provision of new
            network layer capabilities such as multicast, mobility, and
            support for multimedia applications.


     3.  These areas should be evaluated independently and SC 6
         encourages collaboration in all of them.  This work should
         continue regardless of the status of discussions on liaison
         relationships.



3 Statement of Expected Benefits Resulting From Liaison Between ISO/IEC
JTC1/SC6 and the Internet Society




Background on OSI Protocols and Related Work by the Internet Society


   Interconnection and internetworking protocols have been developed by
   ISO/IEC and ITU-T in accordance with the OSI reference model
   architecture.  They are known colloquially as OSI protocols.  The
   Internet community has developed difference protocols for the same
   basic purposes.  These protocols are known formally as the Internet
   Protocol Suite (IPS) but they are nearly always referred to
   colloquially as TCP/IP protocols (Transmission Control
   Protocol/Internet Protocol).  TCP and IP incorporate the functions of
   the OSI class 4 transport and connectionless Network layer protocols,
   ie the networking part of the IPS.


Goals and Benefits


   The establishment and pursuit of a collaborative effort is expected
   to:


       - Simplify the deployment and operation of the global
         communications infrastructure;

       - Facilitate and accelerate the growth of a global communications
         infrastructure based on open systems networking standards;

       - Reduce the complexity and cost of open systems networking to
         the users and providers of network products and services by
         reducing the number of alternatives.







Expiration Date April 1994                                      [Page 3]


                           - 4 -



       - More efficiently use the scarce worldwide resource of
         networking experts involved in the definition of new and
         improved open systems networking protocols;

       - Enable ISO/IEC to develop and evolve its standards in such a
         way as to promote their usage within the global communications
         infrastructure.

   The IETF and JTC 1 SC 6 have begun to develop new capabilities such
   as multicast mobility, and multimedia applications.  Effective
   liaison will focus the resources of the two groups on common
   solutions to these problems, accelerating the development of these
   new capabilities and their deployment within the global
   communications infrastructure.


Methodology


   Details of the technical interaction will be developed jointly by SC
   6 and the Internet Society within the terms of agreement that may be
   reached between the Internet Society and JTC 1 within respect to
   liaison.



Background to the Liaison Initiative


   At its 1992 plenary meeting in San Diego, SC 6 instructed its
   chairman in initiate a dialogue with external bodies with whom SC 6
   shares a mutual interest, such as the Internet Architecture Board
   (IAB) and the Frame Relay Forum, with a view to establishing liaison
   relationships between those bodies and SC 6 (see Resolution 138 of SC
   6/N 7684).  In the absence of a chairman of SC 6 following the San
   Diego meeting, the action was undertaken in late 1992 on an interim
   Society (ISOC) and the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).

   Discussion of the purpose and form of a liaison relationship between
   SC 6 and the Internet Society took place over a period of months that
   included IAB participation in the February 1993 meetings of SC 6
   working groups in London and Mr Houldsworth's participation in a
   meeting of the IAB in Columbus, Ohio in March 1993.

   JTC 1 was informed of these liaison initiatives at their March 1993
   plenary meeting in Berlin.  JTC 1 instructed SC 6 to proceed
   immediately with the establishment of a Category C relationship with
   the IAB in accordance with he JTC 1 Directives (see Resolution 44 of
   SC 6 N 8055).  JTC 1 also instructed other specific SCs to consider
   their requirements for liaison with the Internet Society.






Expiration Date April 1994                                      [Page 4]


                           - 5 -



   [NOTE:  The IAB, which desires a relationship with JTC 1 and its
   subcommittees broader than that offered by a Category C relationship
   with SC 6, has written to the ITTF to request Category A liaison
   status with JTC 1.  Pending the completion of this initiative with
   JTC 1, the IAB has explicitly stated its reluctance to enter into a
   Category C relationship with SC 6 (or with SC 21 or SC 18, which have
   also discussed the possibility of establishing Category C
   relationships with the Internet Society).]

   The JTC 1 Directives state that a subcommittee wishing to establish a
   liaison must provide a statement of the benefits that the
   relationship will bring.  Therefore, in accordance with clause 4.3.2
   of the JTC 1 Directives, the attached document is submitted to JTC 1
   to assist in the formal establishment of a liaison relationship.

   SC 6 proposes to JTC 1 that a Category A liaison relationship between
   SC 6 and the Internet Society would be mutually beneficial.  Further,
   subject to JTC 1 approval SC 6 offers to develop with the Internet
   Society a "Memorandum of Understanding" (MOU) describing the precise
   nature of the liaison relationship.  SC 6 suggests that the subject
   MOU could be applicable to the situation in which other JTC 1 SCs
   might find themselves with respect to the liaison with the Internet
   Society.




4 Author's Address


   Jack Houldsworth
   ICL Enterprise Systems
   Cavendish Road, Stevenage
   Herts SG1 2DY, UK
   Phone: +44 438 313361 (ext 6112)
   EMail: j.houldsworth@ste0906.wins.icl.co.uk




















Expiration Date April 1994                                      [Page 5]


