


dmarc                                                            D. Otis
Internet-Draft                                               Trend Micro
Intended status: Experimental                               June 7, 2015
Expires: December 9, 2015


                              DMARC Escape
                       draft-otis-dmarc-escape-03

Abstract

   DMARC assumes the From header field has the combined role of Author
   and Sender or that it shares the same domain as that of the Sender.
   Message delivery becomes unreliable and the Author role may be
   supplanted as services adapt to DMARC's incompatible policies
   affecting otherwise valid and well formed messages.  This document
   recommends two methods to allow DMARC to be compatible with RFC5322.


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 9, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Policy Suitable for Non-transactional Public Email . . . . . .  6
   3.  Domain Authorization Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Escaping DMARC Disruptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Handing DMARC Disruptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Privacy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  MUA conventions for displaying header fields  . . . . 14
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15


























Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


1.  Introduction

   Services that depend on email notification experience customer
   attrition when notifications become phishing targets.  DMARC
   [RFC7489] leveraged either SPF or DKIM records to request message
   Reject or Quarantine handling when From header field domains do not
   align with either of these records.  From header fields also having
   the role of Sender occurs with transactional notifications.  However
   when the From header field does not play the role of Sender and does
   not share the same domain as the Sender header field, a different
   alignment strategy is needed to ensure delivery.  Section 10.5 of
   [RFC7489] offers feeble advice by stating although mediator
   transformations may conform with standards, Reject or Quarantine
   handling may not be avoidable.

   Large Email Service Providers (ESPs) are able to manage their service
   in a manner not tolerated with smaller providers.  Many large ESPs
   ignore abuse reports indicating compromised or abused user accounts
   or even message security being exploited.  They are in a class best
   described as Too Big to Fail.  DMARC permits these ESPs to export
   managerial roles onto receivers who must then cope with disrupted
   services.  Both SPF and DKIM favor these ESPs by being referenced
   from domains not actually managing the sending of messages.  These
   authorization mechanisms leave others to suffer the repercussions
   caused by unbeknownst access.

   Email reputation often use identities imposing little assessment
   overhead, such as source IP addresses.  Most providers rate limit
   users, but DKIM's replay-ability leaves DKIM identifiers vulnerable
   to rate-limiting abuse.  Mailing-lists are able to dynamically
   confirm source identities with confirmation links, but since DKIM
   signatures easily bypass rate limiting this does not bode well for
   Too Big to Fail domains.  Currently, mailing-lists either refuse or
   mung email address domains that assert a restrictive DMARC policy.
   Establishing restrictive confirmations "as-if" DMARC had been applied
   may not see rapid adoption because DMARC lacks provisions to assert a
   policy suitable for third-party message sourcing on behalf of the
   general public, message transformation, or message rerouting.
   Efforts at handling messages based only on the Author role rather
   than the Sender when present is at the heart of the problem.

   Only the Sender role can establish a trustworthy message source and
   ensure domain alignment with SPF or DKIM records, not the Author.  If
   DMARC had a provision for Sender header field alignment, its
   confirmation would also better enable effective exclusion of known
   bad or inclusion of known good domains by MTAs or MUAs.  Controlling
   abuse while causing limited collateral blocking requires identifying
   actual sources.  Permitting alignment with the Sender header field



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   would not benefit those seeking to protect only email notifications
   from being phished where an assumption of From header alignment
   permits ignoring the Sender header field.

   Unfortunately this simplification can not accommodate normal email
   exchange in many cases.  Such simplification ignores the identity of
   the Sender, relationships with the From header field identity, and
   even whether the identity of the Sender is in a likely displayed
   header field.  Rather than obfuscating authorizations with the use of
   DKIM linked DKIM signature fragments to authorized a subsequent
   domain.

   Allowing and displaying Sender alignment in MUAs is readily available
   for normal public user email offered on a free basis or bundled with
   broadband services.  Such provisions would allow DMARC to be more
   compliant with [RFC5322] and less likely to disrupt messages
   undergoing mediator transformations or originating from different
   verified domains.  Such a provision would also better ensure the
   identity of Author remains intelligible and carried in predictable
   locations.

   SPF authorizes outbound IP addresses used by domains to send mail.
   Until DMARC, SPF largely only squelched Delivery Status Notifications
   (DSNs) emitted from spoofed sources and DKIM never required domain
   alignment with From header fields.  Now DMARC attempts to exclude
   messages where either DKIM or SPF records do not align with the From
   header field domains.  DMARC lacks any fallback strategy when DMARC
   domains allow users to interact with mediators unable to retain
   compliance with DMARC.  DMARC refuses to adopt assertions to indicate
   a policy that allows alignment with Sender header fields on the basis
   few recipients see these header fields and insist this will lead to
   increased phishing.

   In reaction to incompatible limitations imposed by a few domains
   handling public email, some advocate use of
   [I-D.levine-dkim-conditional].  This proposes a new DKIM signature in
   the hope ESPs disrupting standards compliant messages with
   restrictive DMARC policy will instead use this mechanism to delegate
   their signing to third-party domains listed within the signature's
   header field.  This new DKIM signature may require some selected
   header fields be retained unaltered while allowing the entire message
   body to change.  A strategy that creates interesting situations when
   the header fields selected by this new DKIM signature does not
   coincide with those signed by the third-party DKIM signature
   designated to forward altered messages.

   DKIM is unable to ensure where a signed message fragment originates
   and is unable to constrain overall message volume or an associated



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   number of recipients.  While permitting third-parties to sign a
   different domain's From header field, the retained header fields
   represent those that DMARC advocates claim will not prevent phishing.
   Especially retention of never seen Message-IDs or Date header fields
   where any asserted expiry must still allow reasonable intervals for
   delivery, especially for moderated lists.  Any replay window will
   allow subscribed malefactors a means to side step normal rate limits
   when acceptance is based on DKIM signatures while ignoring other
   source identifiers that forms the general simplified basis for DMARC.

   Selection of message destinations to receive a new DKIM delegation
   signature represents similar vetting as required of
   [I-D.otis-tpa-label].  TPA-Label has an advantage of being able to
   mitigate actual detected sources of abuse.  An effort to deploy TPA-
   Label can be greatly reduced for customers of large ESPs by having
   DMARC records reference a consolidated and centrally managed TPA-
   Label zone.  Establishing restrictive source identifier confirmations
   "as-if" DMARC will be a struggle to adopt due to the lack of benefit
   alignment.

   ESPs unwilling to accept DMARC alignment with Sender header fields as
   a fallback scheme seem equally unlikely to include a new DKIM
   signature dynamically delegating a proxy signer for their domain.
   Especially since a mailing-list is unlikely to reject messages a
   DMARC domain may consider egregious or that use weak confirmation
   techniques.  A scheme that allows any such message to be replicated
   without limit within whatever expiry time adopted.  Even the mailing-
   list may not see all header fields a malefactor might employ in their
   campaign.

   Some also advocate use of [I-D.kucherawy-dkim-transform] to introduce
   several encapsulation schemes where unverifiable versions are
   conveyed together with a portion verified by a DKIM signature.  In
   effect, this offers recipients confusing information in a form most
   are likely to find unpleasant, while increasing message overhead and
   weakening desired protections where malware might be partially
   encoded and then reconstructed by users.  Most mobile devices
   offering the least flexibility already support highly visible S/MIME
   methods.

   Users naturally expect an ability to use email services gainfully
   employed for decades.  Instead, due to some ESPs making misleading
   alignment assertions, users may encounter these service's messages
   either being rejected or quarantined.  These users may ironically
   find the identity of the Author difficult to ascertain when services
   are forced to abandon the role of the From header field as a
   practical means to ensure delivery.  In addition, DMARC's use of DKIM
   or SPF means malefactors only need an ability to exploit either



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   scheme.  An unfortunate progression making email less reliable and
   identifying the Author less certain.

   As DMARC becomes more broadly deployed, how will improved SMTP
   security via opportunistic DANE TLS [I-D.ietf-dane-smtp-with-dane] be
   introduced?  SMTP with DANE should soon offer a secure global host
   identity scheme.  DNSSEC/DANE overcomes security weaknesses found in
   both routing and message exchange.  While some claim DNSSEC/DANE is
   not practical they also misrepresent weaker methods based on IP
   address authorization or signed message fragments as representing
   domain authentication.  IP address based authorization or potentially
   malformed message fragments can not safely verify the binding of a
   domain with that of a message.  DMARC even offers malefactors
   feedback that can enhance the exploitation effectiveness or leak
   relationship information that can be used to facilitate deceptions.
   Misleading use of the term "authentication" which conflicts with
   [RFC3552] and [RFC4949] occurs with [RFC7001] and [RFC7489].


2.  Policy Suitable for Non-transactional Public Email

   DMARC Section 6.7 of [RFC7489] recommends Mail Receivers make a best
   effort not to increase the likelihood of accepting abusive mail when
   not complying with a Domain Owner's "reject" request.  Reject request
   being applied against normal public email exchange is not compatible
   with [RFC5322] which proves highly disruptive.

   Such efforts could be declared as checking the DMARC policy of the
   Sender header field domain or considering multiple From identities
   and treating the list as <First> on behalf of <Second(s)> as-if the
   First identity represents the identity of the Sender header field.  A
   "p:" Requested Mail Receiver policy may include "public" where
   alignment requirements may include the domain of the first listed
   From identity or that of the Sender header field where a check
   failure results in a Quarantine status.  The "public" provision also
   allows a simple override mechanism for domains offering inappropriate
   "reject" for otherwise disruptive domains determined to be handling
   public email where From header field alignment can not be assured.
   Such an override is preferable to diverted placement of valid and
   legitimate messages being rejected or placed into quarantine folders.

   It seems a best effort should include quarantine handling when:

      1) sender can not be confirmed

      2) identity of sender not likely apparent





Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   The identity of the sender should be confirm by recognized methods
   and be contained in the first identity in the From header field or
   the only identity in the Sender header field.  Authentication-Results
   header fields [RFC7001] will not make identities apparent to
   recipients.

   This represents improved protections over the typical handling of
   messages from domains making inaccurate assertions of their message
   alignments.  An override entails replacing "reject" with "public" for
   a few often large domains to avoid disruptions.

   This mode of operation does not demand the cooperation of the larger
   domains.  Often these domains already are making exceptions for their
   internal services.


3.  Domain Authorization Issues

   A domain referenced by SPF [RFC7208] or a domain confirmed in a DKIM
   [RFC6376] signature has not posed a problem since seldom was
   acceptance based on From header field Domain Alignment with a domain
   used by these two methods.  However, when acceptance is based on From
   header field alignment in the case of DMARC [RFC7489] which may use
   either SPF or DKIM related domains, this may disrupt many Third-Party
   Services where the expected reaction to this problem has the effect
   of deprecating the use of the From header field retaining the role of
   Author.  The disruption becomes egregious when messages from the
   domain's own users are rejected based on an erroneous level of the
   domain's asserted alignment practices.  At the strictest alignment
   level, erroneous assertions not only disrupt messages from their
   users, it also affects subscriptions or services for other users of
   affected third-party services.

   SPF normally provides a form of authorization by listing IP addresses
   of authorized outbound servers.  In many cases, these servers
   represent a shared resource used by perhaps thousands of domains.
   SPF is unable to verify an IP address represents the actions of a
   claimed domain which does not meet the definition of "$
   authentication" in [RFC4949].

   DKIM intended to establish increased levels of trust based upon
   verified DKIM signatures controlling acceptance and what a user sees
   within the From header field.  But DKIM failed to include in its
   header stack processing a scheme to actively guard against pre-pended
   header fields.  This would ensure acceptance is not based on verified
   DKIM signatures that fail to prevent header field spoofing.  Even
   now, this weakness allows malefactors to exploit DKIM signature
   acceptance established by large ESPs to spoof ANY other domain, even



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   when prohibited within the Signer's network.

   DKIM signatures are verified by a process that MUST examine the
   entire header field stack and yet needs some prior unreported and
   unknown message structure verification.  Inclusion of this undefined
   process has proven problematic in preventing header spoofing.  It
   took several years for one of the largest service providers to notice
   this oversight long after arguments were made about this risk.
   Ignoring essential header field stack validation that MUST occur
   represents an oversight in the DKIM deployment specifications that at
   one time had been partially addressed by the earlier DMARC
   specifications.  It seems even this validation was removed by what
   might be described as a misguided insistence such processing is to
   remain the responsibility of the transport.

   Section 3.3 of [RFC5321] clearly indicates messages SHOULD NOT be
   rejected based on perceived defects in [RFC5322] message structure.
   Section 7.1 of [RFC5321] also warns against preventing spoofing
   within the SMTP transport and suggests much safer PGP or S/MIME, both
   of which benefit by deployment of DANE.  DMARC was developed to
   curtail phishing attempts leading to user attrition with high volume
   transactional services.  Unfortunately, DMARC is being (ab)used to
   lessen phishing attempts related to general user accounts where there
   seems little interest at finding a solution for the problems this
   creates.


4.  Escaping DMARC Disruptions

   Conditionally permit Sender header field alignment:  For domains
      handling normal user email, a special DMARC policy assertion
      "public" requests policy suitable for public email users which
      recognizes alignment with Sender header fields when present or the
      first identity in the From header field when Sender is not
      present.  This makes an assumption users employ Mail User Agents
      that display the identity contained in the Sender header field
      when used as a basis for acceptance.


   Define a replacement Author header:  A new "IM-From" header field re-
      establishes the Author role for RFC5322.From domains affected by
      DMARC.  This header permits re-locating the Author role to a new
      header to establish the integrity of third-party services.
      Establishing a new header prevents confusion caused by unknown
      alternatives, such as Reply-To, or Original-From, or indirectly
      through the use of Original Authentication Results header (OAR).
      Munging Reply-To or From header fields removes information
      essential for establishing side discussions rather than having all



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


      conversations on the list.  Not all conversations are suitable for
      the entire forum.


   Third-Party Authorization:  A different domain is specifically
      excluded from actions caused by non-alignment when authorized by
      the DMARC domain using [I-D.otis-tpa-label].  DMARC could make an
      assertion of "sam=tpa; and tpa=third-party-authority.example.com;"
      when the DMARC domain offers the Specific Advisory Methods "sam="
      tag indicating the third-party advisory methods supported.  The
      "tpa=" tag can also indicate the domain location where third-
      party-authorization hashes have been consolidated with an assumed
      prefix of "_smtp._tpa.<tpa-domain>".



   A few large domains have had a high percentage of user accounts
   compromised.  These events gave malefactors access to prior private
   exchanges and contact lists.  Even after accounts were reclaimed,
   malefactors continue sending convincing spoofed messages from other
   sources.  To mitigate harm, some domains have asserted DMARC
   Alignment policies similar to those used by domains that only emit
   transactional messaging where a prior DMARC recommendation of
   restricted use was normally heeded.  In addition, some domains also
   recommended "reject" rather than "quarantine" as a misalignment
   response.  In conjunction with misleading DMARC alignment assertions,
   rejection becomes a highly disruptive choice.

   Currently, the least disruptive adjustment made by receivers faced
   with Third-Party services used by a RFC5322.From domain is to
   override their policy of "reject" with "quarantine" to allow delivery
   of the message causing users to search through their "quarantine"
   folder for otherwise lost messages.  Alternatively, the From header
   field may replace the Author role with that of the Sender by
   asserting a policy of "public" intended to assert the strongest
   protection suitable for a domain supporting email being used by the
   general public which allows alignment to occur with Sender header
   fields and multiple identities within the From header field.  Some
   have suggested the From header field contents be retained in the
   Reply-To header.  This document offers an alternative to the use of
   X-Original-From header field and that it be given the name IM-From
   header field that has additional semantics not available with the
   normal From header field.  Use of IM-From header field claims the
   role of Author that has been lost due to DMARC.

   It is unfair to place a large burden on receivers and expect them to
   remain cooperative.  Prior to making alignment assertions likely to
   disrupt services handling legitimate messages, it is possible for



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   RFC5322.From domains to make assertions which allow compliance with
   normal email handling.  When RFC5322.From domains proactively guard
   against disrupting legitimate messages, receivers are more likely to
   cooperate with their recommendations.  When the asserted policies
   prove disruptive over time, DMARC should offer receivers reasonable
   overrides.


5.  Handing DMARC Disruptions

   Deterrents based upon reputation and/or path based scoring strategies
   that utilize a variety of originating header fields has proved
   ineffective.  These header fields often remain invisible to
   recipients, and contain domains exploited for periods measured in
   hours to avoid any Whack-A-Mole like response.  Even long term
   reputations have issues due to an intermix of messages from
   compromised accounts.  Content filtering is unable to keep up with
   the polymorphic abuse.  Few recipients will inspect the stack of
   message header fields, or be able to draw useful conclusions from a
   profusion of unfriendly information.  As a result, many recipients
   deal with abuse by sorting messages into groups based on assumed
   sources found in a few originating header fields.

   DMARC represents an open registry that offers domain specific
   guidance for DKIM/SPF alignment sending practices to determine
   whether messages should be delivered, quarantined, or refused.
   However, appropriate actions become unclear whenever Third-Party
   Services are involved.  Although DMARC warns of a potential for
   disruption, the specific handling requested by DMARC is very limited.
   DMARC expects receivers to devise their own special handling to
   mitigate disruptions that DMARC assertions might cause for legitimate
   messaging.  This is unfortunate, since the necessary feedback is
   given to the DMARC asserting domain and not to the cooperating
   receivers.

   When a Third Party domain does not employ DKIM or SPF or does not
   include Authentication-Results header fields [RFC7001] or perhaps
   [I-D.kucherawy-original-authres] (OAR) or its "X-" version could
   allow authorizations to be exploited.  For Third Party domains not
   applying DMARC but capture the OAR, past compliance with DMARC based
   on the OAR can be made a requirement for authorization.

   While conceivably Domain Alignment might just rely on the content of
   the Original-Authentication-Results header, whether to trust this, or
   any other message content can not be based on the mere acceptance of
   the message alone.  Whether false content even effects message
   acceptance would be difficult to determine.  Only the DMARC asserting
   domain is able to make this type of determination based on their



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   knowledge of outbound messages and corrections needed based on DMARC
   feedback.

   im-from = "IM-From:" (mailbox-list / address-list) CRLF

   address = mailbox / group

   group = display-name ":" [group-list] ";" [CFWS]

   mailbox = name-addr / addr-spec

   addr-spec = local-part "@" domain ["/" resourcepart]

   name-addr = [display-name] angle-addr

   angle-addr = [CFWS] "<" addr-spec ">" [CFWS]

   group = display-name ":" [group-list] ";" [CFWS]

   display-name = phrase

   mailbox-list = (mailbox *("," mailbox))

   address-list = (address *("," address))

   group-list = mailbox-list / CFWS

   mailbox-list = (mailbox *("," mailbox))

   Use of the IM-From header group display name can be used to replace
   the use of list tags embedded in the Subject header field.  Since
   this header is ignored by DMARC, it can also retain the identity of
   the Author.  This field also permits the use of the resourcepart
   extension to support XMPP endpoints as defined in [RFC6122] and which
   is to be ignored otherwise.

5.1.  Privacy Considerations

   DMARC policy assertions are transitory so exclusion of users within a
   DMARC domain is never assured.  Unless all valid Third-Party Domains
   have been authorized or allowed a suitable From header field
   alternative, personally identifiable information will be exchanged
   within the DMARC feedback.  This feedback can unintentionally expose
   private exchanges made on behalf of the RFC5322.From domain's users.
   To the greatest extent possible, this feedback information should not
   be shared with other domains not offering the information.  This
   feedback can even identify mailing-list subscribers that never sent
   any message to the list, or invoices made on behalf of an



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   accountant's client.

5.2.  Security Considerations

   This draft extends Domain Alignment validation practices that depend
   on DKIM [RFC6376] or SPF [RFC7208].  Most related security matters
   are discussed in those specifications.  Additional considerations are
   also included in [RFC6377].  Some receivers mistakenly bypass
   validation of the [RFC5322] header fields because a signature from a
   Trusted Domain had been confirmed as perhaps suggested in [RFC5863].
   Validation of the header stack MUST NOT be omitted unless the message
   is not accepted for other reasons.

   Services that depend only upon path authorizations might permit the
   RFC5322.From domain to be spoofed and obtain acceptance.  During such
   events, the RFC5322.From domain might need to retract its
   authorization from the service.  For this reason, path related
   validation based on IP addresses should only be used as a carefully
   monitored interim solution.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Terry Zink, J. Gomez, Hector Santos, John Levine, Stephen Turnbull



7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3207]  Hoffman, P., "SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over
              Transport Layer Security", RFC 3207, February 2002.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", RFC 3552, July 2003.

   [RFC4949]  Shirey, R., "Internet Security Glossary, Version 2",
              RFC 4949, August 2007.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              October 2008.



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.

   [RFC6122]  Saint-Andre, P., ""Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Address Format"", RFC 6122, March 2011.

   [RFC6125]  Saint-Andre, P. and J. Hodges, "Representation and
              Verification of Domain-Based Application Service Identity
              within Internet Public Key Infrastructure Using X.509
              (PKIX) Certificates in the Context of Transport Layer
              Security (TLS)", RFC 6125, March 2011.

   [RFC6376]  Crocker, D., Hansen, T., and M. Kucherawy, "DomainKeys
              Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures", STD 76, RFC 6376,
              September 2011.

   [RFC7001]  Kucherawy, M., "Message Header Field for Indicating
              Message Authentication Status", RFC 7001, September 2013.

   [RFC7489]  Kucherawy, M. and E. Zwicky, "Domain-based Message
              Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC)",
              RFC 7489, March 2015.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dane-smtp-with-dane]
              Dukhovni, V. and W. Hardaker, "SMTP security via
              opportunistic DANE TLS", draft-ietf-dane-smtp-with-dane-19
              (work in progress), May 2015.

   [I-D.kucherawy-dkim-transform]
              Kucherawy, M., "Recognized Transformations of Messages
              Bearing DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures",
              draft-kucherawy-dkim-transform-00 (work in progress),
              April 2015.

   [I-D.kucherawy-original-authres]
              Chew, M. and M. Kucherawy, "Original-Authentication-
              Results Header Field", draft-kucherawy-original-authres-00
              (work in progress), February 2012.

   [I-D.levine-dkim-conditional]
              Levine, J., "Mandatory Tags for DKIM Signatures",
              draft-levine-dkim-conditional-01 (work in progress),
              April 2015.

   [I-D.otis-tpa-label]
              Otis, D., "Third-Party Authorization Label",



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


              draft-otis-tpa-label-07 (work in progress), April 2015.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1930]  Hawkinson, J. and T. Bates, "Guidelines for creation,
              selection, and registration of an Autonomous System (AS)",
              BCP 6, RFC 1930, March 1996.

   [RFC4686]  Fenton, J., "Analysis of Threats Motivating DomainKeys
              Identified Mail (DKIM)", RFC 4686, September 2006.

   [RFC4954]  Siemborski, R. and A. Melnikov, "SMTP Service Extension
              for Authentication", RFC 4954, July 2007.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5863]  Hansen, T., Siegel, E., Hallam-Baker, P., and D. Crocker,
              "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Development,
              Deployment, and Operations", RFC 5863, May 2010.

   [RFC6377]  Kucherawy, M., "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) and
              Mailing Lists", BCP 167, RFC 6377, September 2011.

   [RFC6698]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schlyter, "The DNS-Based Authentication
              of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, August 2012.

   [RFC7208]  Kitterman, S., "Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for
              Authorizing Use of Domains in Email, Version 1", RFC 7208,
              April 2014.


Appendix A.  MUA conventions for displaying header fields

   ####
   # Header field in OS X Apple Mail(tm).
   ####
   Mail, Preferences, Viewing, Show message headers: custom,
     type the desired headers.

   ####
   #  Header field display in Mozilla Thunderbird(tm).



Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                DMARC-Escape                     June 2015


   ####
   Mail, Preferences, Advanced, General tab, click Config Editor, Enter
   mail.compose.other.header and double click
   mail.compose.other.header entry and type the desired headers
   in the string dialog.

   ####
   # Sender header field in Microsoft Outlook(tm)
   ####
   Sender and From header field identities are combined as:
   From <Sender> on behalf of <From>

   ###
   # A large percentage of Web email can be annotated by
   # JavaScript as demonstrated by Iconix.com.
   ###


Author's Address

   Douglas Otis
   Trend Micro
   10101 N. De Anza Blvd
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.257-1500
   Email: doug_otis@trendmicro.com























Otis                    Expires December 9, 2015               [Page 15]

