Internet-Draft                                            Kenji Takahashi
draft-takahashi-spatial-privacy-scenario-00.txt                       NTT
Expires:  Jan 2002                                            Haitao Tang
                                                                    Nokia
                                                                July 2001

      Location-based Service Scenarios for Privacy Analysis
        <draft-takahashi-spatial-privacy-scenario-00.txt> 

Status of This Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in subject to all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as 'work in progress.'

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract
   We propose a user scenario framework of location-based services to 
   analyze security and privacy issues associated with the services.  The 
   framework is intended to cover the most of the location-based services 
   available today and in near future. There are many kinds of existing and 
   possible location-based services. Though, what is meant by location-
   based service varies widely.  The framework gives people a common ground 
   from  where  discussion on the security and privacy issues can start.

1. Introduction
   There are many kinds of existing and future location-based services.  
   However, the definition of location-based services is different among 
   users and service providers.  For example, what is a "push" service? 
   Some people may say that the push service is a location based "handbill" 
   delivery ? for example, when you come close to a pizza restaurant, you 
   receive a mail message about the restaurant.  Other people may say the 
   push service is a guardian service that periodically pushes location 
   information of kids to their guardians.  The trust models are totally 
   different in these two cases.  In the former case, the anonymized 
   location information of a person is obtained by the trusted party (e.g., 
   an advertisement agency) if s/he is in a particular geographical area 
   during an allowed time period.  In the latter case, the location 
   information of the specific persons is kept tracked by the trusted party 
   (e.g. parents).

   We therefore propose a user scenario framework as a common ground to 
   productively discuss the security and privacy in location-based 
   services. 


2. Definition

   Throughout this document, we define and use the following terms

   Owner
   The owner is the person who rightfully owns the location information.  
   The owner is the target of the location information if the target is a 
   human, or is a human who owns the target if the target is a non-human 
   object.  For example, John is obviously the owner of his location 
   information.  John is also the owner of the location information of his 
   dog.

   Requester
   A requester is a human or non-human entity that asks a responder for the 
   location information of an owner. Requesters could be the owners, if,
   for example, the requesters themselves ask  where they are.

   Responder
   A responder is a human or non-human entity that delivers a requester the 
   location information.  Responders could be the owners if, for example, 
   the owners have GPS devices and the means that can send the location 
   information obtained from the devices.  Responders could also be proxies 
   of the owners.

   Proxy
   A proxy is a computer entity that acts on behalf of one or more 
   responders to deliver the location information and/or on behalf of one 
   or more requesters to ask for the location information.

   Location information
   The information about where a human or non-human entity is 
   geographically located.  The location information can be represented in
   many ways, for example, a pair of longitude and latitude.

3. Security and privacy attacks

   Regarding location-based services, we have identified the following four 
   major types of security and privacy attacks:

   Snoop
   Attackers snoop and reveal (and decrypts) the payloads of packets.  They 
   may also modify the location information.  Interestingly, the location 
   data alone, e.g., longitude and latitude, may not be necessarily 
   encrypted because the data is useless in many cases if the data is not 
   associated to an owner.  For example, "Kenji is at (35.55, 136.28)" is 
   very private information, while the disclosure of the data content, 
   "(35.55, 136.28)" alone is not harmful to Kenji.  This is fairly 
   different from music data content distribution where the data itself is
   important and should be encrypted.  Anonymous use of the location data 
   could be easier to implement without encryption. 

   Replay attack
   There are two types of replay attacks: those by "owner" and by "receiver".
   In former case, the attackers, who disguise the true owners, receive and 
   send the false location information to requesters.  In latter case, 
   attackers, who disguise the true requester, send requests for the location
   information to the owners.

K. Takahashi, H. Tang                                               [Page2]
IETF Draft Location-based Service Scenarios for Privacy Analysis

   Traffic analysis
   Traffic analysis reveals the source and destination of packets delivered 
   by tapping network links and/or actively attacking routers.  In 
   particular, the source and destination of packets can be associated with 
   location in mobile communication.

4. Basic episodes
   Location-based services could be very complicated.  However, we believe 
   that it is possible to extract a limited number of common basic episodes, 
   or building blocks of user scenarios, from the complicated services.  
   Episodes are end-to-end transactions. Also for simplicity, we do not 
   consider episodes in which proxies participate usually. Though, one 
   exception is when a person is asking about oneself, s/he interacts with 
   one's proxy that has the person's location information and can answer
   the person's question.  By considering what users experience through 
   location-based services, we can identify four perspectives:

   Focus: Target / Place
   Services focused on "place" handle basically request for reports on 
   "whether someone/something is in a particular place", whereas those 
   focused on "target" handle requests for reports "where a particular 
   person/thing is".  The different focuses make a significant difference 
   in the interaction model.  In target-focused services, responses include 
   location data, whereas in place focused-services, requests include 
   location data (and responses, for example, are just "yes", "no", or
   "how many"). 

   Target: User's own position / Third party's position 

   Trigger: Requester-pull / Owner-push 
   
   Anonymity: Anonymous / Non-anonymous

   As shown in Figure 1, there are 10 basic episodes from the combination of 
   these four perspectives. 

   (Ep1) Owner asks Proxy where he is.
   (Ep2) Owner tells anonymously Requester where he is.
   (Ep3) Owner tells Requester where he is.
   (Ep4) Requester asks Responder where an anonymous target is.
   (Ep5) Requester asks Responder where Target Y is.
   (Ep6) Owner asks Proxy whether he is in Place X.
   (Ep7) Owner anonymously tells Requester whether he is in Place X.
   (Ep8) Owner tells Requester whether he is in Place X.
   (Ep9) Requester asks Responder whether an anonymous target is in Place X.
   (Ep10) Requester asks Responder whether Target Y is in Place X.








K. Takahashi, H. Tang                                               [Page3]
IETF Draft Location-based Service Scenarios for Privacy Analysis


   [Focus]  [Target]     [Trigger]  [Anonymity]
   Target -+- Self  -----+- Pull -------------------- (Ep1)
           |             |
           |             +- Push -+- Anonymous  ----- (Ep2)
           |                      |
           |                      +- Not anonymous -- (Ep3)
           |
           +- 3rd party --- Pull -+- Anonymous  ----- (Ep4)
                                  |
                                  +- Not anonymous -- (Ep5)
   
   Place  -+- Self  -----+- Pull -------------------- (Ep6)
           |             |
           |             +- Push -+- Anonymous  ----- (Ep7)
           |                      |
           |                      +- Not anonymous -- (Ep8)
           |
           +- 3rd party --- Pull -+- Anonymous  ----- (Ep9)
                                  |
                                  +- Not anonymous -- (Ep10)
   
      Figure 1. Basic episodes in location-based service

5. Composite scenarios

   There can be an unlimited number of location services that comprise of 
   the basic episodes.  Here we illustrate how three scenarios consist of 
   the episodes.  Certainly, these scenarios could be specified in more 
   detail and may contain more intermediaries. However, we describe here 
   the  simplest cases.

   (1) Where is the nearest pizza restaurant?
   A person looking for a nearest pizza restaurant can start this scenario 
   by using a location service for Ep1 ("Owner asks Proxy where he is."), 
   or getting the position locally, e.g., via using GPS.  Then the person
   uses a service for Ep2 ("Owner anonymously tells Requester where he is")
   to let the service provider know where he is.  At last the service
   provider gives the person the information about the nearest pizza
   restaurant.  The last interaction looks like a simple information
   delivery, while there is still a potential risk of the disclosure of 
   location information.  An attacker can know that the person may go to 
   the restaurant if the attacker can snoop the information that the person 
   got and identify whom the person is. 

   (2) Location-based advertisement distribution.
   Suppose that a person subscribes to an advertisement provider and allow
   it to use the information about his location in a limited manner.  A
   person may start with Ep2, Ep3, Ep7, or Ep8, depending on the trust
   relationship between the person and the provider, to tell the provider
   where s/he is or whether s/he is in a specific place.  Then the provider 
   distributes the advertisement information to the person based on where 
   s/he is.  There is a potential risk where attackers know where s/he is by 
   associating the advertisement with its receivers. 

K. Takahashi, H. Tang                                               [Page4]
IETF Draft Location-based Service Scenarios for Privacy Analysis

   (3) Web-based "whereabouts" service
   A service provider provides users a service to tell them where a person 
   is.  A user starts with Ep5 ("Requester asks Responder where Target Y 
   is").  Then the provider, as a proxy of the person (the location owner) , 
   executes Ep3 ("Owner tells Requester where he is").  In this scenario, 
   the provider should get the permission from the location owner to use his 
   location report.

6. Conclusion

   The location privacy and security problems are usually specific to 
   certain application(s) of the location information. It would be very 
K. Takahashi, H. Tang                                               [Page2]
IETF Draft Location-based Service Scenarios for Privacy Analysis

   difficult to design an effective privacy and security scheme for
   something, unless the associated use cases are analysed. We therefore 
   propose to solve these problems inside the applications rather than by 
   considering the location something alone.

Author's Addresses

   Haitao Tang
   P.O. Box 407, FIN-00045 Nokia
   Finland                      
   Email: haitao.tang@nokia.com

   Kenji Takahashi
   NTT
   3-9-11 Midoricho
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585 Japan
   Email: takahashi.kenji@lab.ntt.co.jp























K. Takahashi, H. Tang                                               [Page5]
IETF Draft Location-based Service Scenarios for Privacy Analysis

Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English. The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
   not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."
