


Network Working Group                                            A. Falk
Internet-Draft                                                IRTF Chair
Intended status: BCP                                   September 7, 2008
Expires: March 11, 2009


  Definition of an Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) Document Stream
                         draft-irtf-rfcs-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 11, 2009.

Abstract

   This memo defines the publication stream for RFCs from the Internet
   Research Task Force.  Most documents undergoing this process will
   come from IRTF Research Groups and it is expected that they will be
   published as Informational or Experimental RFCs by the RFC Editor.


1.  Changes from Last Version (to be removed)

   Updates from draft-irtf-rfcs-01.txt:






Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


   o  Removed internal process description not needed for stream
      definition (added to wiki)

   o  IESG review text now points to draft-housely-rfc3932bis

   o  Replaced proposed IESG notes with pointer to
      draft-iab-streams-headers-boilerplate

   o  Added recommendation to permit unlimited derivative rights


2.  Introduction

   From time to time the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) [RFC2014]
   will wish to publish a document in the Internet RFC series.  This
   memo defines the steps required to publish a document in the IRTF RFC
   stream.  Document streams are described in Section 5 of [RFC4844].
   Most documents undergoing this process will come from IRTF Research
   Groups and it is expected that they will be published as
   Informational or Experimental RFCs by the RFC Editor.

   The IRTF RFC stream provides an avenue for research groups to publish
   their findings with an IRTF label.  Pre-publication editorial review
   by the Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG) increases the
   readibility of documents and ensures proper caveats (described in
   Section 3.1) are applied.

   The IRTF RFC approval process may be summarized as:

   o  The Research Group performs a thorough technical and editorial
      review of the document and agrees it should be published.

   o  The Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG) reviews the document
      and approves it for publication.

   o  The Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) reviews the
      document to assure that there are no conflicts with current or
      expected standardization activities.

   o  The document is submitted to the RFC Editor for publication.

   This draft has been updated based on over a year of experience and
   processing of roughly a dozen documents.  The IRTF concludes that
   there has been sufficient experience to justify the benefits and
   process are sound.






Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


3.  Approval Process

   The following sections describe the steps for IRTF-stream document
   review and publication process.  There are fundamentally two steps:
   IRSG review and IESG review.  The document shepherd is responsible
   for making sure reviews are responded to and documented and that the
   process moves along.

3.1.  Research Group Preparation

   If an IRTF Research Group desires to publish a document as an IRTF
   RFC, the process in this document must be followed.  First, the RG
   must review the document for editorial and technical quality.

   The following guidelines should be adhered to:

   o  There must be a statement in the abstract identifying it as the
      product of the RG

   o  There must be a paragraph near the beginning (for example, in the
      introduction) describing the level of support for publication.
      Example text might read: "this document represents the consensus
      of the FOOBAR RG" or "the views in this document were considered
      controversial by the FOOBAR RG but the RG reached a consensus that
      the document should still be published".

   o  The breadth of review the document has received must also be
      noted.  For example, was this document read by all the active
      research group members, only three people, or folks who are not
      "in" the RG but are expert in the area?

   o  It must also be very clear throughout the document that it is not
      an IETF product and is not a standard.

   o  If an experimental protocol is described, appropriate usage
      caveats must be present.

   o  If the protocol has been considered in an IETF working group in
      the past, this must be noted in the introduction as well.

   o  There should be citations and references to relevant research
      publications.

   The Research Group identifies a document shepherd who's responsibilty
   is to track and facilitate document progression through RFC
   publication.  The shepherd should be copied on all correspondence
   relating to the document.




Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


3.2.  IRSG Review and Approval

   The IRSG functions similar to an editorial review board.  It is the
   IRSG's responsibility to ensure high technical and editorial quality.
   The IRSG will review and approve all documents intended for the IRTF
   RFC stream.

   The purpose of the IRSG review is to ensure consistent technical
   clarity and editorial quality for IRTF publications.  IRSG review is
   not a deep technical review.  (This should take place within the RG.)
   At least one IRSG member who is not a chair of that research group
   must review the document and the RG's editorial process.

   IRSG reviewers should look for clear, cogent, and consistent writing.
   An important aspect of the review is to gain a critical reading from
   reviewers who are not subject matter experts and, in the process,
   assure the document will be accessible to those beyond the authoring
   research group.  Also, reviewers should assess whether sufficient
   editorial and technical review has been conducted within the RG and
   the requirements of this process document have been met, for example
   reviewers should evaluate whether the breadth of review the document
   has received is adequate for the material at hand.  Finally,
   reviewers should check that appropriate citations to related research
   literature have been made.

   Reviews should be written to be public.  Review comments should be
   sent to the IRSG and RG mailing lists and entered into the IRTF's
   document tracker.  All IRSG review comments must be addressed.
   However, the RG need not accept every comment.  It is the
   responsibility of the shepherd to understand the comments and ensure
   that the RG considers them including adequate dialog between the
   reviewer and the author and/or RG.

   Following resolution of the editorial review, the IRSG will make a
   decision as to whether to approve the document for publication.  If
   the IRSG does not approve the document, it returns to the research
   group with feedback on what would need to be fixed for publication.
   In rare cases the IRSG may determine that a document is not suitable
   for publication as an IRTF RFC.  (For example, members of the RG may
   assert to the IRSG that there was no RG consensus to publish the
   document.)  Other publication streams would still be available to
   those authors.

3.3.  IESG Review

   The IRTF Chair will then extend the Internet Engineering Steering
   Group (IESG) an opportunity to review the document according to the
   process and scope described in [I-D.housley-iesg-rfc3932bis].  The



Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


   scope of this review is confined to that described in [RFC2026],
   section 4.2.3, for non-IETF documents, specifically it is "[t]o
   ensure that the non-standards track Experimental and Informational
   designations are not misused to circumvent the Internet Standards
   Process."

   The IESG (via the IETF Secretariat) is expected to provide the IRTF
   chair with a response, normally within four weeks, as to whether
   publication of the draft is perceived to be at odds with the Internet
   Standards Process.

   The IESG may recommend against publication.  Should this occur, the
   RG may choose to revise the document based on the comments
   accompanying this recommendation and pass a revised version to the
   IESG.  If the RG and IESG cannot come to agreement publishing the
   document, the RG chair may ask the IRTF Chair to raise the matter
   with the IAB, which will act as final arbiter on whether the document
   is submitted to the RFC Editor (along with the commentary and
   recommendation from the IESG, to inform the RFC Editor in its
   publishing decision).

3.4.  RFC Editor Handling

   The IRTF Chair will then ask the RFC Editor to publish the document,
   after which it will be enqueued for publication.

   The document enters the RFC Editor queue at the same priority as non-
   standard IETF-stream and IAB-stream documents.  The document shepherd
   is responsible for ensuring that the document authors are responsive
   to the RFC Editor and that the RFC editing process goes smoothly.
   The AUTH48 review stage of RFC publication is an area where the
   shepherd may be of particular assistance, ensuring a) authors respond
   promptly in reviewing about-to-be-published RFCs and b) authors don't
   inject changes into the document at the last minute which would not
   be supported by the research group or other reviewers.

   If not already present, the RFC Editor will insert labels and text
   for the "Status of this Memo" section that identify the document as
   the product of the IRTF.  The specific text is defined in
   [I-D.iab-streams-headers-boilerplates].

3.5.  Intellectual Property

   IRTF documents should include a derivative rights statement where the
   authors grant unlimited permission for derivative works with
   appropriate credits and citations.  This is because research within
   the IRTF is intended to have broad impact and would be encouraged by
   avoiding limitations on the use of the documents.  Also, it is



Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


   currently the common case for non-IETF RFCs.


4.  IAB Statement

   In its capacity as the body that approves the creation of document
   streams (see [RFC4844]), the IAB has reviewed this proposal and
   supports it as an operational change that is in line with the
   respective roles of the IRTF, IESG and RFC Editor.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


6.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations in this document.


7.  Acknowledgements

   This document was developed in close collaboration with the Internet
   Research Steering Group (IRSG), see Appendix A for membership.
   Useful contributions were made by Mark Allman, Bob Braden, Brian
   Carpenter, Leslie Daigle, Stephen Farrell, Tom Henderson, Rajeev
   Koodli, Danny McPherson, Allison Mankin, Craig Partridge, Juergen
   Schoenwaelder, Karen Sollins, and Mark Townsley who contributed to
   development of the process defined in this document.


8.  Informative References

   [I-D.housley-iesg-rfc3932bis]
              Alvestrand, H. and R. Housley, "IESG Procedures for
              Handling of Independent and IRTF Stream Submissions",
              draft-housley-iesg-rfc3932bis-01 (work in progress),
              August 2008.

   [I-D.iab-streams-headers-boilerplates]
              Daigle, L. and O. Kolkman, "On RFC Streams Headers and
              Boilerplates", draft-iab-streams-headers-boilerplates-00
              (work in progress), June 2008.




Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


   [RFC2014]  Weinrib, A. and J. Postel, "IRTF Research Group Guidelines
              and Procedures", BCP 8, RFC 2014, October 1996.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC4844]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC
              Series and RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.


Appendix A.  Internet Research Steering Group membership

   IRSG members at the time of this writing:

      Bill Arbaugh, MOBOPTS RG; Bob Braden; John Buford, SAM RG; Ran
      Canetti, CFRG; Leslie Daigle; Wes Eddy, ICCRG; Aaron Falk, IRTF
      Chair; Kevin Fall, DTN RG; Stephen Farrell, DTN RG; Sally Floyd,
      TMRG; Andrei Gurtov, HIPRG; Tom Henderson, HIPRG; Rajeev Koodli,
      MOBOPTS RG; Olaf Kolkman, IAB Chair; John Levine, ASRG; Tony Li,
      RRG; Dave McGrew, CFRG; Jeremy Mineweaser, SAM RG; Craig
      Partridge, E2E RG; Juergen Schoenwaelder, NMRG; Karen Sollins, E2E
      RG; Michael Welzl, ICCRG; John Wroclawski; Lixia Zhang, RRG


Author's Address

   Aaron Falk
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton Street
   Cambridge, MA  02138
   USA

   Phone: +1-617-873-2575
   Email: falk@bbn.com

















Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  IRTF RFCs                 September 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Falk                     Expires March 11, 2009                 [Page 8]


