
Internet Engineering Task Force                                A. Birman
INTERNET DRAFT                                                 R. Guerin
                                                              D. Kandlur
                                                                     IBM
                                                        22 February 1996


           Support for RSVP-based Service over an ATM Network
                   draft-birman-ipatm-rsvpatm-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material, or to cite them other than as a ``working draft''
   or ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the internet-drafts
   Shadow Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast), nic.nordu.net
   (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim).


Abstract

   In this document we focus on RSVP-based resource reservations in a
   heterogeneous environment which includes ATM networks.  We describe
   a method for establishing 'shortcuts' through an ATM network which
   avoids the performance penalty associated with level 3 processing in
   a 'classical RSVP over ATM' approach.  For the case of guaranteed
   service we show how to map the RSVP flow characteristics to ATM call
   parameters, and thus enable end-to-end performance guarantees.  We
   also discuss the extensions to RSVP and to ATM signaling required for
   the implementation of these solutions.












Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page i]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


1. Introduction

   We consider a heterogeneous environment in which legacy networks
   coexist with ATM networks.  For applications that require performance
   guarantees the reservation of network resources is carried out using
   RSVP as the reservation setup protocol.  The operation of RSVP over
   an ATM network is the focus of our paper.

   Our starting point is the classical IP over ATM model [Lau94] in
   which an ATMARP server is used for address resolution within a LIS,
   while the inter-LIS traffic is routed through IP routers.  For
   an application with QoS requirements the classical IP over ATM
   architecture does allow for QoS support over the VCCs between the
   routers.  This solution is not altogether satisfactory, however,
   since it may not provide the QoS which would be possible if a direct
   VCC through the ATM network was established along the path through
   the ATM network.  Such a direct connection, first proposed in [Mil95]
   and referred to as a 'shortcut', eliminates the level 3 processing at
   the routers and thus allows better performance.  We describe below
   a method to establish such shortcuts over ATM networks, first for
   unicast and then multicast application flows (for additional details
   see [BFG+95]).  We refer to this approach as 'classical RSVP over ATM
   with shortcuts'.

   The approach described here has, without doubt, shortcomings.  Some
   of these can be traced to the differences between RSVP and ATM
   signaling ([For94],[For95]), and their opposing design principles.
   This approach is offered as a possible first step in supporting QoS
   flows in a heterogeneous environment with ATM networks.  If adopted
   and carried through to implementation, the experience thus gathered
   may be beneficial in the design of a better next scheme.


2. Reservation setup for unicast flows

   We first consider unicast flows.  The parameters necessary for
   setting up VCCs with QoS guarantees are obtained from RSVP messages
   Path and Resv.


2.1. Classical RSVP over ATM

   Figure 1 shows an ATM network consisting of four LISs.  A is the
   ingress router to the ATM network, B is the egress router.  RSVP
   messages follow the IP route AEFGB.  Thus, a Path message will
   travel downstream from A to B, while the corresponding Resv message
   will travel upstream from B to A.  When the Resv message arrives at
   G the router has sufficient information to set up a VC from G to B.



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 1]
Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996



   Similarly, VCs will be set up from F to G, from E to F, and from A
   to E.

   In particular, if the ATM network consists of a single LIS then the
   route from A to B has only one hop, although there could be multiple
   hops at the ATM level.

   For the multi-hop case, while RSVP messages travel over best-effort
   VCs, data packets flow over QoS VCs and enjoy QoS support in
   the routers.  Traversing the routers, however, entails IP-level
   processing and thus is less desirable than a shortcut VC from A to
   B.  In the rest of this section we discuss several schemes for RSVP
   support using ATM shortcuts.


2.2. ATM shortcuts

   In this scheme, we modify the RSVP operation in order to identify
   the appropriate egress router for the purpose of establishing a
   shortcut route through the ATM network.  When the first Path message
   for a session arrives at A (Figure 2), the node determines that the
   message will be forwarded over an ATM link and thus node A is the
   ingress node into the ATM network.  The Path message is routed along
   the default IP route, and is modified to carry both the ATM address
   and the IP address of A (the IP address of A is the `previous hop'
   or PHOP). At each node along the route an ATM connectivity check
   is performed to determine whether the current node is the egress
   point from the ATM network.  This decision would be based on the ATM
   connectivity between the current router, the upstream router, and the
   downstream router as determined by the logical ATM network in which




         +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+
     --->|A|------>|E|------>|F|------>|G|------>|B|--->
         +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+

             LIS 1     LIS 2     LIS 3     LIS 4
           <-------> <-------> <-------> <------->

                         ATM network
          <-------------------------------------->




      Figure 1: Reservation setup using ``classical'' RSVP support



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 2]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   they reside (the concept of the logical ATM network as described in
   [KP95]).  If the current router is not an egress router, it forwards
   the Path message to the downstream router without updating the PHOP
   address field.  If the current router is an egress router (e.g.
   B) it processes the Path message by creating a Path state for the
   session and by storing, along with other data, the IP address and the
   ATM address of A.

   A Resv message is considered new when it represents either a
   reservation requests for a new flow or a request to modify the
   reservation of an existing flow.  When such a Resv message arrives
   at B, B inserts its own ATM address as an object into this message,
   and forwards the message along the default routed path to A.
   Intermediate routers recognize the Resv message but do not create
   any session or reservation and simply forward the message upstream.
   When this Resv message arrives at A it carries in addition to the
   regular RSVP information, both the ATM address of the egress router
   B and QoS information necessary to determine the type of ATM VC that
   needs to be setup.

   Since intermediate nodes do not need to process the Resv message,
   an alternative here is to encapsulate the Resv message into an IP
   datagram that is then tunneled from B to A.  Tunneling provides
   the advantage that packet processing is expedited (along the
   fast-path through the router) since there is no special processing at
   intermediate nodes.  On the other hand, the packet is not treated as
   a signaling packet and is susceptible to normal loss at intermediate
   nodes.

   After the shortcut VC from A to B is set up, B needs to be able
   to associate the newly created VC with the RSVP flow.  In order to
   achieve this, the flow identifier consisting of the tuple

           (sourceIPaddress;destinationIPaddress; transportlayer)

   is carried in the SETUP message in the Broadband High Layer
   Information (B-HLI) element (the length of this field would have
   to be extended from its current size of 8 bytes).  The source and
   destination IP addresses cannot be inferred from the ATM addresses
   in the router--router case.  The source and destination addresses
   themselves further consist of pairs of the form

                          (IPaddress;portnumber):

   Note also that the receipt of the SETUP message provides an implicit
   acknowledgment that the Resv message was received at router A.
   This means that router A also has received all the information
   necessary to forward Resv messages upstream, i.e.  the RSVP filter



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 3]
Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996



   and service specifications that are not directly available from the
   ATM connection characteristics.  As a result, the egress router B
   now suppresses the transmission of Resv refreshes towards router A,
   unless they carry a modified service specification.

   Figure 2 shows a shortcut VC from A to B which bypasses nodes E,
   F and G.  The shortcut VC is used for the RSVP data traffic, but
   Path messages continue to flow along the default routed path.  It is
   noted that this scheme for creating shortcut routes is independent of
   the underlying routing mechanism and is oblivious to any IP routing
   domain boundaries.  Moreover, RSVP state is required only in the edge
   routers A and B.

   A possible variation to the method described above handles Path
   messages the same way, but differs from it in that it shifts the
   responsibility of establishing the ATM shortcut VC from the ingress
   router A to the egress router B (see Figure 2).  This is possible
   because ATM unicast calls are always duplex, and resources can be
   reserved in both directions.

   Specifically, when a Resv message arrives at the egress router B,
   B can generate a SETUP message towards A and specify the resources
   required in both directions.  The SETUP message will specify QoS
   requirements in the direction A to B to accommodate the service
   specifications carried in the Resv message.  Conversely, it will not
   request any QoS or bandwidth guarantees from B to A since there is
   no data flow in this direction.  While the VC setup is now handled by
   the egress router, it is still necessary to forward the Resv message




         +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+
     --->|A|------>|E|------>|F|------>|G|------>|B|--->
         +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+       +-+
           :                                     :
           :                VC                   :
           .......................................



                         ATM network
          <-------------------------------------->




            Figure 2: Reservation setup using ATM shortcuts



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 4]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   to the ingress router, so that it can propagate that information
   upstream (it cannot be accurately inferred for the traffic and QoS
   parameters carried in the SETUP message).  In order to do that,
   Resv messages including refreshes for reliability purposes, will
   keep on being forwarded onto the IP route.  However, as with the
   previous method, they are not acted upon at intermediate routers.
   Another alternative is to include the Resv message as higher layer
   information in the SETUP message.

   The main advantage of this scheme is that it is consistent with the
   preferred solution for multicast flows when the LIJ capability of UNI
   4.0 becomes available (see Section 3.2 for details).


3. Reservation setup for multicast flows

   We consider two methods for establishing shortcuts through an ATM
   network.  The ``root-initiated ATM shortcut'' is better suited to
   the present UNI 3.1 environment, while the ``leaf-initiated ATM
   shortcut'' would be preferred when the leaf-initiated join capability
   of UNI 4.0 becomes available.


3.1. Root-initiated ATM shortcuts

   We start by extending the unicast scheme of Section 2.2 to
   single-sender multicast flows, as illustrated in Figure 3.  As
   mentioned before, this is the approach best suited to a UNI 3.1
   environment.  The determination of the ATM shortcut follows the same
   steps as in Section 2.2.  When a Path message for a session arrives
   at node A, the node determines that the message will be forwarded
   over an ATM link and thus node A is the ingress node into the ATM
   network (note that this step only needs to be performed upon receipt
   of the first Path message).  The ATM address of A is inserted as an
   object into the Path message, which is fowarded onto the default IP
   route.  In addition, a mechanism such as MARS [Arm95] is used for
   local multicast delivery on this path.

   At each node along the route an ATM connectivity check is again
   performed to determine whether the current node is an egress point
   from the logical ATM network.  If the current node, such as F in
   Figure 3, is not an egress point then the Path message is forwarded
   to the downstream nodes without updating the PHOP (previous hop)
   address field.

   When the first Resv message arrives at an egress point, say B, B
   forwards the message along the reverse path to A.  The ATM address
   of B is carried as an object in the Resv message.  Intermediate



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 5]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996



         +-+       +-+       +-+            +-+
     --->|A|------>|E|------>|F|----------->|B|--->
         +-+       +-+       +-+            +-+
                    |
                    |                       +-+
                    +---------------------->|C|--->
                                            +-+


                      ATM network
          <---------------------------------->





           Figure 3: Reservation setup with maximum shortcut



   routers, F and E in this case, simply forward the message upstream
   towards A.  Specifically, they do not merge Resv messages and do
   not perform any reservation.  As in the unicast case, an alternative
   is to tunnel the Resv message directly to A by encapsulating it
   into an IP message.  When the first Resv message arrives at A, say
   from B, A has all the information necessary to create a shortcut
   point-to-multipoint VC with root A and leaf B.  In order for B
   to associate the newly created VC with the RSVP flow, the flow
   identifier consisting of the pair

                  (sourceIPaddress; destinationIPaddress)

   is carried in the SETUP message in the Broadband High Layer
   Information (B-HLI) element.  Later, when the Resv message from C
   arrives at A, A adds C to the point-to-multipoint VC with an ADD
   PARTY signaling message.  The ADD PARTY message will also carry the
   flow identifier in the B-HLI element.

   In order to track route changes and changes in group membership,
   Path refresh messages keep flowing normally over the IP route.
   However, Resv refreshes from each router are suppressed as soon
   as the egress router receives the ATM setup message (ADD PARTY
   or SETUP for the first leaf).  This is because the setup message
   indicates that the initial Resv message has been received by the
   ingress router, and that the reservation through the ATM network has
   been successfully performed.  This suppression prevents the steady
   state implosion of refresh Resv messages at the ingress router.



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 6]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   However, the ingress router is still required to perform as many ATM
   connection SETUPs as there are leaves in the ATM network for the
   multicast address.  This is because, the scheme always results in
   the use of a ``maximum'' ATM shortcut between the ingress and egress
   routers.  The use of a maximum shortcut minimizes IP-level processing
   at intermediate nodes and thus shortens end-to-end packet delays,
   but the (signaling) load imposed on the ingress router may become a
   problem when dealing with large multicast groups.

   Milliken [MillikenJul9501] proposed a scheme which is intended to
   alleviate the problem by distributing the (signaling) processing
   load among the routers.  This load distribution is achieved by
   allowing some flexibility at each router on deciding whether or not
   to extend an ATM shortcut.  A more promising and systematic approach
   to eliminate the possibility of signaling overload at the ingress
   router, it to use the Leaf-Initiated Join (LIJ) capability of of UNI
   4.0.  We discuss such a solution in the next section.


3.2. Leaf-initiated ATM shortcuts

   Consider the ATM network in Figure 3 and assume the flow of Path
   messages is as described in the previous section.  That is, Path
   messages continue to use the default IP routed path, and a mechanism
   such as MARS is used for local multicast delivery on this path.
   As before, the Path message processing at intermediate routers is
   changed, in that the PHOP is not modified, while the Path message
   carries the ATM address of A.  In addition, A also chooses a
   ``global connection identifier'' (GCID) and inserts it into the
   Path message.  This global connection identifier consists of a
   call identifier uniquely chosen by the root, which is paired with
   the root's ATM address for LIJ setup.  For a given RSVP session,
   there may be multiple flows transiting through A and, for each
   flow, A would choose a distinct global connection identifier.  This
   connection identifier will be used by egress routers when generating
   an ATM LIJ request to join the point-to-multipoint connection
   associated with the IP multicast address.

   When the first Resv message reaches an egress router, say B, the
   router has all the information needed for generating an LIJ request
   to the GCID it received.  The ATM point-to-multipoint connection is
   then created at this time, with the ingress router A as its root
   and B as the first leaf.  As other egress routers, such as C in
   Figure 3, also receive their first Resv message, they signal their
   intention to join the connection in exactly the same manner, i.e.
   through a LIJ request to the specified GCID. They are then added as
   new leaves to the existing point-to-multipoint connection, but the
   ingress router A is not notified of this new join.  This eliminates



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 7]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   the potential processing overload at router A since it is only
   required to handle a single signaling request, i.e.  when the first
   leaf joins.

   However, note that as a result of not notifying the ingress router
   of new leaves joining, the information carried in the Resv messages
   arriving at the associated egress routers is not forwarded to the
   ingress router during the ATM setup process.  This information is,
   however, necessary for the ingress router to further propagate Resv
   messages upstream, i.e.  it needs information elements such as the
   RSVP service and filter specifications, which as mentioned before
   cannot always be directly inferred from the ATM traffic and QoS
   parameters.  In order to achieve this, Resv messages, including
   refreshes, will continue to be propagated and merged on the IP
   path, but no reservation will be triggered at intermediate routers.
   The merging on the IP path ensures that the ingress router is not
   overwhelmed by the volume of refresh Resv messages it receives,
   while providing it with all the information it needs to forward Resv
   messages to its upstream neighbor.  Note that even refreshes are sent
   in order to ensure reliable delivery of Resv messages to the ingress
   router.


4. Issues Related to Flow/Call Characteristics

   The previous sections have dealt with many of the issues related to
   the mapping between RSVP and ATM control flows.  In this section,
   we focus on similar problems but at the level of the data flows.
   Specifically, we consider issues related to the mapping of traffic
   parameters and QoS guarantees as well as connection types.


4.1. Flow mapping

   RSVP defines a session as the set of data flows with the same
   (unicast or multicast) destination.  As a result, at an endpoint of a
   flow (sender or receiver) the data flow is uniquely identified by the
   pair
                  (sourceIPaddress;destinationIPaddress):
   The source and destination addresses themselves further consist of
   pairs of the form
                          (IPaddress;portnumber);
   where the destination IP address can be a multicast IP address.

   The ATM UNI identifies a connection through the Connection Identifier
   used in the SETUP, CONNECT, etc.  messages.  Connection Identifier is
   associated to an ATM flow from one sender to one or more receivers
   and is unique at the sender.  A call can be uniquely identified



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 8]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   in the ATM network by the pair (Connection Identifier, sender ATM
   address).  Similarly, in ATM UNI 4.0 which introduces the Leaf
   Initiated Join (LIJ) capability, each LIJ capable call is uniquely
   identified by a Global Call Identifier (GCID). The GCID is formed by
   pairing the LIJ call identifier selected by the the ``ROOT'' of the
   call (point-to-multipoint connection) and the address of the ROOT
   itself.  Network wide uniqueness is, therefore, ensured.

   From the above discussion, we see that a node at the boundary between
   IP and ATM networks can map the quadruplet (source IP address, source
   port number, destination IP address, destination port number) that
   uniquely identifies an RSVP flow, to an ATM GCID consisting of (call
   identifier, sender ATM address).


4.2. Traffic and QoS handling

   Traffic and QoS specifications are not defined in RSVP. They are
   deferred to the int-serv IETF draft documents.  The Guaranteed Delay
   int-serv draft [SP95] defines the traffic specification (TSpec) as
   consisting of a token bucket with a given bucket depth b (in bytes)
   specifying the maximum allowed burst size for the flow, a bucket rate
   r (in bytes/second) giving the average rate of the flow, and a peak
   rate p (in bytes/second) giving the maximum transmission rate of the
   flow at the source.  This traffic specification can be mapped into
   the corresponding ATM traffic parameters, which are specified in
   cell-based measures.

   [SP95] defines the service specification (RSpec), and a procedure
   that describes how the RSpec is determined as a function of the
   delay requirements of the flow and the capabilities of the service
   elements (routers) on its path.  The end-to-end delay d and the
   associated service specifications for the flow are not quantities
   that are initially provided explicitly.  Rather, they are determined
   at the receiver upon receipt of the Path message carrying the values
   of the ``error terms'' Ctot=  Sum Ci and Dtot =  Sum Di, which have
   been accumulated on the connection's path.  The terms Ci and Di
   correspond to the error contributed by router i when compared to a
   perfect fluid service model.

   The RSVP and Int-Serv documents suggest that the resource reservation
   for a flow from S to D with guaranteed delay requirement is
   performed in the following way.  The source S generates Path
   messages that contain the traffic characterization (TSpec)of the
   flow.  The Path message, therefore, includes the parameters b, r, p,
   and two fields Ctot and Dtot which are both initialized to 0.  At
   router i, these fields are incremented using the local values Ci and




Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996          [Page 9]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   Di:
                       Ctot:= Ctot+Ci; Dtot:= Dtot+ Di
   At the receiver D, a desired end-to-end delay d is selected, and the
   required clearing rate R is computed as:

             R = max(r, ((b + Ctot) / (d - Dtot)))

   The clearing rate R is then loaded in the RSpec included in the Resv
   message sent towards S.

   A key aspect of the above approach, that complicates the interactions
   with ATM is the decoupling between the advertising (accumulation of
   Ctot and Dtot as the Path message progresses) and the reservation
   phases (request for allocation of the clearing rate R).  The main
   issue at the boundary of an ATM network is to determine which values
   to select for the terms CATM and DATM, when updating the Ctot and
   Dtot fields in the Path message.  Also, delay guarantees based on
   the specification of a clearing rate may not always be supported by
   ATM switches and can not be readily expressed through ATM signaling.
   Hence, the ATM network has to be accounted for as a fixed delay
   component of the path.  This requires information about (a) the
   ingress and egress points (routers) of the ATM network, (b) a delay
   bound, DATM, on the flow between the ingress and egress points.

   The first item is available at the egress point as the Path message
   exits from the ATM network (as outlined in Section 2.2).  The
   second item may be obtained by the egress router by querying the
   ATM network to find the best delay that can be guaranteed for a
   flow with the specific endpoints.  While this information is not
   currently accessible over an ATM UNI, it is available as part of
   the ATM PNNI control information.  The egress router would then be
   responsible for updating the Ctot and Dtot fields as the Path message
   exits from the ATM network (intermediate routers would leave these
   fields unmodified).  This mechanism for updating the advertizement
   information at the egress points is consistent for both unicast and
   multicast flows.


5. Impact on RSVP and ATM signaling

   In this document we proposed a method for supporting RSVP-based
   resource reservations in a heterogeneous environment which includes
   ATM networks.  This method, classical RSVP over ATM with shortcuts,
   requires a number of modifications to RSVP and to ATM signaling.  We
   review here these requirements.






Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996         [Page 10]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


5.1. Modifications to RSVP in the UNI 3.1 environment

   In this environment, the general approach we take can be
   characterized as root oriented.  This means that most of the
   interactions with the ATM signaling needed to extend RSVP flows
   across ATM networks, originate in the ingress router.  Such
   extensions require a number of modifications to the processing of
   Path and Resv messages.

   The first step at the ingress router is to identify that the
   flow is to cross an ATM network and should, therefore, be handled
   differently.  Once this has been determined, subsequent modifications
   to the Path message handling vary somewhat as a function of the
   approach used.  Typically, the Path message will be forwarded on
   the normal IP path, and extended to carry the ATM address of the
   ingress router.  Path processing is also different at intermediate
   (non-egress) routers which do not update the PHOP field, so that
   it still points to the ingress router, and do not maintain state
   information.  This helps lower the processing overhead for such
   messages.  In addition, the Dtot field (and Ctot) is not updated
   until the Path message reaches the egress router(s), where it is
   incremented by an estimate of the maximum delay the ATM network would
   contribute.  Path messages continue flowing on the IP route even
   after an ATM VC shortcut has been established for the flow.

   The processing of Resv messages is also affected when crossing ATM
   networks.  They are used to trigger the establishment of an ATM
   shortcut when received at an egress router(s).  The connection
   request originates from the ingress router (ADD-PARTY for multicast
   flows, or SETUP for unicast flows) upon receipt of a new Resv message
   from an egress router.  This Resv message carries the standard
   RSVP information, i.e.  filter and service specifications, that
   are needed by the ingress router to forward Resv messages to its
   upstream neighbor.  The Resv message also contains the ATM address
   of the egress router as well as the delay guarantees needed for the
   connection across the ATM network.  Note that the receipt of the
   SETUP (or ADD-PARTY for multicast flows) at an egress router provides
   an implicit acknowledgment that the ingress router has received
   the Resv message and that the ATM reservation has been successful.
   Finally, refresh Resv messages are suppressed, i.e.  not forwarded on
   the IP path, and connection liveness is guaranteed by ATM mechanisms.


5.2. Modifications to RSVP in the UNI 4.0 environment

   The major enhancement in UNI 4.0, from the point-of-view of RSVP
   support, is the LIJ ability in point-to-multipoint connections.  This




Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996         [Page 11]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   allows us to use a leaf oriented approach to support RSVP flows (both
   unicast and multicast) which ensures better scalability.

   The handling of Path messages remain essentially as for the UNI
   3.1 case, in that they are forwarded on the normal IP path but not
   processed at intermediate routers, i.e.  PHOP field and OPWA objects
   are not modified and no state is created.  In addition to carrying
   the ATM address of the ingress router, the Path message also carries
   a global ATM call identifier (GCID) in the case of multicast flows.
   This GCID is then specified in the LIJ message generated by egress
   routers upon receipt of a new Resv message, when they want to join
   an existing point-to-multipoint connection associated with a given
   multicast flow.  In the case of a unicast flow, the egress router
   simply initiates a SETUP to the ATM address of the ingress router.

   Because in the leaf oriented approach the egress routers are
   responsible for the establishment of ATM connections, it is not
   necessary to forward Resv messages to the ingress router for that
   purpose.  However, it is still necessary to transmit the RSVP
   information contained in the Resv message (filter and service
   specifications) to the ingress router, so that it can propagate
   it upstream.  This is achieved by forwarding all Resv messages
   (including refreshes for reliability) on the IP route to the
   ingress router.  Note that although Resv messages are processed at
   intermediate routers they are not acted upon, i.e.  merging of Resv
   messages will take place when required but no reservations will be
   triggered and no state is maintained.


5.3. Modifications and extensions to ATM signaling

   As stated above, it is clear that many of the extensions to be
   included in UNI 4.0 are key to an efficient support of RSVP flows
   across ATM networks.  Foremost among them is the LIJ capability,
   which is critical to handle large multicast connections.  This
   capability should, however, be such that different leaves are
   allowed to specify different service requirements.  Other desirable
   extensions to be included in UNI 4.0 are the ability to renegotiate
   the characteristics of an established connection, and a B-HLI field
   larger than its current 8 bytes.

   There are, however, other desirable extensions which may not be
   provided in UNI 4.0.  One such example, is the ability for an RSVP
   router to query the ATM network for the best delay that can be
   guaranteed to a given destination.  This can be achieved either by
   allowing ``soft'' requests, or by supporting both ``desired'' and
   ``acceptable'' QoS parameters.  As a second example, the ability to
   let the root of a point-to-multipoint call assign a GCID even before



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996         [Page 12]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


   any leaf has requested to join, could simplify some of the processing
   when establishing such calls.


6. References

   [Arm95] G. Armitage, "Support for Multicast over UNI 3.1 based ATM
   Networks", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ipatm-ipmc-10.txt, December
   1995.

   [BFG+95] A. Birman, V. Firoiu, R. Guerin and D. Kandlur,
   "Provisioning of RSVP-based Services over a Large ATM Network", IBM
   Research Report RC20250, October 1995.

   [BZB+96] R. Braden, L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, S. Jamin,
   "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1, Functional
   Specification", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-rsvp-spec-09.txt, February
   1996.

   [For94] ATM Forum, "ATM User-Network Interface Specifications,
   Version 3.1", September 1994.

   [For95] ATM Forum, "ATM User-Network Interface Specifications,
   Version 4.0", ATM Forum/94-1018.

   [KP95] D. Katz and D. Piscitello, "NBMA Next Hop Resolution Protocol
   (NHRP)", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-rolc-nhrp-07.txt, December 1995.

   [Lau94] M. Laubach, "Classical IP and ARP over ATM", Internet Draft,
   Internet RFC1577, January 1994.

   [Mil95] W. Milliken, "Integrated Services IP Multicasting over ATM",
   Internet Draft, draft-ietf-milliken-ipatm-services-00.txt, July 1995.

   [SP95] S. Shenker and C. Partridge, "Specification of Guaranteed
   Quality of Service", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-intserv-guaranteed-
   svc-03.txt, December 1995.


7. Authors' Address

          Alex Birman
          T. J. Watson Research Center
          IBM Corporation
          30 Saw Mill River Rd.
          Hawthorne, NY  10532

          Phone:   +1-914-784-7275



Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996         [Page 13]

Internet Draft              RSVP over ATM               22 February 1996


          E-mail: birman@watson.ibm.com


          Roch Guerin
          T. J. Watson Research Center
          IBM Corporation
          30 Saw Mill River Rd.
          Hawthorne, NY  10532

          Phone:   +1-914-784-7038
          E-mail: guerin@watson.ibm.com


          Dilip Kandlur
          T. J. Watson Research Center
          IBM Corporation
          30 Saw Mill River Rd.
          Hawthorne, NY  10532

          Phone:   +1-914-784-7722
          E-mail: kandlur@watson.ibm.com






























Birman, Guerin, Kandlur         Expires 31 August 1996         [Page 14]

