Network Working Group                                           P Rissen
Internet Draft                                 Siemens Business Services
Expires: July 2007                                      January 12, 2007

            A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Formal Namespace
               for the British Broadcasting Corporation
                     draft-rissen-bbc-urn-00.txt

Status of this Memo

By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that
any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is
aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she
becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of
BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

This Internet-Draft will expire on July 16, 2007.

Abstract
This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace
Identification (NID) convention as prescribed by the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C) for identifying, naming, assigning, and managing
persistent resources and XML artifacts for the British Broadcasting
Corporation.

Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 1]

Internet Draft     URN Namespace for the BBC               January 2007

1.  Introduction
The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) wishes to define a
namespace convention and structure for internal/external use by
creating and managing globally unique, persistent, location-
independent identifiers for their scheme resources and XML artifacts.

The BBC has adopted the method of using URL (Uniform Resource
Locator) as a way of uniquely identifying classification schemes and
terms within classification schemes. In the future, the BBC wishes to
be able to develop classification schemes using a URN. This will
enable the BBC to publish documents, schemas and other identifiable
assets that cannot be registered within other public registries.
Adopting a URN will also provide a high level of future proofing.

The BBC wishes to provide guidance on namespaces internally and to
its agencies so that they use a portion of the adopted namespace to
minimize the risk of their creating different (and potentially
conflicting) namespace structures. 

2. Specification Template

2.1 Namespace ID:
	
"BBC"

2.2 Registration Information:

Version Number: 1

Date: 12th January 2007

Declared registrant of the namespace:

Rhys Lewis

Chief Enterprise Architect

BBC

Wood Lane, London

Email: rhys.lewis@bbc.co.uk

Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 2]

Internet Draft     URN Namespace for the BBC               January 2007

2.3 Declaration of structure:

The identifier has a hierarchical structure, of which the top level
is as follows:

urn:bbc

The structure of the identifier and any additional levels of
hierarchy will be managed by the BBC. If major changes to the
identifier's structure are proposed and accepted internally, the
appropriate registration process will be followed with the IANA etc.

2.4 Relevant ancillary documentation:

None.

2.5 Identifier uniqueness considerations:

Identifiers will be assigned by the BBC via a system that guarantees
uniqueness.  Uniqueness will be achieved by checking against a
registry of previously assigned names, and ensuring that the
identifier conforms to appropriate internal standards. The BBC will
be responsible for this.

2.6 Identifier persistence considerations:

The assignment process guarantees that identifiers are not reassigned
and that the binding between the identifier and the resource is
permanent.

2.7 Process of identifier assignment:

Identifiers will be assigned by a BBC system that will be managed
internally by a group tasked with the management of the system.

2.8 Process of identifier resolution:

URNs will be resolved using BBC internal systems and tools. 

2.9 Rules for Lexical equivalence:

The entire URN is case-insensitive.

2.10 Conformance with URN Syntax:

Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 3]

Internet Draft     URN Namespace for the BBC               January 2007

No special considerations.

2.11 Validation mechanism:

None specified.

2.12 Scope:

Global. It is intended that the URNs will be used widely within the
context of the BBC's content, and as this content is made available
worldwide, it should have a global scope.

3.  Examples

The following examples are not guaranteed to be real; they are for
pedagogical purposes only.

urn:bbc:schemas:MediaIngest:2006-03

urn:bbc:news:schemas:Syndication:2005

urn:bbc:metadata:mpeg7cs:ControlledVocabulary:2006-11:PeopleCS:2006-
11:TonyBlair

urn:bbc:metadata:mpeg7ds:MetadataInterchange:2006-12-02

urn:bbc:metadata:GenreCS:2006-12-01:Comedy

urn:bbc:metadata:ChannelCS:2006-12-01:BBCOne

4.  Namespace Considerations:

Where appropriate, the BBC wishes to adopt a scheme of identifying
resources which will enable it to share and track information both
internally and externally. The scheme should be flexible and future-
proof - a URN namespace would achieve this goal.

5.  Community Considerations:

The BBC will benefit internally from this namespace, as it will allow
easier communication and identification of its resources. In turn,
this will benefit the wider community as a whole, as the quality of
content produced will increase. Externally, the use of a URN will aid
communication and identification of resources amongst the BBC's
customers, both in terms of its audience and other organizations who
share the BBC's content.

Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 4]

Internet Draft     URN Namespace for the BBC               January 2007

6.  Security Considerations

There are no additional security considerations other than those
normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in
general. The application, registration and assignment of subsequent
specifiers will leverage existing corporation processes to
authenticate the applicants and their association with the proposed
specifier application.

7.  IANA Considerations

This document includes a URN NID registration for BBC for entry in
the IANA registry of URN NIDs (see RFC 2434 [5] for more information).

8.  Acknowledgments

Since the specification described in this document is derived from 
BCP 66, RFC 4350, RFC 4195, and RFC 3043, the acknowledgements in
those documents still apply.  

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

[1]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,

"Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition Mechanisms",
BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

[2]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC 3986,
January 2005.

[3] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

[4]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC 3986,
January 2005.

[5]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 1998.

Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 5]

Internet Draft     URN Namespace for the BBC               January 2007

[6]  URI Planning Interest Group, W3C/IETF (See acknowledgments)
September 2001,<http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/NOTE-uri-clarification-
20010921/>.

Author's Addresses

Paul Rissen
Siemens Business Services
68 Wood Lane, London
	
Email: paul.rissen@siemens.com

Intellectual Property Statement

The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 6]

Internet Draft     URN Namespace for the BBC               January 2007

Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
retain all their rights.

This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
Internet Society.


Rissen              Expires July 16, 2007                      [Page 7]
