



Network Working Group                                              E. of
Internet-Draft                                              The Internet
Intended status: Informational                             July 16, 2018
Expires: January 17, 2019


                       Social Media (An Apology)
                  draft-elders-social-media-apology-00

Abstract

   Oops, we did it again.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 17, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.







of                      Expires January 17, 2019                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Social Media (An Apology)              July 2018


1.  Introduction

   Recently, you may have noticed a dramatic increase in the amount of
   opprobrium, outrage, hate speech and overall bile on your favorite
   social media channel.

   The Elders of the Internet apologize unreservedly for this
   disruption.

   Recently, our attention has been focused on keeping the United States
   government, Comcast, your local ISP and some guy at the coffee shop
   out of your bits [RFC7258].

   As a result, we were caught unawares when the Internet became the
   sink for every poorly-considered argument, paranoid thought when you
   wake up in the dead of night, and shrieking nutjob you'd usually
   cross the street to avoid.

   Combined with the magnification offered by "likes" and "retweets",
   along with the inevitable back-and-forth squabbling that ensures, the
   Internet is currently having a crippling effect on your ability to
   work, communicate productively, and - occasionally - breathe.

   In retrospect, we should have known; USENET was a pretty clear
   warning.  We will do better.

2.  Mitigations

   To partially mitigate the effects of this phenomenon, a number of
   techniques can be used.  Note that none of these is a "fix", and some
   undesirable effects (e.g., loss of sleep, appetite or democracy) may
   persist.

2.1.  Meme-Only Diet

   Memes are a time-proven way to express disdain, mocking and other
   sentiments while maintaining an air of light humor.  They can
   therefore be helpful in a transition away from full-throated, deeply-
   felt outrage.

   In other words, they're the methadone of the Internet.  Memes are
   only to be generated or consumed under advice of a doctor, as
   prolonged use might result in undesirable side effects (e.g.,
   [fourchan]).







of                      Expires January 17, 2019                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Social Media (An Apology)              July 2018


2.2.  Blocklists

   Blocklists are a proven means of avoiding undesirable content, and
   responsible social networks (looking at you, Facebook) implement
   them.  They may be able to help you enjoy the sparse benefits of a
   social network without some of the worst side effects.

   Recommending a specific blocklist is out of scope for this document,
   but we suggest starting with "Trump" and working outwards from there.

2.3.  Abstention

   The most proven way to win is not to play.  By abstaining from social
   media, you may find you have more time, a more authentic and
   meaningful engagement with life, and a corresponding lack of the
   desire to stock up on canned food and ammunition.

   Other benefits may include more productive and authentic
   participation in genuine societal issues (as opposed to "using a
   hashtag" while binge-watching [Netflix]).

2.4.  Whisky

   For those unable to leave social media or otherwise curtail their
   use.

3.  Security Considerations

   The security of the Internet is the least of your problems.  Buckle
   up, kids.

4.  Informative References

   [fourchan]
              Anonymous, "4Chan", n.d., <https://www.4chan.org/>.

   [Netflix]  Netflix, "Netflix", n.d., <https://netflix.com/>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>.

Appendix A.  Membership Notes

   The Edlers of the Internet note with sorrow the passing of our former
   member, Stephen Hawking, aka "The Hawk."  You will be missed.





of                      Expires January 17, 2019                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Social Media (An Apology)              July 2018


   Applications for membership are now being accepted at the usual IPv6
   address.

Author's Address

   Elders of the Internet
   The Internet

   Email: internet-elders@hotmail.com










































of                      Expires January 17, 2019                [Page 4]
