Internet Draft                                          D. Pinkas, Bull
PKIX Working Group                            J. Kazin, Jefferson Wells
expires in six months                                         June 2007
Target Category: Informational


                Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
                 PKI Disaster Recovery and Key Rollover
                  <draft-pinkas-pkix-pki-dr-kr-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   Months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document presents a framework to assist the writers of policy 
   or practice statements and the designers of a Public Key 
   Infrastructure to prepare disaster recovery plans in case of a
   private key-compromise or a private key-loss.  This may happen to 
   end-entity keys, Certification Authorities, Revocation Authorities, 
   Attribute Authorities, or Time-Stamping Authorities.  Since 
   certificates have finite validity, CA key-rollover should be 
   planned in advance. 

   In addition, denial of service attacks on Repositories holding 
   CRLs has also to be considered.

   This framework provides a comprehensive list of potential key-
   compromise or key-loss conditions that, in the opinion of the 
   authors, should be addressed so that it is possible to quickly 
   recover from exceptional situations.

Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 1]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  INTRODUCTION
 1.1  BACKGROUND                                                      4
 1.2  PURPOSE                                                         4
 1.3  SCOPE                                                           4

2.  ABREVIATIONS                                                      4

3.  CONCEPTS                                                          5

4. Subscribers (End-Entities) keys                                    5
 4.1. Signature keys                                                  5
  4.1.1. Signature key-compromise                                     5
   4.1.1.1. Key used for authentication, access control, and 
            confidentiality                                           5
   4.1.1.2. Key used for short-term non repudiation                   5
   4.1.1.3. Key used for long-term non repudiation                    6
   4.1.1.3. Key length considerations                                 7
  4.1.2. Signature key-loss                                           7
  4.1.3. Key rollover                                                 7
 4.2 Decryption key                                                   8
  4.2.1. Decryption key-compromise                                    8
   4.2.1.1. Key used to decrypt stored data                           8
   4.2.1.2. Key used to decrypt communications                        8
  4.2.2. Decryption key-loss                                          9
   4.2.2.1. Key used to decrypt stored data                           9
   4.2.2.2. Key used to decrypt communications                       10

5. Certification Authority                                           10
 5.1. Authority key-compromise                                       10
  5.1.1. Root CA key-compromise                                      11
  5.1.2. Intermediate CA key-compromise                              11
   5.1.2.1. CA key-compromise during certificate life-time           11
   5.1.2.2. CA key-compromise beyond certificate life-time           14
 5.2. CA key-loss                                                    15
 5.3. Key rollover                                                   15
  5.3.1. For root keys                                               15
  5.3.2. For intermediate keys                                       16
  5.3.3. For leaf keys                                               16

6. Revocation Authority                                              16
 6.1. CA key-compromise within certificate life-time                 16
 6.2. CRL Issuer key-compromise within certificate life-time         17
 6.3. OCSP responder key-compromise within certificate life-time     17
 6.4. Revocation Authority key-compromise beyond certificate 
      life-time                                                      18
 6.5. Revocation Authority key-loss                                  18

7. Attribute Authorities                                             18
 7.1. Attribute certificate revocation                               18
 7.2. Attribute Authority Key compromise                             18
 7.3. Attribute Authority Key loss                                   19

Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 2]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

8. Time-Stamping Unit keys                                           19
 8.1. Time-Stamping Unit Key loss                                    19
 8.2. Time-Stamping Unit Key compromise                              20
  8.2.1. Compromise during the validity period of the TSU 
         certificate                                                 20
   8.2.1.1. Checking during the validity period of the TSU 
            certificate                                              20
   8.2.1.2. Checking beyond the validity period of the TSU 
            certificate                                              21
  8.2.2. Compromise after the end of the validity period of the TSU 
         certificate                                                 22

9. CRL Repositories                                                  22

10. Security considerations                                          23

11. Acknowledgments                                                  23

12. IANA considerations                                              23

13. References                                                       23

14. Authors' addresses                                               24

15. Full Copyright Statement                                         24






























Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 3]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


1.  INTRODUCTION

1.1  BACKGROUND

   A CA should expect end-entities to experience private key-compromise 
   and/or loss.  However, private key-compromise and/or key-loss for 
   Authority keys should not happen, but might occur so, it is prudent 
   to develop procedures for how to recover from such events.  As a 
   general rule, to limit the damage caused by a key-compromise, the 
   private key-usage lifetime - not to be confused with the 
   certificate-validity period - should be limited and key-compromise 
   and key-rollover responses should be planned in advance.

1.2  PURPOSE

   The framework identifies ways to recover from a key-compromise or 
   a key-loss and to restore normal operations: this is known as 
   a disaster recovery plan.  While recovery times may vary based on 
   implementation factors, shorter recovery times are better.  The 
   framework also provides guidance for key-rollover.

1.2  SCOPE

   The scope of this document covers the loss of use of a private key 
   due to the actual destruction of the key-material (key-loss), the 
   actual or suspected theft of key-material (key-compromise), and key-
   rollover for subscribers (leaf certificates issued to end-entities) 
   as well as for PKI Authorities.

   It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the general concepts
   of public-key cryptography, public-key infrastructure and its 
   artifacts and protocols: digital signatures, digital certificates, 
   the Online Certificate Status Protocol (see [OCSP]), Attributes 
   Certificates (see [AC]) and the Time-Stamp Protocol (see [TSP]), 
   etc., as used in X.509 and RFC 3280 (see [PKIX-1]) or its 
   successors. 

   The framework as presented assumes use of the PKI as described in 
   RFC 3280 or its successors, as well as RFC 2560.

2.  ABREVIATIONS

   This document makes use of the following abbreviations:

   AA :   Attribute Authority
   AC:    Attribute Certificate
   ARL:   Authority Revocation List
   CA:    Certification Authority
   CRL:   Certificate Revocation List
   HTTPS: Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure
   OCSP:  On line Certificate Status Protocol
   SSL:   Secure Socket Layer
   TSU :  Time-Stamping Unit

Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 4]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007



3.  CONCEPTS

Key compromise needs to be considered for two different time periods:

   1) during the validity period of the certificate (and of all 
      superior certificates in its certification chain), but also 
      before the beginning of the validity period of the current 
      certificate in case of certificate renewal;

   2) after the end of the validity period of the certificate.

   The first case applies to the use of certificates for the following 
   security services: authentication, message-integrity, short-term 
   non-repudiation (i.e. during the validity period of the certificate) 
   and message-confidentiality.

   The second case applies to the use of certificates for long-term 
   non-repudiation security services (i.e. beyond the validity period 
   of the certificate).

4. Subscribers (End-Entities) keys

4.1. Signature keys

4.1.1. Signature key-compromise

   Should a signature creation key be lost or compromised, then the 
   corresponding certificate shall be revoked.  A new key pair shall 
   be generated and a new certificate shall be issued.  The certificate 
   corresponding to the lost/compromised private-key shall be revoked 
   and its serial number placed in a Certificate Revocation List (CRL) 
   or communicated to an OCSP responder.

4.1.1.1. Key used for authentication, and message-confidentiality

   During real-time use, such as authentication to protected resources, 
   and message-confidentiality, relying parties will be able to check 
   the revocation status of a certificate using CRLs or OCSP responses.

4.1.1.2. Key used for short-term non-repudiation

   Digital signatures created during the certificate-validity period, 
   and before certificate-revocation shall continue to be valid.  When 
   verifying a signature, it will be necessary to prove to an 
   arbitrator that the signer’s digital signature was, indeed, created 
   before the certificate was revoked.

   There are two ways to provide that evidence:

       - Time-Stamping, or
       - Time-Marking.


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 5]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   When using Time-Stamping, a time-stamp token will be applied over 
   the digital signature, which demonstrates that the digital signature 
   was created before the date included in the time-stamp token.

   If the date and time contained in the Time-Stamp token is during 
   the validity period of the certificate (and as close to the digital 
   signature time as possible), and the signer’s certificate has not 
   been revoked, then it can be asserted that the digital signature 
   was, indeed, created while the certificate was valid.

   In order to be guarded against the possible revocation of a signer’s 
   certificate, it is advisable to obtain a Time-Stamp token as 
   soon as possible after the signature has been created.

   When using Time-Marking, i.e., an audit trail from a Trust Service 
   Provider, it is necessary to disclose the format of the audit trail, 
   the procedures used to create it, to produce the physical media and 
   to reveal other records that are in the audit trail.  It would be 
   extremely difficult to standardize the format of such audit trails 
   as well as that of physical media .  Additionally, the Trust 
   Service Provider should be independent of any parties involved in 
   a dispute, otherwise there might be an allegation of collusion 
   between one of the parties and the Trusted Service Provider.  For 
   these reasons, time-stamping is recommended.  For the rest of this 
   document, only the use of Time-Stamping is assumed.

4.1.1.3. Key used for long-term non repudiation

   When used in the context of a long-term non-repudiation security 
   service, it is necessary to prove that the digital signature was 
   created while the certificate was valid.  CAs are not required to 
   manage revocation information of digital certificates beyond the 
   end of the validity period of that certificate (see section 3.3 
   Revocation from [PKIX-1]: “An entry may be removed from the CRL 
   after appearing on one regularly scheduled CRL issued beyond the 
   revoked certificate's validity period").  In other words, if, 
   beyond the end of the validity period of the certificate, it was 
   reported that a private key had been compromised during or after 
   the validity period of the certificate, the revocation request will 
   not be honored by the CA and the serial number of the certificate 
   will NOT be added to the CRL or communicated to an OCSP responder.

   So, in order to prove that the signature was created during the 
   validity period of the certificate, a Time-Stamp token should be 
   applied to the signature at a time as close as possible to the 
   creation of the signature, and at latest before the end of the 
   validity period of the certificate.







Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 6]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

4.1.1.3. Key length considerations

   The use of a Time-Stamp token has an important side benefit.  Most 
   of the time, it is believed that that for a digital signature to 
   remain valid for 10 years, a key size that can resist attacks 
   during 10 years is needed.  If Time-Stamping is being used to 
   assert the validity of the digital signature, this is no longer 
   critical.  The rule is that the signer's signature key must only 
   resist to attacks during the validity period of the certificate 
   (usually a couple of years).  Only the signature applied by the 
   time-stamping unit must resist to attacks and remain valid for the 
   period in question, as that proves that the service in charge of 
   the TSU saw the digital signature at the indicated time in the past.

4.1.2. Signature key-loss

   Should a signature creation key be lost, and where a compromise or 
   theft of key-material is not suspected, then if a back-up copy of 
   that key exists, that back-up copy should be installed. Otherwise, 
   the corresponding certificate shall be revoked.  A new key pair 
   shall be generated and a new certificate shall be issued.

   However, the TSU's signing key should be able to resist attacks 
   during the entire period in which the signature is expected to be 
   validated.  If the TSU's signature key is close to becoming 
   vulnerable to cryptographic attacks, then it is necessary to apply
   an additional and stronger time-stamp token before the private key 
   from the previous TSU can be cracked.

   It is important to remember that Time-Stamping enables the use of 
   smaller keys for signers which speeds up the signature generation 
   process.

4.1.3. Key rollover

   Revocation information about certificates need only be posted from 
   the first CRL issued after the time of reporting the loss/compromise 
   of a subscriber's key, until the next CRL following the end of the 
   validity period of the lost/compromised certificate.  If a digital 
   signature was issued close to the end of the validity period of the 
   corresponding certificate of that signature key, then there would 
   be no posting of CRL information beyond once following the end of 
   the validity period of the certificate. 

   However, a digital signature used in the context of a non-
   repudiation service is not necessarily verified immediately after 
   it has been created, but in some cases a few days later.

   In order to avoid disputes about the validity of a signature, it is 
   recommended not to use the keys close to the end of the validity 
   period of the corresponding certificate.  To this respect, new leaf 
   keys should be made available before the end of the validity period 
   (e.g. one month) of the corresponding certificate and the current 


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 7]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   leaf keys should not be used close to the end of the validity 
   period of the corresponding certificate.  This means that leaf 
   certificates should have overlapping validity periods (e.g. of one 
   month).

4.2 Decryption key

4.2.1. Decryption key-compromise

   Two cases need to be considered whether that key was used to decrypt 
   stored data or to decrypt communications.

4.2.1.1. Key used to decrypt stored data

   In this case, if encrypted data is not protected by an access 
   control scheme, then it would be possible for an attacker to access 
   the encrypted data, and decrypt that data with the compromised key. 
   For that reason, it is recommended to use an encryption service with 
   an access control scheme controlling access to the ciphertext.  
   Otherwise as soon as the key-compromise is detected, the stored data 
   shall be placed under access control. 

   Since asymmetric decryption is computationally intensive and slower 
   in comparison to symmetric-key decryption, data is generally first 
   encrypted under a working key using a symmetric-key algorithm and 
   the working symmetric-key is, in turn, encrypted under a public 
   key.  To decrypt data, each working symmetric-key shall be first 
   decrypted and the symmetric-key is then used to decrypt ciphertext 
   data.

   It should be noticed that, in some cases, a legitimate user will 
   both experience a key-compromise and a key-loss, and if it still 
   needs an encryption key to encrypt further data, it will have to 
   follow the recommendations for key-loss. 

4.2.1.2. Key used to decrypt communications

   If an encrypted communication session has been previously recorded, 
   and if an encryption key is being used to encrypt a session key,
   with the aid of the compromised decryption key, then it may be 
   possible for an attacker to decrypt the intercepted communications. 

   Note: If the communication was encrypted using a session key built 
         using a signed Diffie-Hellmann exchange, then this kind of 
         attack does not apply.

   If the communication line has not been tapped, then there is no 
   risk of transient data being compromised from a lost/compromised 
   key and no further action is necessary with respect to communication 
   data.




Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 8]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


4.2.2. Decryption key-loss

   If a decryption key is deemed lost (but not compromised), then two 
   cases need to be considered: 

   1) whether that key was used to decrypt transient communications 
     (Data-in-Transit), or 

   2) it was used to decrypt stored data (Data-at-Rest).

4.2.2.1. Key used to decrypt stored data (Data-at-Rest)

   If it is still necessary to decrypt stored ciphertext, two 
   techniques may be used to recover from lost keys:

      - Key-escrow, or
      - Key-recovery.

   Note that there exists a spectrum of variations between these two 
   techniques.

   When using key-escrow, a backup of every decryption key is kept by 
   a Key Escrow Center (KEC).  When the key is lost, a copy of the 
   private key is retrieved from escrow and provided to the subscriber. 
   The certificate is not revoked.

   When using key-recovery, data is stored encrypted under a working 
   symmetric-key that is encrypted under the public encryption key of 
   the subscriber, and one or more asymmetric Recovery Keys.  

   In this case, since the private key is lost, the certificate shall 
   be revoked, so that the public encryption key will not be used for 
   further encrypting data. A new key pair, as well as a new 
   certificate, shall be generated.

   Recovery Keys may be specific to each subscriber, common to a set 
   of subscribers, or common to all subscribers.  The extent of 
   recovery key diversification is important.

   If one or more Recovery Keys are specific to an individual 
   subscriber, they may be communicated to the subscriber, so that the 
   subscriber can recover the working symmetric-key using the recovery 
   key and then replace, in each key recovery field (KRF):

     a) the working symmetric-key encrypted under the (old) public 
        recovery key by the same working symmetric-key re-encrypted 
        under the new public recovery key, and

     b) the working symmetric-key encrypted under the (old) public 
        encryption key of the subscriber by the same working symmetric-
        key re-encrypted under the new public encryption key of the 
        subscriber.


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                        [Page 9]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   If the Recovery key is common to a set of subscribers, it cannot be 
   communicated to any one of them, as it could compromise the keys of 
   the others in that set.  However, a Key Recovery Center (KRC) 
   is able to recover the common recovery-key.  That common key 
   recovery key must not be communicated to the subscriber or used an 
   environment that is not known to be secured. 

   So each set of KRF data shall be communicated to the KRC and 
   processed in the KRC premises.  Each key recovery field (KRF) that 
   contains :

     a) the working symmetric-key encrypted under the (old) public 
     recovery key, will be processed by the KRC and replaced by the 
     same working symmetric-key re-encrypted under the new public 
     recovery key, and

     b) the working symmetric-key encrypted under the (old) public 
        encryption key of the subscriber by the same working symmetric-
        key re-encrypted under the new public encryption key of the 
        subscriber.

   The processed KRF data shall then be transferred back to the 
   subscriber.  In this way, using its new private key, the subscriber 
   will be able to decrypt its data as usual. 

   All the policies, procedures, and tools for making these operations 
   possible should be prepared in advance.

4.2.2.2. Key used to decrypt communications (Data-in-Transit)

   The corresponding certificate shall be revoked.  A new key pair 
   shall be generated and a new certificate shall be issued. 

5. Certification Authority

5.1. Authority key-compromise

   At a first level of granularity the following Authorities need to 
   be considered: Certification Authorities, Revocation Authorities, 
   Attribute Authorities, and Time-Stamping Authorities.

   At a finer level of granularity, three kinds of Certification 
   Authorities need to be detailed:

       - Root Certifications Authorities (Root CAs),
       - Intermediate Certifications Authorities (Intermediate CAs),
       - Leaf Certifications Authorities (Leaf CAs).

   Finally, three kinds of Revocation Authorities need to be detailed:

       - Authority Revocation Lists (ARLs),
       - Leaf Certificate Revocation Lists, and
       - Online Revocation Status authorities (OCSP).

Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 10]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


5.1.1. Root CA key-compromise

   A root key is a key from a CA – a Root CA - that is directly 
   trusted by some relying parties to issue certificates for some 
   period of time and possibly under a stated certification policy 
   and/or name constraints.  A Root CA signs its own digital 
   certificate, thus anchoring the “root” of the top-entity's 
   certificate chain.  The self-signed certificate issued by a root CA 
   specifies, the name of the trusted CA, the value of the public key 
   and the associated algorithm and the validity period of that root 
   key. 

   The authority key identifier of the new self-signed certificate 
   should either be the same as the previous one or should be omitted.

   If a root key is compromised, then it shall be changed and all 
   relying parties using it should be informed using out-of-band 
   communication methods.

   The new key may then be provided using various out-of-band 
   communication methods, such as:

   - Publishing the hash of the new self-signed certificate and
     pushing or pulling the new self-signed certificate.

   - Providing a patch to the software application that makes use of 
     that root key, so that the new root key is installed when 
     installing the patch.  The patch may be downloaded from a trusted 
     server.

   - Providing a new version of the software application that makes 
     use of that root key, so that the new root key is installed when 
     installing the software.  The new version may be downloaded from 
     a trusted server or obtained from a trustworthy CD-ROM.

   A root key from a CA may also be trusted because it is part of a 
   validation policy.  See [RFC3379].  If one of the root keys 
   recognized under that validation policy is compromised, then the 
   validation policy shall be updated.  Signature policies used in the 
   context of non-repudiation is a special case of a validation policy.  
   See [RFC3125]. 

   All the certificates issued by the compromised Root CA must be 
   re-issued.

5.1.2. Intermediate CA key-compromise

5.1.2.1. CA key-compromise during certificate life-time

   All certificates issued by the compromised Intermediate CA must be 
   revoked.  Since this CA's key is no longer trustworthy, this cannot 
   be done by the CA itself, and must be done by the CAs that issued a 
   CA certificate to the compromised Intermediate CA.

Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 11]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

   All CAs which issued a CA certificate to the compromised CA must 
   revoke such certificates.  This implies that the operators of the 
   compromised Intermediate CA must maintain good configuration 
   management procedures so they are aware who to contact quickly to 
   request revocation of the compromised CA's certificate. 

   Revocation by the Issuing CAs will usually occur using ARLs 
   (Authority Revocation Lists).

   All certificates issued by the compromised Intermediate CA are 
   no longer valid, implying that new certificates must be issued 
   to affected subscribers.  If the number of currently valid 
   certificates issued by the compromised CA is relatively small, 
   e.g. 10.000, and depending on the Issuance practices adopted for 
   such certificates, this may be done rapidly. 

   However, if that number is large, e.g. 10 millions, without advance 
   planning it may not be feasible to re-issue all certificates within 
   a reasonable amount of time, even with simple issuance practices.
   For these reasons, it is necessary to establish a disaster recovery 
   plan prepared in advance, so that CA operations staff may be ready 
   to react promptly.  The following plan is recommended:

   When establishing the PKI, the CA will generate two issuing key 
   pairs: 

      - a primary issuing key pair that will be used to issue 
        certificates to the subscribers,

      - a backup issuing key pair that will only used to issue backup 
        certificates for any certificate issued under the primary 
        issuing key.  These backup certificates will be released to 
        subscribers in case of a compromise of the primary issuing key.

   The backup issuing public key will NOT be divulged to the public or 
   subscribers unless the primary issuing key is compromised.

   Consequently, a brute force attack to compromise the backup key 
   pair cannot be attempted before the existence of the backup public 
   key value is divulged.

   Should the primary issuing private key be compromised then the 
   public key part of the backup key pair is presented to its issuing 
   CAs so it can be certified by them.

   The validity period of each new Intermediate CA certificate for the 
   backup signing keys will be established as follows:

      - the start of the validity period will be the current date of 
        issuance of the new Intermediate CA certificate,

      - the end of the validity period will be the original end of the 
        validity period of the original Intermediate CA certificate. 


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 12]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


        Note that longer dates would be possible, but a detailed 
        analysis of the validity period of the upper CA certificates 
        would be required, which may not be appropriate in an emergency 
        situation.

   It should be noted that even if the primary issuing private key is 
   compromised and the certificates issued to subscribers are too, the 
   private keys of the subscribers are not compromised. 

   Subscribers’ backup certificates signed with the secondary CA key 
   will be escrowed in a repository under the sole control of the CA 
   and are not made available to anyone unless the primary issuing 
   private key is deemed compromised.  It should be noted that these 
   escrowed certificates are useless until the validation path (which 
   has an open end) is linked to complete the certificate path.  If 
   the primary issuing private key is compromised then the secondary 
   (backup) CA will be certified, its certificate placed online and 
   made accessible to the public.

   Subscribers will, typically, not be aware of the revocation of the 
   of their CA, unless they get complaints from relying parties. 

   CA operators should use information obtained at the time of 
   registration to contact them promptly (e.g. an e-mail address or 
   a phone number).  In addition, subscribers should be informed, at 
   the time of registration of the procedure that will be used in case 
   of an emergency situation, in particular the means to be used to 
   obtain the new certificate, e.g. an HTTPS address, or a piece of 
   software delivered at the time of registration.

   When the subscriber is part of an organisation in direct contact 
   with the CA, the organisation may directly inform the employees of 
   that organisation using electronic means such as a workstation 
   management software 

   Either by connecting to a server (using HTTPS or SSL) or using a 
   dedicated piece of software made available in advance, the 
   subscriber will use a protocol which basically performs the 
   following exchanges:

    1. a signed request identifies the serial number(s) of the 
       certificate(s) that the subscriber is willing to retrieve. 
       These certificates may be used for authentication purposes, 
       signature purposes or encryption purposes.  This request will 
       be signed using the private key of an authentication or a 
       signature certificate (which is still valid for the issuing CA 
       only).  The reference of this authentication or signature 
       certificate will be included in the signed request.






Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 13]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


    2. a server in charge of exercising access control on the 
       certificate repository will use the reference of the 
       authentication certificate or of the signature certificate
       included in the request to identify the subscriber and then 
       will verify the digital signature using the current 
       authentication or signature certificate.  If the signature is 
       correct, then the backup certificates referenced in the request 
       and stored in the repository will be released.

    3. in addition, new CA certificates that have been created by 
       other CAs, may also be released to the subscriber.

   The client software may then update the certificates.

   The access to the repository containing the backup certificates 
   should remain open during some reasonable period of time, e.g., 
   one month.  It is expected that it will be heavily accessed 
   close to the time of compromise of the primary issuing key.  For 
   that reason, it is recommended to duplicate the content of the 
   repository on multiple servers and to identify the various points 
   of access.

   When the subscriber is using a smart card that contains his 
   certificates, then he should be able to replace the current 
   certificates by the new certificates without the need to change the 
   private keys.  If certificate chains are also supported, the upper 
   certificate should be changed as well.

   Relying parties will, typically, not be aware of the revocation of 
   an Intermediate CA certificate, until they attempt to validate a 
   certificate of a subscriber in the context of some business 
   transaction.  The validation process using the certificate chain 
   that includes the compromised Intermediate CA certificate will 
   result in failure due to the revocation status of the compromised 
   CA.

   As soon as the operator of the compromised CA will have executed the 
   recovery plan, the situation will become normal again.

5.1.2.2. CA key-compromise beyond certificate life-time

   Since revocation information is not honored by CAs nor posted beyond 
   the first CRL after the end of the validity period of a certificate, 
   it will be necessary to prove that the certificate was issued before 
   the end of the validity period of the CA certificate.  This could be 
   provided using an individual time-stamp over every certificate.

   However, current Internet protocols, whether there are 
   infrastructure protocols or application protocols, have not been 
   designed to be able to handle time-stamped certificates.  Therefore 
   this solution would require major changes to these protocols.



Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 14]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

   Instead of time-stamping every certificate, the same benefit can be 
   obtained by using a single time-stamp over the certification path 
   (and the associated revocation information) obtained at the time of 
   initial verification, i.e. while all the certificates from the 
   certification path are still valid.  This solution has been chosen 
   in the Electronic Signature Formats for long term electronic 
   signatures (see [ES-F]), where both the certification path and the 
   associated revocation information may be protected under a single 
   time-stamp using an additional unsigned attributed in the CMS 
   structure (see [CMS]).

5.2. CA key-loss

   A CA key may be lost as the result of a hardware failure or an 
   unsuccessful attack on the cryptographic module holding the issuing 
   key (which may have zeroized its contents as a result).

   If the lost CA key is a root key, it is important that staff reloads 
   the same CA key-pair from their backup. 

   If the lost CA key is that of an Intermediate or a Leaf CA, the key 
   could technically be superseded with a new key-pair.  However, it is 
   recommended that the same key-pair be reinstated to avoid the lookup 
   of a new CA certificate and the revocation status of the earlier 
   certificate.

   A backup cryptographic module may also be necessary in case the 
   cryptographic module is damaged after a physical attack. 

   While implementation details will vary amongst cryptographic 
   module vendors, the staff in PKI Operations shall ensure that the 
   backup key is not, activated, available, or accessible on the backup 
   module until and unless it is necessary.  No single individual 
   should ever has full control of the CA's private key.  The key 
   protection may be implemented with M of N control over the key.

5.3. Key rollover

   According to [PKIX-1], a certificate is valid only if it is within 
   the validity period of all the CA certificates within its 
   certificate chain.

   In order to avoid a synchronous change to all certificates within a 
   certificate chain, when the root key expires, it is recommended to 
   generate a new key pair and issue a new self-signed certificate 
   before the end of the validity period of the current Root CA 
   certificate.

5.3.1. For Root CA keys

   If a certificate issued by a trust anchor is supposed to have a 
   validity of X years, then it is necessary to issue a new self-signed 
   certificate at least X years before the current self-signed 


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 15]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

   certificate expires, otherwise the issued certificate would have a 
   life time shorter than X years. 

   This means that root key self-signed certificates should have 
   overlapping validity periods.  A consequence of this strategy is 
   that, at any given time, two root public keys will be usable by a 
   relying party to verify a certificate from a given CA. 

   The installation of the new root key may be done using [CMP]. See 
   section 2.4 Root CA key update.  The NewWithOld and NewWithNew 
   certificates will be used.

   If the root CA issues itself the CRLs, then two CRLs should be 
   maintained: the first one for the certificates issued under the old 
   key and the second one for the certificates issued under the new 
   key.

5.3.2. For intermediate keys

   If a certificate issued by an intermediate CA is supposed to have a 
   validity of Y years, then it is necessary to issue a new certificate 
   at least Y years before the current certificate expires, otherwise 
   the issued certificate would have a life time shorter than Y years. 

   This means that a new issuing key should be used to issue new 
   certificates. 

   If the CA issues itself the CRLs, then two CRLs should be 
   maintained: the first one for the certificates issued under the old 
   key and the second one for the certificates issued under the new 
   key.

5.3.3. For leaf keys

   Confidentiality keys and encryption keys may be used up to the very 
   end of the validity period of the corresponding certificate. 

   However, this should not be the case for non repudiation keys, 
   since a relying party might wait a few days (or even weeks) before 
   verifying an electronic signature.  For this reason it is 
   recommended to issue a new non repudiation key (signature key) 
   about one month before the end of the validity period of the 
   current certificate, and ask the signer to use the new key rather 
   the current key.

6. Revocation Authority

6.1. Revocation Authority key-compromise within certificate life-time

   A CA has two ways to advertise revocations: using CRLs or using OCSP 
   responders (see [OCSP]).




Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 16]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

   In a closed environment, it is possible to configure client software 
   with responder information.  This not only allows the requester to 
   trust the responder, but also to know from where to fetch revocation 
   information.

   In an open environment, the CA typically indicates in each 
   certificate which revocation status mechanism is supported (i.e. 
   CRLs or OCSP) and designates the authorities responsible for 
   handling revocation status information. A CA may choose either 
   mechanism or both mechanisms to publish revocation information by 
   using either:

      - a CRLDistributionPoint extension for CRLs, or 
      - an AccessInformationAuthority extension for OCSP. 

   In an open environment, the CA may nominate Revocation Authorities 
   by issuing certificates to them.  Should the private key of such 
   Revocation Authorities itself be compromised, it would be necessary 
   for the Issuing CA to revoke the signing key certificate of such 
   revocation authorities.  This may be achieved using ARLs (Authority 
   Revocation Lists) or using OCSP.

   When using ARLs, the ARLs must be signed with the CA’s issuing key. 
   CRLs containing only leaf certificates may be signed by one or more 
   CRL Issuers whose certificate was issued by the CA.

   When using OCSP, the responses for the revocation status of 
   Authorities are usually signed by the CA issuing key.  However, OCSP 
   responses for leaf certificates may be issued by a Designated 
   Responder (Authorized Responder), which holds a specially marked 
   certificate, issued directly by the Issuing CA, indicating that the 
   subject responder may issue OCSP responses for that CA.  In 
   practice, different AccessInformationAuthority extensions should be 
   used for Authority certificates and leaf certificates.

6.2. CRL Issuer key-compromise within certificate life-time

   Should the CRL Issuer's signing key be compromised, then either the 
   corresponding certificate shall be added to the ARL, or OCSP 
   responses signed directly by the CA shall be used to provide 
   revocation status for the CRL Issuer's certificate.

6.3. OCSP responder key-compromise within certificate life-time

   Should the signing key from an OCSP responder (providing revocation 
   status information for leaf certificates or attribute certificates) 
   be compromised, either the corresponding certificate shall be added 
   to the ARL or OCSP responses signed directly by the CA shall be 
   used.






Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 17]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


6.4. Revocation Authority key-compromise beyond certificate life-time

   In the same way as for leaf certificates, since revocation 
   information for Authorities is not honored by CAs nor posted beyond 
   the end of the validity of a certificate, it will be necessary to 
   prove that the certificate was issued before the end of the validity 
   period of the certificate. 

6.5. Revocation Authority key-loss

   Should a Revocation Authority key (i.e. a CRL Issuer key) be lost 
   but NOT compromised, then a backup copy of the key may be installed 
   if one exists.  Otherwise, the corresponding certificate shall be 
   revoked.  A new key pair may be generated and a new certificate may 
   be issued if the PKI operators choose to replace the revocation 
   authority.

7. Attribute Authorities

7.1. Attribute certificate revocation

   In many environments, the validity period of an Attribute 
   Certificate (AC) is less than the time required to issue and 
   distribute revocation information.

   Therefore, short-lived ACs typically do not require revocation 
   support and may be marked as such, using the noRevAvail extension 
   (see [AC]).

   However, long-lived ACs and environments where ACs enable high value 
   transactions will require revocation support.  Such ACs do not 
   contain the noRevAvail extension and, if used in an open 
   environment, shall include either an authorityInfoAccess extension 
   or a crlDistributionPoints extension.  If used in a closed 
   environment, it is possible to configure the clients so that they 
   directly trust a Trusted Responder whose public key is trusted by 
   the requester but also so that they know where to fetch the 
   revocation information.

   Should an AC needed to be revoked then either the corresponding 
   attribute certificate identifier shall be added to a CRL from the 
   CRL Issuer nominated by the AC (using the crlDistributionPoints 
   extension) or a OCSP server nominated by the AC (using the 
   authorityInfoAccess extension) shall be used.

7.2. Attribute Authority Key compromise

   Attribute certificates are signed by indicating either the name of 
   a CA (using GeneralNames for v1 or v2 ACs) or a certificate serial 
   number from a CA (using baseCertificateID for v2 ACs).  That 
   information is part of the AttCertIssuer field.



Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 18]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   Attribute Authorities may either be directly trusted by a verifier 
   or be indirectly trusted because part of a trusted certification 
   path.

   In the first case, verifiers directly know the name and public key 
   from the AA and shall be informed from the revocation conditions 
   using out-of-bands means.

   In the later case, Attributes Authorities obtain a certificate from 
   a CA. 

   When using GeneralNames, the name(s) of the CA(s) that is (are) 
   trusted to issue a certificate to that AA is left undefined and has 
   to be defined locally using out-of-bands means.  In that case, the 
   CA that has been locally defined shall revoke the AA using either an 
   ARL or an OCSP responder.

   When using baseCertificateID, the CA that is allowed to issue a 
   certificate to that AA and thus also able to revoke that certificate 
   is explicitly indicated in IssuerSerial.  In that case, the CA shall 
   revoke the AA using either an ARL or an OCSP responder.  When 
   verifying the certification path, verifiers will be automatically 
   notified of the revocation condition.

   Thereafter a new certificate with a new private key shall be issued 
   for the Attribute Authority.

7.3. Attribute Authority Key loss

   Should a Attribute Authority Key (i.e. a AC Issuing key) be lost, 
   then if there is a back-up copy of the key, that back-up copy should 
   be installed.  Otherwise, the corresponding certificate shall be 
   revoked.  Then a new key pair shall be generated and a new 
   certificate shall be issued.

8. Time-Stamping Unit keys

   The public key of a TSU (Time-Stamping Unit) is trusted because the 
   certificate from the TSU is part of a certification path trusted 
   for that purpose.  This certificate may be issued by a trusted CA 
   that only issues TSU certificates or may be part on a broader 
   certification forest.

   Once it has been verified that the key generation process has been 
   followed correctly, then the public key shall be exported from the 
   hardware module to be certified by a CA.

8.1. Time-Stamping Unit Key loss

   Should the private key inside a TSU hardware module be destroyed 
   (e.g. as the result of tampering or a hardware failure), then the 
   TSU hardware module should be replaced by a spare one.


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 19]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   The use of a back-up key is deprecated because, this there is a 
   risk that the back-up key could be installed in a new module, but 
   initialized with an incorrect time.

   It is recommended to synchronize the reference clock with UTC, 
   generate a new key pair on the TSU module itself, certify the new 
   public key and finally install the new certificate in the TSU 
   module.  This operation shall be done at least under dual control. 
   Since this may take some time, it is also recommended to use two 
   TSUs.  While one TSU is being fixed, the other TSU can handle the 
   service.  Each TSU should be dimensioned to reach the global 
   performances awaited from the system.

   The TSU module should be unable to import and export of any private 
   key.  In this way no private key ever exists outside the security 
   module and therefore cannot be compromised.

8.2. Time-Stamping Unit Key compromise

8.2.1. Compromise during the validity period of the TSU certificate

   Should such a condition occur, then the TSU certificate shall be 
   revoked and a new certificate shall be issued. 

   However all the time-stamps that have been issued by the TSU become 
   invalid, whatever their issuing date. 

   If an additional time-stamp has been applied, because the validity 
   of the TSA certificate was near its expiration, then this time-stamp 
   provides the protection; provided that in addition it can be proven 
   that the TSA key was not compromised when the additional time-stamp
   was applied.

8.2.1.1. Checking during the validity period of the TSU certificate

   In order to make sure, during the validity period of the TSU 
   certificate, that a time-stamp token is indeed valid, the revocation 
   status information at the time of the verification (i.e., at the 
   current time) shall be fetched, which means that the revocation 
   status information obtained at the time the time-stamp was generated 
   is not sufficient.

   In the case of a key-compromise, any time-stamp issued under a 
   compromised key brings no proof anymore.  In order to be prepared 
   for such a situation, relying parties should be advised, for 
   critical situations, to get two time-stamps, instead of one, from 
   two different TSUs, either in parallel or embedded; in the later 
   case, the second time-stamp token is protecting the first one. 






Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 20]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


8.2.1.2. Checking beyond the validity period of the TSU certificate

   Usually, a time-stamp token becomes unverifiable beyond the end of 
   the validity period of the certificate from the TSU, because the CA 
   that has issued the certificate is no more recording key 
   revocations, including key-compromises for expired certificates.

   There are two ways to address this issue:

    1 - capture the current CRL applicable for the TSU and verify that 
        the serial number of the TSU certificate is not present, and 
        then apply an additional time-stamp token from a different TSU 
        over the previous one.  This will demonstrate that the key of 
        the TSU was not compromised at the time the new time-stamp 
        token was applied.

    2 - rely on a specific time-stamping policy, which mandates a 
        specific design of the TSUs and appropriate procedures to 
        handle the TSUs:

          - the TSU key pair shall only be generated by the TSU. 
            The export and the import of TSU private keys shall be 
            forbidden.  In this way, no copy of the private may ever 
            exist outside the TSU.

          - the TSU private key shall be zeroized in case of an attempt 
            to attack the physical enclosure of the TSU.

          - the TSU private key shall be zeroized at the end of the 
            private key usage.

          - the TSU certificate shall only be generated once the key 
            pair has been generated on the TSU and security officers 
            have verified that the TSU is in synchronization with UTC.

        In that case, it is first necessary to capture any CRL 
        applicable to the TSU between the end of the validity period 
        of the TSU private key and the end of the validity period of 
        the TSU certificate and verify that the serial number of the 
        TSU certificate is not present.  This will demonstrate that the 
        TSU certificate was not revoked before the TSU private key was 
        zeroïzed. 

        It is then necessary to make sure that the hash algorithms used 
        in the time-stamp token exhibits no collisions, and that the 
        key size of the signature algorithm under which the time-stamp 
        token has been signed is still beyond the reach of 
        cryptographic attacks.  If both conditions are met, then the 
        time-stamp token is valid.





Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 21]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


8.2.2. Compromise after the end of the validity period of the TSU 
       certificate

   This case may happen if the key length originally used by the TSU 
   is no more beyond attack.  Before such a situation happens, an
   additional time-stamp token shall be applied to protect the 
   previous time-stamp token.

9. CRL Repositories

   CRL Repositories may be subject to denial of service attacks.  It is 
   extremely difficult to guard against all types of denial of service 
   attacks.  Additionally, repositories may become inaccessible due to 
   hardware or software failures.  Replication of a repository on 
   multiple servers may provide increased availability, in particular 
   when combined with network controls capable of detecting abnormal 
   numbers of requests and to throttle them while allowing other 
   requests to be serviced.

   Since PKI-related repositories typically contain only digitally 
   signed information (Certificates, CRLs, ARLs) they are susceptible
   -at worst- only to denial of service attacks.  However some denial 
   of service attacks on CRLs may lead to unexpected results and 
   security problems, as it will now be explained.

   It is a common practice that many CAs issue "emergency CRLs" as 
   soon as the PKI operators become aware of, or are notified of a key 
   compromise.  However, there is no guarantee that this emergency CRL 
   will ever be seen by a relying party for two reasons:

      a) If a relying party has a currently valid CRL (where the 
         current time is less than the nextUpdate field from that 
         valid CRL), then most validation policies do not require to 
         check for most recent CRL.

      b) Even if a relying party periodically checks for a new CRL 
         then it is possible to mount a denial of service attack on 
         the CRL distribution point(s) of the Issuing CA, thereby 
         preventing the emergency CRL from being retrieved.  In this 
         case, the RP will see only the CRL in its cache, if one 
         exists.

   Even such a guarantee cannot be obtained, it is recommended to adopt 
   the following strategy: whenever a CRL is needed, look for it in a 
   cache :

       - if not present, fetch the CRL as usual and place it in 
         the cache with the time when it was fetched, and use it,

       - if present, look for the time when it was fetched, and 
         use it if it was fetched earlier than x minutes, otherwise, 
         look for a new CRL, and use it.


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 22]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007

10. Security considerations

   This document is all about security.

11. Acknowledgments

   Special thanks are due to Ernst Giessman from T-Nova for his 
   valuable inputs and support and to Arshad Noor from StrongAuth, Inc
   for his review and comments on the initial draft.

12.  IANA Considerations

No action by IANA is necessary for this document or any anticipated 
updates.

13. References

   [PKIX-1] 

      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure.
      Certificate and CRL Profile.  RFC 3280
      R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, D. Solo.

   [OCSP] 

      X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure. 
      Online Certificate Status Protocol – OCSP.  RFC 2560
      M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, C. Adams.

   [AC] 

      An Internet Attribute Certificate Profile for Authorization
      S. Farrell, R. Housley.  RFC 3281.

   [TSP] 

      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
      Time-Stamp Protocol (TSP).  RFC 3161.
      C. Adams, P. Cain, D. Pinkas, R. Zuccherato.

   [ES-F] 

      Electronic Signature Formats for long term electronic signatures
      D. Pinkas, J. Ross, N. Pope.  RFC 3126.

   [CMS] 

      Cryptographic Message Syntax.  RFC 3852.
      R. Housley July 2004.






Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 23]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   [ISO-X509] 

      ISO/IEC 9594-8/ITU-T Recommendation X.509, "Information
      Technology - Open Systems Interconnection: The Directory:
      Authentication Framework," 1997 edition. 

14. Authors' addresses

   Denis Pinkas
   Bull SAS.
   Rue Jean-Jaures
   78340 Les Clayes sous bois CEDEX
   FRANCE
   e-mail: Denis.Pinkas@bull.net

   Joel Kazin
   Jefferson Wells
   Penthouse
   99 Park Avenue
   New York, New York 10016
   USA
   e-mail: Joel_Kazin@jeffersonwells.com

15. Full Copyright Statement

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   An "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 24]

Internet-draft    PKI Disaster recovery and key rollover      June 2007


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





































Pinkas et. al.            Informational                       [Page 25]
