



RFC Editor Futures                                            M. StJohns
Internet-Draft                               NthPermutation Security LLC
Intended status: Informational                            24 August 2020
Expires: 25 February 2021


    An Editorial Board-based Management Structure for the RFC Series
                      draft-stjohns-rfced-rseb-00

Abstract

   This document describes a revised model for the management, evolution
   and improvement of the RFC Series led by an RFC Series Editor (RSE)
   assisted by an RFC Series Editorial Board (RSEB).  The model removes
   the IAB and its appointed RFC Series Oversight Committee (RSOC) from
   direct control of the RFC Series and the RFC Series Editor, replacing
   them on the publication evolution side with the RSEB, and on the
   financial and personnel management side with the IETF Administration
   Limited Liability Company or its board as appropriate (LLC).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 25 February 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.










StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  The RFC Series Editorial Board  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Role of the RSEB  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Composition of the RSEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.2.1.  RFC Series Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.2.  Independent Series Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.3.  Stream Managers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.4.  At-Large Members  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  RFC Series Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  RFC Production Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  Other Contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  Contract Monitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Selection of the RSE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  RSE Search Committee  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Approval by the RSEB  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.3.  Engagement Model for the RSE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5.  Operation of the RSEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  The Editorial Stream  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   This document is submitted in response to the request by the chairs
   of the RFC Series Future Development Program for proposals for the
   revision for the RFC Series model.

   This document should be read primarily as a proposal for the
   replacement of section 3 and appropriate revisions to section 4 of
   [RFC8728].  Specifically, this removes from the IAB (and its
   delegates) primary responsibility for both the evolution and



StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


   management of the RFC Series and for the oversight of the contractual
   or employed resources supporting the RFC Series.  Those resources are
   the RFC Series Editor (RSE), the RFC Production Center (RPC), and, if
   any, other task-specific contracts related to the RFC Series.  In
   general, any task previously assigned to the RSOC or the IAB in
   whatever section shall devolve on the RSEB, LLC or the RSE as
   appropriate.  Additional word-smithing will be required to review the
   merged documents for consistency, and such disconnects should not be
   read to be intentional at this time.

   In the 50+ years of its existence, the RFC Series been under the
   direct control of the IAB only in the last 10 years, and only in the
   last few years has the IETF community directly, through the RSE LLC
   contract, had a mechanism to exert contractual control over the RSE.
   The IAB's role was originally conceived as technical in nature, but
   has gradually ended up, perhaps to our detriment, deeper in
   administrivia and policy.  Considering that in view of the IAB's
   recent missteps with respect to the RSE, it should not come as a
   surprise that the author believes that the IAB is the incorrect place
   to home either part of the management of the RFC Series.

   This document proposes a model which creates an RFC Series Editorial
   Board (RSEB) as the proper home for the evolution and sustainment of
   the RFC Series.  However, unlike the current model, the RSEB has no
   oversight or management responsibility with respect to the RSE,
   vesting that instead in the contract holder or employer of the RSE.
   In this initial iteration the contract holder/employer shall be the
   IETF LLC.  As described here, the RSEB becomes another organization
   at the top level of the IETF community along with the IAB, IESG and
   LLC.

   This document also creates a new stream, the Editorial Stream, under
   the control of the RSEB and for the publication of documents that
   create, direct, modify or describe functions specific to the RFC
   Series System.

   Lastly, this document from time to time refers to an RFC Series
   Organization (RSO).  That term is used only as a short-hand to refer
   to the RSE, the RSEB and any contracted-for resources involved in the
   production of RFCs and should not be taken as creating an actual
   organization.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].




StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


2.  The RFC Series Editorial Board

2.1.  Role of the RSEB

   The RSEB is a policy and strategy board within the general umbrella
   of the IETF organization.  Its primary role is to provide advice to
   the RSE on the evolution of the RFC Series, and to approve such
   documents for publication within the Editorial stream as may be
   necessary to accomplish that evolution.

   The composition of the RSEB was chosen to explicitly enfranchise more
   members of the RFC Series community than just the IAB.  It contains
   direct representation for all of the current RFC publication streams,
   and includes at-large members selected by the community through the
   Nomcom process to directly represent the community.

   The RSEB is meant to be tightly focused on the RFC Series as the
   structure for enabling world-class publishing of Internet Standards,
   technical and research proposals, and the minutia of the IETF
   operating procedures.  The RSEB may suggest to the RSE topics for
   their consideration, and may request that the RSE add those topics to
   tasks approved under the RSE's work agreement.  The RSE, RSEB and LLC
   should occasionally meet together to review current tasking.

   Note: As the RSEB has no contractual relationship with the RSE, the
   RSEB does not exercise any form of work direction over the RSE nor
   does it have any role in evaluating the RSE's performance.  The
   individuals of the RSEB may provide commentary to the LLC or the CM
   on their perception of the RSE's performance, but those comments
   should not be given any more weight than comments from other
   community members.  The RSE and RSEB are co-equal partners and
   collegues.  If any member of the RSEB has an issue with the RSE's job
   performance the appropriate approach is providing their concerns to
   the LLC board or the RSE's CM.

   For avoidance of doubt: The LLC has no oversight or management role
   with respect to the strategic development of the RFC Series.  The
   funding of the RSE, RPC and other tasks within the RSO does not
   expand the LLC's current administrative remit to oversight of the RFC
   Series.

2.2.  Composition of the RSEB

   The RSEB consists of the RSE, the ISE, three stream managers who
   represent their streams, and three at-large members.






StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


2.2.1.  RFC Series Editor

   The RSE role is described in [RFC8728], and this document is in
   general agreement with that description.  The RSE role is conceived
   as a funded position for a senior subject matter expert in the field
   of technical publication, with primary responsibility for the smooth
   functioning of the operation and evolution of the RFC Series.  See
   section 2.1.6 of that RFC for a detailed list of qualifications.

   The RSE is the Editor in Chief of the RFC Series, and
   responsibilities and authorities commensurate with that role.  In
   particular, the RSE will be responsible for the authoring,
   improvement and upkeep of documents that describe the RFC Series
   processes and its look and feel (e.g.  RFC Style Guide, XML
   vocabulary, publication process), as well as working with volunteers
   and contractors to ensure tools exist to support those processes.
   The LLC may also, with the RSE's agreement, designate the RSE as
   Contract Monitor for one or more RSO contracts.

2.2.2.  Independent Series Editor

   The ISE role is described within [RFC6548] and this document does not
   modify the responsibilities described there, nor the process for
   selecting the ISE.  However, the ISE gains an additional
   responsibility with the formation of the RSEB.

   The ISE serves as the vice-chair of the RSEB, and, if the RSE role is
   vacant, serves as acting chair of the RSEB and acting Editor in Chief
   of the RFC Series.

   If the ISE role is vacant, the responsibilities and authorities
   delegated to the ISE devolve onto the RSE.  If both roles are vacant,
   the remainder of the RSEB shall select one of its number to act as
   RSE and ISE until one or the other of the roles is filled.

2.2.3.  Stream Managers

   Stream managers are selected from the membership of the IESG, the IAB
   and the IRSG as their body's representative to the RSEB as stream
   managers for their respective streams.  The chairs of the respective
   bodies should not serve as stream managers as their chair duties are
   unlikely to allow them sufficient time to focus on the needs of the
   RFC Series.








StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


   Stream managers must be reappointed by their bodies annually and will
   notify the RSE of their selections upon the conclusion of the First
   IETF meeting of the year.  Any stream manager may be replaced by
   their body with 30 days notice, or upon the stream manager leaving
   their position on the respective body.

   While the selection of the stream manager is completely within the
   purview of the owning body, the member chosen should have some
   background with the RFC system beyond publishing an RFC, or should
   have equivalent background in other publication systems.

   Stream managers represent their body to the RSEB and, as such, are
   expected to coordinate with them on other than trivial actions taken
   by the RSEB.

2.2.4.  At-Large Members

   Two At-Large members of the RSEB shall be nominated by the Nomcom and
   confirmed by the ISOC Board of Trustees.  The initial members shall
   be selected to serve for 2 and 4 years respectively.  Subsequent
   members shall serve for a nominal term of 3 years and may be
   reappointed for a maximum of three terms.  Those terms shall end at
   the conclusion of the First IETF meeting of the year in which their
   term expires.

   One At-Large member shall be selected by the ISOC Board of Trustees
   (BOT) and shall serve for a term of three years.  IETF-appointed
   members of the ISOC board are not eligible to serve as the ISOC At-
   Large member of the RSEB.  An RSEB member who is appointed to the
   ISOC board by the IETF and accepts the appointment is considered to
   have resigned from the RSEB.  The term of this member runs from the
   date of appointment.

   Consistent with the normal requirements for other Nomcom selected
   positions, an At-Large member of the RSEB shall not serve in any
   other Nomcom selected position.

   The RSEB is responsible for writing and updating the position
   description used by the Nomcom to select the at-large members.  This
   description shall also be provided to the ISOC BOT for assistance in
   selecting their member.

   For the initial selection process, the position description shall be
   written collaboratively by the ISE and the stream managers with
   community input, but should generally describe someone with interests
   or experience in technical publication.  As the scope of the RSO is
   intended to extend beyond the IETF's interests, the Nomcom is highly
   encouraged (as it has done with the LLC board) to consider for



StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


   selection to the the RSEB those who are not currently participants
   within the IETF community, but who might bring in needed publication
   expertise.

   The Nomcom is expected to explicitly seek out the input of the RSEB
   members with respect to any RSEB member that is being considered for
   appointment or reappointment.  The Nomcom should also consult the
   record of the RSEB during its deliberations with respect to
   candidates for reappointment.  This is in addition to the usual call
   for community input.

3.  RFC Series Resources

3.1.  RFC Production Center

   The general model of the RFC Production and Publication (RPC) system
   is as described in sections 2.2 and 2.3 of [RFC8728] and this
   document does not change that model except to note that the
   relationship of the RSE to the RPC is subject to the contractual
   language between the LLC and the RSE.  The LLC may chose to place the
   RSE in a directive position over the RPC as a Contract Monitor, or it
   may place the RSE in an advisory role with respect to the RPC.  If
   the RSE is designated as CM for the RPC, then there must be specific
   contractual language spelling out the RSE's responsibilities and
   authorities wit respect to the RPC.  The exact relationship is
   subject to negotiation between the RSE, the LLC and the RPC.

3.2.  Other Contracts

   The RSE may recommend the outsourcing of specific tasks related to
   the RFC Series production and development.  A current example of this
   might be hiring an XML expert to assist with the V3 XML2RFC language.

   The RSE will create a budget, a Request for Proposal (RFP) and a
   draft Statement of Work, and shall provide them to the LLC for
   initial approval prior to sending the task out for bid.

   Upon receipt of the bids, the RSEB shall review the proposals and
   indicate their preference for one or two of the responses along with
   their reasoning.  The LLC, as the contracting entity, will do its due
   diligence and, if acceptable, shall issue a contract for those tasks.
   The interaction of the RSEB with the contract ends with the
   submission of the selection material to the LLC.

   Whether the RSE should act as contract monitor for any short-term
   contracted tasks is left to be resolved on a case by case basis.
   Notwithstanding this section, the LLC has full authority to choose
   CM's as appropriate to the LLC's needs.



StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


3.3.  Contract Monitors

   The contracting entity (i.e., the LLC) may select an individual to
   act as a contract monitor (CM) for any given RSO resource.  As the CM
   role is, or should be, one of a fiduciary for the contracting entity,
   the delegation of authority and responsibility from the contracting
   entity to the CM must be written, contractually binding, and
   acceptable (as to the role, not the individual) to the contractor.
   The delegation of authority and responsibility shall be a public
   document accessible to the community.

   As a fiduciary, this document anticipates that any CMs will generally
   be either contractors or employees of the LLC and not unpaid
   volunteers from the community.

   For avoidance of doubt:

   *  The ISE SHALL NOT be a CM for the RSE.

   *  The RSE SHALL NOT be a CM for the ISE.

   *  The RSE MAY be a CM for the RPC

   *  The RSE MAY be a CM for any task contracts.

   *  No other member of the RSEB may be a CM for any RSO contract.

   *  Hiring and firing decisions or contract termination or renewal
      decisions SHALL NOT be made by the CM.

   *  The RSE is not "just a contractor", but a senior member of the
      community.  Any delegation from the LLC to a CM SHALL be limited
      to the minimum functions necessary.  See the last paragraph of
      Section 2.1 for a brief comment on the limits of the LLC's role.

4.  Selection of the RSE















StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


4.1.  RSE Search Committee

   In the event of a vacancy or pending vacancy in the RSE, the RSEB
   shall select and convene a search committee consisting of the ISE (as
   an advisor), one of the stream managers, and one of the at-large
   members.  Those three shall select a search committee chairman from
   set of solicited volunteers who shall not currently be serving on any
   of the IETF boards (e.g., IAB, IESG, LLC, Trust, IRSG, RSEB) and who
   shall have specific experience and contacts in the technical
   publication space.  In addition, if appropriate, the search committee
   may engage the assistance of an outgoing or previous RSE to aid in
   the search as a second advisor to the committee.

   Note: A hired search firm or principal may be the best approach to
   finding good quality candidates.

   The search committee is responsible for creating the RFP and
   Statement of Work (SOW) documentation to fill the position of RSE,
   and for seeking the approval for the search to proceed from the LLC
   board.  Any proposed SOW is expected to consistent with the documents
   that set out the roles and responsibilities of the RSE.  Upon
   publication of the RFP, the search committee is expected to make an
   active search for viable candidates and is expected to reach out to
   other technical publication organizations for leads on candidates.

   If the existing RSE continues to remain a good fit for the community
   at the end of an existing contract, the appropriate action is to
   negotiate a renewal of the engagement terms rather than opening up a
   search.  The decision as to which approach to take lies with the LLC.

4.2.  Approval by the RSEB

   Once the search committee has found one or more appropriate
   candidates, the full RSEB shall vote on acceptance, rejection and
   preference with respect to each of the candidates.  The results of
   that vote along with any recommendations or comments shall be sent to
   the LLC for its action.  The general goal is for the RSEB to approve
   all well qualified candidates, and to leave the LLC the flexibility
   to resolve the balance between contractual needs, funding and scope.

   In the event the LLC declines to engage any of the candidates, the
   search committee will restart its process and attempt to find other
   viable candidates.  In the result of a failure, the RSEB shall meet
   with the LLC, IAB and IESG to determine a path forward.







StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


4.3.  Engagement Model for the RSE

   Consistent with the description in section 2.1 of [RFC8728], the RSE
   is a senior-level subject matter expert within the realm of technical
   publication.  And consistent with past experience, the RSE role as
   currently scoped requires approximately 50% of a full time equivalent
   to service that function.  That suggests that the appropriate
   engagement model for the RSE is either as an independent contractor,
   or as a board employee.

   While it is ultimately the LLC's decision, the RSE should be engaged
   via either a personal services contract or an employment contract for
   a given term.  Engagement as an at-will employee would not be
   appropriate for a senior-level resource with these strategic
   responsibilities and would not provide any measure of consistency and
   continuity over the RFC Series.

5.  Operation of the RSEB

   Within the constraints of the following items, the RSEB shall set its
   own form of operation:

   *  The RSEB meets at least annually in public session during an IETF
      meeting (if physical) or alternately, in the week prior to or
      after a virtual meeting (if schedule time is tight during IETF
      week).  This will allow the RSEB to hear community input and
      concerns in a formalized session, and to discuss planned work and
      work in progress.

   *  All meetings of the RSEB SHALL be open and complete proceedings
      shall be published, with the sole exception of proceedings
      directly related to the search process for a RSE or the selection
      of other sub-contractors.  The intent is that the should be no
      closed or partially closed deliberations by the RSEB excepting
      those searches.

   *  The RSE and ISE act as chair and vice chair respectively, and the
      RSEB shall not override that model except as provided above.

   *  The RSEB SHALL act via recorded vote with a majority vote of all
      members being required for most actions.  The voting record shall
      be public except for votes related to searches.

   *  A quorum of the RSEB consists of a majority of the members which
      includes at least one stream manager member, one at-large member
      and either the chair or vice-chair.  The RSEB shall document any
      actions for which only a quorum majority is sufficient vice a
      majority of the whole membership.



StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


   *  The RSEB shall encourage community input for any documents
      produced, however, similar to documents produced by the IAB, the
      RSEB is not required to determine community consensus prior to
      publication of their documents.  Given the initial configuration
      of the RSEB, at least one stream manager member and one At-Large
      member will need to give their consent for any document to be
      published.

   *  [RFC8728] sections 2.1.2 and 2.1.4 (substituting RSEB for RSOC or
      IAB) describes the general interaction between the community and
      the RFC series and this section does not purport to modify that
      interaction, only clarify that the community has delegated certain
      responsibilities to the RSE and RSEB, similar to the way the
      community has delegated responsibilities to the IAB, IESG and LLC.

   Once the RSEB is chartered, the charter may only be revoked by a 2/3
   vote of the IAB, IESG and LLC members voting individually and such
   vote may not be proposed more than once annually.

6.  The Editorial Stream

   The Editorial Stream (ES) is created as the designated stream for
   publication of documents that describe, develop, amend, or explain
   the RFC Series, the roles, responsibilities and authorities of the
   RSO elements, and the general engagement model between the RSO and
   the IETF and broader community.  The content of the ES shall be
   limited to just those topics.  The RSEB shall approve by 2/3s
   majority vote most publications in that stream.  The exception is
   that the RSE has the right of publication of documents authored by
   the RSE as commentary or analysis of the RFC Series and its progress.
   The RSE may publish those without RSEB approval, but the RSEB may
   require a note be added to the abstract indicating any issues agreed
   to by a majority of the RSEB.

   While the RSEB bears sole authority to approve publications in that
   stream, the RSEB (or the RSE acting on behalf of the RSEB) is
   expected to solicit community input and involvement for the
   improvement of documents that affect long-term evolution of the
   series, or documents that affect how and when any stream approved
   document is published.

7.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Brian Carpenter, Bob Hinden, Scott Bradner and John Klensin
   for reading and commenting on the first draft of this document.






StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            RFC Series Management              August 2020


8.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

9.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC6548]  Brownlee, N., Ed. and IAB, "Independent Submission Editor
              Model", RFC 6548, DOI 10.17487/RFC6548, June 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6548>.

   [RFC8728]  Kolkman, O., Ed., Halpern, J., Ed., and R. Hinden, Ed.,
              "RFC Editor Model (Version 2)", RFC 8728,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8728, February 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8728>.

Author's Address

   Michael StJohns
   NthPermutation Security LLC
   Germantown, MD 20874
   United States of America

   Email: msj@nthpermutation.com















StJohns                 Expires 25 February 2021               [Page 12]
