







INTERNET DRAFT                                                        V.Kashyap
<draft-kashyap-ipoib-ipv4-multicast-01.txt>                                 IBM
Expiration Date: October 26, 2001                                April 26, 2001

                IPv4 multicast and broadcast over InfiniBand networks

Status of this memo

        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
        with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
        groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
        documents as Internet- Drafts.

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use
        Internet-Drafts as Reference material or to cite them other
        than as ``work in progress''.

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed
        at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

        This memo provides information for the Internet community.
        This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
        Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

        This document specifies a method for the transmission of IP
        version 4 multicast and broadcast datagrams over InfiniBand
        subnets.

Table of Contents

        1.0 Introduction
        2.0 InfiniBand addresses
        2.1 Unicast GIDs



Kashyap                                                         [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        2.2 Multicast GIDs
        2.3 InfiniBand Multicast group management
        3.0 IPv4 on IB multicast fabrics
        3.1 Scope bits
        3.1.1 Options for implementing IPv4 subnets spanning multiple IB subnets
        3.2 Flag bits
        3.3 Mapping of IPv4 multicast address to IB address
        3.3.1 IPv4 multicast addresses spanning multiple IB subnets
        4.0 IPv4 multicast address to LID mapping
        5.0 Guidelines on setup of IB multicast groups
        6.0 Outline description of multicast on IPoIB subnets
        6.1 IPv4 broadcast addresses
        6.2 Receiving/forwarding multicast packets
        6.3 Sending IPv4 multicast datagrams
        6.4 Leaving/Deleteing a multicast group
        7.0 Security considerations
        8.0 Acknowledgement
        9.0 References
       10.0 Author's Address
       11.0 Full Copyright statement

1.0 Introduction

        IPv4 multicasting provides a means of transmitting IPv4
        datagrams to a group of interfaces. A group IPv4 address is
        used as the destination address in the IPv4 datagram as
        documented in STD 5, RFC 1112 [1]. Standard mappings are
        defined for various media types e.g. ethernet [1], fddi
        RFC1188 [2], and token ring RFC 1469[3] etc. IPv4 broadcast
        address is used to send packets to all the IPv4 nodes in the
        specific IPv4 network.

        The address range of the multicast addresses is 224.0.0.0 to
        239.255.255.255. The limited broadcast address is 255.255.255.255.
        The net broadcast address is <net_id><-1> or
        <net_id><subnet_id><-1).

        This document defines the mappings for IPv4 multicast and
        broadcast addresses to the InfiniBand multicast group
        addresses.

        This document addresses the issues wrt IPv4. It further
        assumes unreliable datagram and raw datagram services of
        InfiniBand Architecture(IBA). These services are described in
        InfiniBand architecture specification [4]. For a concise
        overview of the InfiniBand architecture refer to
        draft-kashyap-ipoib-requirements-00.txt [5].




Kashyap                                                         [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        IPv6 multicast over datagram service of IBA will be described
        in a subsequent document.

        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
        NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
        "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described
        in RFC 2119.

        This document utlises the text representations described in
        RFC2373[6] for both the IPv6 and InfiniBand (IB) addresses.

2.0 InfiniBand addresses

        The InfiniBand architecture borrows heavily from the IPv6
        architecture in terms of the InfiniBand subnet structure and
        global identifiers (GIDs).

        The InfiniBand architecture defines the global identifier
        associated with a port as follows:

                GID (Global Identifier): A 128-bit unicast or
                multicast identifier used to identify a port on a
                channel adapter, a port on a router, a switch, or a
                multicast group. A GID is a valid 128-bit IPv6 address
                (per RFC 2373) with additional properties/restrictions
                defined within IBA to facilitate efficient discovery,
                communication, and routing. Note: These rules apply
                only to IBA operation and do not apply to raw IPv6
                operation unless specifically called out.

        The raw IPv6 operation referred to in the note in the the
        definition above is the IPv6 mode of InfiniBand's raw datagram
        service. It does not mean IPv6 itself. The routers and
        switches referred to in the above definition are the
        InfiniBand routers and switches.

        The InfiniBand(IB) specification defines two types of GIDs:
        unicast and multicast.

2.1 Unicast GIDs

        The unicast GIDs are defined, as in IPv6, with three scopes.
        The IB specification states:

                a. link local: This is defined to be FE80/10.
                               The IB routers will not forward packets
                               with a link local address in source or
                               destination beyond the IB subnet.



Kashyap                                                         [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


                b. site local: FEC0/10
                               A unicast GID used within a collection
                               of subnets which is unique within that
                               collection (e.g. a data center or
                               campus) but is not necessarily globally
                               unique. IB routers must not forward any
                               packets with either a site-local Source
                               GID or a site-local Destination GID
                               outside of the site.

                c. global: A unicast GID with a global prefix, i.e. an
                           IB router may use this GID to route packets
                           throughout an enterprise or internet.

2.2 Multicast GIDs

        The mulicast GIDs also parallel the IPv6 multicast addresses.
        The IB specification defines the multicast GIDs as follows:

                FFxy:<112 bits>

        Flag bits:

        The nibble, denoted by x above, are the 4 flag bits: 000T. The
        first three bits are reserved and are set to zero. The last
        bit is defined as follows:

                T=0: denotes a permanently assigned i.e. well known GID
                T=1: denotes a transient group

        Scope bits:

        The 4 bits, denoted by y in the GID above, are the scope bits.
        These are defined as :

                scope value             Address value

                    0                        Reserved
                    1                        Unassigned
                    2                        Link-local
                    3                        Unassigned
                    4                        Unassigned
                    5                        Site-local
                    6                        Unassigned
                    7                        Unassigned
                    8                        Organization-local
                    9                        Unassigned
                    0xA                      Unassigned



Kashyap                                                         [Page 4]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


                    0xB                      Unassigned
                    0xC                      Unassigned
                    0xD                      Unassigned
                    0xE                      Global
                    0xF                      Reserved

                                Table 1

        The IB specification further refers to RFC2373 [6] and
        RFC2375[7] while defining the well known multicast addresses.
        However, it then states that the well known addresses apply to
        IB raw IPv6 datagrams only. The IB unreliable datagram (UD)
        service recognises only one well known multicast address. This
        is the ALL_CHANNEL_ADAPTERS multicast address defined to be
        FF02::1. The scope of this address is limited to a single IB
        subnet.

2.3 InfiniBand Multicast group management

        IB multicast groups (multicast GIDs) are managed by the subnet
        manager(SM). The SM explicitly programs the IB switches in the
        fabric to ensure that the packets are received by all the
        members of the multicast group.

        When the group is created a create request is sent to the SM.
        The subnet manager records the group GIDs and the associated
        characteristics. The group characteristics are defined by the
        group path MTU, whether the group will be used for raw
        datagrams or unreliable datagrams, the service level, the
        partition key associated with the group, the LID (local
        identifier) associated with the group etc. These
        characteristics are defined at the time of the group
        creation.

        The LID is a 16-bit value, valid only within an IB subnet,
        that is associated with the multicast group by the subnet
        manager(SM) at the time of the multicast group creation. An IB node
        may to request a specific LID be associated with a group. The
        SM determines the multicast tree based on all the group
        members and programs the relevant switches. The LID is used by
        the switches to route the packets.

        Any member IB node wanting to participate in the group must
        join the group. As part of the join operation the node is
        returned the group characteristics. At the same time the
        subnet manager ensures that the requester can indeed participate
        in the group by verifying that it can support the group MTU,
        and accessiblity to the rest of the group members. Other group



Kashyap                                                         [Page 5]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        characteristics may need verification too.

        The SM, for groups that span IB subnet boundaries, must interact
        with IB routers to determine the presence of this group in other
        IB subnets. If present the MTU must match across the IB subnets.

        P_Key is another characteristic that must match across IB subnets
        since the P_Key inserted into a packet is not modified by the
        IB switches or IB routers. Thus if the P_Keys didn't match the
        IB router(s) itself might drop the packets or destinations on
        other subnets might drop the packets.

        These characteristics are returned to the IB endnode that
        joins the multicast group. A join operation may cause the SM
        to repgrogam the fabric so that the new member can participate
        in the multicat group.

3.0 IPv4 on IB multicast fabrics

        The InfiniBand architecture defines multiple transport methods
        to communicate between the IB endnodes. However, only two of
        these methods support multicast. These are the IB unreliable
        datagram (UD) service and the IB raw datagram service. Of the
        two the raw IB datagram service is optional. The UD service is
        the only service that all IB end nodes must support.

        The IPv4 on InfiniBand multicast implementation are
        RECOMMENDED to use the UD service of IB.

        The IB specification does not make multicast support mandatory
        though. Thus, in some IP subnets the multicast service MAY
        have to be implemented using a multicast server or some other
        method. It is RECOMMENDED that the IPv4 implementations on IB
        are implemented on fabrics that support multicast.

        Note that the mappings defined in this document however are
        not effected by the above choices. The IPv4 broadcast and
        multicast to IB multicast GIDs are applicable to any IPv4 over
        InfiniBand network.

3.1 Scope bits

        The IB multicast GID scope is as defined in table 1. The use
        of local scope will confine the IB multicast packets to an IB
        subnet.

        The local scope at IB level conflicts with the requirement of
        an IP brodcast address if IP subnets can span across IB



Kashyap                                                         [Page 6]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        subnets. The IP broadcast address will need to be mapped to an
        IB GID that has a greater scope than the IB subnet.

        Extending the IB router to bridge such packets(using
        local-scope GIDs) across IB subnets suggests an extension to
        the IB specification. It also makes an IP limited broadcast
        address extend across all of the connected IB subnets if any
        of them has an IPv4 subnet in them since all IPv4 subnets
        support the broadcast address (multicast is optional).

        The alternative of using the global scope has the same result
        of extending the group across all the connected IB subnets
        when IPv4 subnets are created in the IB subnets.

        This brings in the associated administrative difficulties of
        ensuring common MTUs and P_Keys across IB subnets for
        implementing the IP multicast groups. The IB multicast groups
        also take other values such as the TClass, HopLimit, FlowId
        etc. that will also cause administrative hiccups in ensuring
        that they are consistent across IB subnets participating in
        the group.

        The use of any other scope is not well defined in IB
        specification.

        Therefore, in the interest of simplicity, it is RECOMMENDED
        that the IPv4 multicast and broadcast addresses be mapped to
        link-local scope IB multicast GIDs. It is further RECOMMENDED
        that the IPv4 subnets implementations do not span multiple IB
        subnets. IPv4 subnetting can be used to span a particular IPv4
        subnet with a shorter mask across multiple IB subnets.

        Note that the IB multicast group takes a hop limit. However,
        setting a hop limit in the SM doesn't limit the span of the
        multicast group. The hop limit only specifies the hop limit
        that the packets sent out by end nodes must use. Secondly, the
        IB subnets may be only 1 subnet away but have multiple of them
        linked by multiple or the same IB routers.

3.1.1 Options for implementing IPv4 subnets spanning multiple IB subnets

       There are two alternatives for implementations that do need to
       span multiple IB subnets and cannot use IPv4 subnetting for
       this. Based on the dicussions in the working group one of these
       methods will be chosen.






Kashyap                                                         [Page 7]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001



        1. Use of a 'spans multiple IB subnets' option

           Some implementations may however wish to implement IP
           subnets across IB subnets. It is a MUST for all IPv4 over
           IB implementations to define a configuration parameter
           associated with an IPv4 subnet that defines the scope bit
           to be used for the multicast translations. The default is
           to use the link-local scope. This parameter MUST be IP
           subnet wide to ensure that all the IP end nodes map the
           addresses the same way.

           It is however NOT RECOMMENDED that such a parameter be set
           to anything but the default value. The implication is that
           the IP subnets are by default assumed to be within an IB
           subnet.

        2. Use of an IP subnet number

           Each IP subnet can be implemented to be associated with a
           specific 16 bit number. This number MUST be kept unique by
           the fabric administrator. This number MUST be made part of
           the multicast mapping thereby creating unique IPv4 subnet
           wide mappings. In this case the IB multicast GIDs MUST use
           the global scope.

3.2 Flag bits

        IPv4 multicast/broadcast addresses have no well defined IPv6
        or IB subnet mappings. The flag bits will therefore always be
        set to 0001 in IPv4 multicast/broadcast mappings to the IB
        multicast GID.

3.3 Mapping of IPv4 multicast address to IB address

        The IPv4 broadcast to IB multicast GID mapping is defined to be:

        FF1y::255.255.255.255

        This mapping applies to all broadcast addresses i.e. any
        directed broadcast addresses and the limited broadcast
        address.

        The IPv4 multicast to IB multicast GID mapping is
        correspondingly defined as:

        FF1y::<IPv4 multicast address>




Kashyap                                                         [Page 8]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        The default value of 'y' is 0x2. Thus the default translation
        of IPv4 broadcast address is FF12::255.255.255.255.

3.3.1 IPV4 multicast addresses spanning multiple IB subnets

        If the IPv4 subnet spans multiple IB subnets the scope value
        will be set according to parameters defined in section 3.1.1.

        If the IP subnet number is used the mapping will be defined as
        FF1E::IP_subnet_number:<IPv4 multicast/broadcast address>.

4.0 IPv4 multicast address to LID mapping

        In a generic LAN setup the IPv4 multicast addresses are mapped
        to the destination link layer address directly. In the case of
        InfiniBand this is only partly true. This document describes
        the IPv4 multicast address to the IB multicast address (GID)
        mapping but not the mapping to the LID. The IPoIB driver on
        the host must determine the LID that needs to be used when
        sending to the particular multicast group.

        A mapping from the IPv4 multicast address or the corresponding
        IB multicast group to a LID is not defined because of the
        following reasons:

                1) Sending to an IPv4 multicast address

                   An IB node cannot be assured of its packets
                   reaching all the multicast members without itself
                   joining the IB multicast group. This is because the
                   relevant switches are programmed by the IB subnet
                   manager only on receiving a join request.

                   Thus the sender will always have to join the IB
                   multicast groups and keep track of the groups it
                   has already joined. Mapping directly to the LID
                   doesn't help if the the group has not been joined.

                   Thus the implementation is required to keep track
                   of the IB groups joined. It can therefore also
                   record the corresponding LID removing the need to
                   map the IPv4 multicast address to the LID.

                2) Joining an IPv4 multicast group

                   At the time of joining an IPv4 multicast group the
                   IP host either will create or join the
                   corresponding IB multicast group. Thus the



Kashyap                                                         [Page 9]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


                   situation is no different as in the above case in
                   terms of receiving the LID value.

                3) Reduction of LID conflicts

                   The LIDs in the range 0xC000 to 0xFFFE are
                   designated as the multicat LIDs by IBA. This limits
                   the range to 2^14 -1 entries (16382 entries). This
                   implies that 2^18 or 256K IPv4 multicast groups
                   could map to a single LID. It is better to let the
                   SM decide on a more efficient usage of the
                   multicast LID space.

                4) SM and IB architecture should stay unaffected.

                   A mapping of the LIDs can conflict with the SM
                   implementations. The SM is under no restrictions to
                   choose a particular LID for any multicast group.
                   Thus it could end up utilising a LID that
                   maps from an IPv4 multicast address for some other
                   multicast group since not everything on IB subnets
                   is governed by the IPoIB rules.

                5) No need to plan for LID conflicts

                   Allowing the SM decide on the LIDs also avoids
                   having to come up with a solution to handle LID
                   conflicts with other multicast groups.

           Thus it is best to avoid such a mapping and leave it to the
           individual implementations to determine the LID from the
           SM. There is no extra work involved in this determination
           since the SM has to be contacted anyway for the IB
           multicast group join/create operations.

5.0 Guidelines on setup of IB multicast groups

        In an IB subnet, to communicate with one another, the
        endpoints must have compatible P_Keys. Thus the administrator
        when setting up an IP subnet over an IB subnet must ensure
        that all the members have compatible P_Keys. An endpoint may
        however have multiple P_Keys [4].

        It is a MUST that the administrator setup the IB multicast
        group corresponding to IPv4 broadcast address (henceforth
        called 'broadcast group') when the IPv4 subnet is setup. The
        administrator therefore chooses the parameters that are valid
        for the multicast group: P_Key, Q_Key, Hop Limit, Flow ID,



Kashyap                                                        [Page 10]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        TClass and the Path MTU.

        This has the additional benefit of distributing these values
        to all the members of the subnet. Since all members must join
        the broadcast group the parameters are conveyed without having
        to define another method for this dispersal.

        An IPv4 host on joining a new IPv4 multicast group might find
        that the corresponding IB multicast group doesn't exist. The
        host's interface driver will therefore create the IB multicast
        group by contacting the subnet manager (SM). It is RECOMMENDED
        that the parameters used in the creation of the group are the
        same as those returned for the broadcast group.

        It is also RECOMMENDED that the administrator set up the
        IB groups corresponding to all-systems (224.0.0.1) and
        all-routers(224.0.0.2) multicast groups.

6.0 Outline description of multicast on IPoIB subnets

        IPv4 multicast on InfiniBand subnets follows the same concepts
        and rules as on any other media. However, unlike most other
        media multicast over InfiniBand requires interaction with
        another entiy, the IB subnet manager. This section describes
        the outline of the process and also suggests some guidelines.

        IB architecture specifies the following format for IB
        multicast packets when used over unreliable datagram (UD)
        mode [4][5]:

       +--------+-------+---------+---------+-------+---------+---------+
       |Local   |Global |Base     |Datagram |Packet |Invariant| Variant |
       |Routing |Routing|Transport|Extended |Payload| CRC     |  CRC    |
       |Header  |Header |Header   |Transport|       |         |         |
       |        |       |         |Header   |       |         |         |
       +--------+-------+---------+---------+-------+---------+---------+

       For details about the various headers please refer to
       InfiniBand Architecture Specification [1].

       The Global routing header (GRH) includes the IB multicast group
       GID. The Local routing header (LRH) includes the local
       identifier (LID). The IB switches in the fabric route the
       packet based on the LID.

       The GID is made available to the receiving IB user (the IPoIB
       interface driver for example). The driver can therefore
       determine the IB group the packet belongs to.



Kashyap                                                        [Page 11]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


6.1 IPv4 broadcast addresses

        All nodes join the broadcast group whenever an interface is
        configured. The broadcast group parameters (P_Key, Q_Key, LID
        etc.) are recorded by the interface module to be used while
        creating other groups.

6.2 Receiving/forwarding multicast packets

        An IP host sends an IGMP report to the router(s) when it wants
        to receive packets on a multicast group. The router could then
        create the IB group. However to receive the packets the IP
        host must join the corresponding IB multicast group.
        Therefore, it is simpler for the IB interface module on the IP
        host to first create the IB group and then send the IGMP
        message to the router. The router will then join the specified
        IB group.

        The router MAY choose to create IB groups corresponding to the
        IPv4 groups it expects to forward.

        Thus the creation of IB groups is done by receivers or routers
        only and not by senders thereby keeping things simple. The
        host must first try to join the group and only on failure
        attempt to create it.

6.3 Sending IPv4 multicast datagrams

        An IP host may send a multicast packet at any time to any
        multicast address. The IP layer translates the address to the
        IB multicast group address as per the mapping described in
        this document.

        The IP layer then conveys the packet to the IB interface
        driver/module. This module attempts to join the relevant IB
        multicast group. This is required since otherwise there is no
        guarantee that the packet will reach its destinations.

        The IB join could fail if the group has not been created. This
        could imply that there are no listeners on the subnet and the
        router doesn't expect to forward packets received on this
        group. In such a case the module would be justified in
        dropping the packet.

        However, this may not be the case. The IB group may not exist
        because the SM ran out of resources or the SM policy allows
        only a limited set of multicast groups to be created.
        Additionally it is not reasonable to expect the router to



Kashyap                                                        [Page 12]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        create IB groups for all the IPv4 multicast addreses that it
        may be called upon to forward.

        Therefore, the multicast module of IPv4 interface, when
        sending a multicast packet MUST do one the following:

                1) join the IB mulicast group corresponding to the
                   IPv4 multicast address. This is the RECOMMENDED
                   option for multicast if the sender is itself a
                   member of the group.

                   As noted earlier, a particular IB multicast group
                   may not exist for some reason. In such a case the
                   implementation MUST fall back to one of the
                   following methods.

                2) Send the multicast packet out with the
                   corresponding IB GID but with the LID associated
                   with the all-systems IPv4 multicast address
                   (224.0.0.1). This is the RECOMMENDED option.

                   An implementation implementing 1) described above
                   must fall back to this condition or the condition
                   given below on failure to join the IB group
                   corresponding to the IPv4 multicast address being
                   sent to.

                3) Send the multicast packet out with the
                   corresponding IB GID but with the LID corresponding
                   to the IPv4 limited broadcast address
                   (255.255.255.255).

                   An implementation MUST fall back to this option if
                   both the options 1) and 2) fail.

6.4 Leaving/Deleteing a multicast group

        An IPv4 sender joins the IB multicast group only because that
        is the only way to guarantee reception of the packets by all
        the group recepients. The sender must however leave the IB
        group at some time. It is RECOMMENDED that a sender, when not
        a receiver on the group, start a timer per multicast group
        sent to. The sender leaves the IB group when the timer goes
        off. It restarts the timer if another message is sent. It is
        RECOMMENDED that the duration of the timer be 120 seconds.

        This recommendation doesn't apply to the IB broadcast group. It
        also doesn't apply to the IB group corresponding to the



Kashyap                                                        [Page 13]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        all-hosts multicast group. A host MUST always remain a member
        of the broadcast group. It MAY choose to remain a member of
        all-hosts group.

        Thus a sender that chooses to always send to the broadcast
        group and not to the specific multicast group does not need to
        implement a timer.

        An IPv4 multicast receiver MUST leave the corresponding IB
        multicast group when it leaves the IPv4 multicast group. If it
        continues to be a sender then it MAY choose to not leave the
        IB group but start a timer as explained above.

        A router is RECOMMENDED to leave the IB multicast group when
        there are no members of the IPv4 multicast address in the
        subnet and it has no explicit knowledge of any need to forward
        such packets.

        The router and the IPv4 hosts MUST NOT delete the IB multicast
        group when they leave the group. It is possible for the same
        IB multicast group be used by a non-IPv4 protocol.

        The IB specification mentions an IB specific protocol that
        will delete the IB groups when it determines that there are no
        IB members of the group.

7.0 Security considerations

        Any multicast/broadcast communication is inherently insecure
        since anyone can receive the data. The applications must
        implement appropriate authentication/encryption methods for
        data security.

        The IPv4 subnet communication can be disrupted by creating
        the IB broadcast/multicast groups with incompatible
        parameters. The implementations must leverage IB specific
        methods to protect against such situations.

8.0 Acknowledgement

        The author thanks David L. Stevens for his useful suggestions
        and comments.









Kashyap                                                        [Page 14]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001



9.0 References

[1]         RFC1112: Host extensions for IP multicasting. S.E. Deering.

[2]         RFC1188: Proposed Standard for the Transmission of IP Datagrams
            over FDDI Networks. D. Katz.

[3]         RFC1469: IP Multicast over Token-Ring Local Area Networks.
            T. Pusateri.

[4]         InfiniBand(TM) Architecture Specification Volume 1, Release 1.0

[5]         draft-kashyap-ipoib_requirements-00.txt

[6]         RFC2373: IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture. R. Hinden,S. Deering.

[7]         RFC2375: IPv6 Multicast Address Assignments. R. Hinden, S. Deering.

10.0 Author's Address

Vivek Kashyap

IBM
15450, SW Koll Parkway
Beaverton, OR 97006

Work: 503 578 3422
Email: vivk@us.ibm.com

11.0 Full Copyright Statement

        Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

        This document and translations of it may be copied and
        furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
        otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be
        prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
        part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
        copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such
        copies and derivative works. However, this document itself may
        not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright
        notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
        organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
        Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
        defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
        as required to translate it into languages other than
        English.



Kashyap                                                        [Page 15]





INTERNET-DRAFT       IPv4 multicast over InfiniBand       April 26, 2001


        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
        not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
        assigns.

        This document and the information contained herein is provided
        on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
        ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
        IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE
        USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
        ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE.








































Kashyap                                                        [Page 16]


-- 
Vivek Kashyap
IBM
viv@sequent.com
vivk@us.ibm.com
503 578 3422 (o)
