
  Network Working Group                                       Lee Rafalow  
  Internet Draft                                                      IBM  
  Category: Best Current Practice                       Andrea Westerinen  
                                                                    Cisco   
                                                               March 2002 
             
          
                     Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work   
                       draft-rafalow-coordination-01.txt  
                                                    
                               Status of this Memo  
          
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all  
    provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
          
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task  
    Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other  
    groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
        
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months  
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any  
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material  
    or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
          
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt   
          
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
    
      
    Copyright Notice  
          
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.  

          
    Abstract  
          
    The Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF) [1] is a membership-based  
    standards organization with technology for, and expertise in, modeling  
    systems and network-related management information.  In the interests  
    of promoting a common set of standards, from time to time the IETF and  
    the DMTF have found and may continue to find opportunities to work  
    together in developing overlapping standards.  
               
    In managing the progress of such joint work activity, there is a need  
    to share information and advance standards-track documents such that  
    the documents are coordinated to reflect a common set of standards and  
    that normative references can be established between the documents.   
    This draft describes a process analogous to an optimized two-phase  
    commit process (as used in transaction processing to keep databases  
    synchronized). 
          

          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 1]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
          
  1. Introduction  
          
    Where possible, the networking industry benefits from common standards  
    defined by the various industry groups (thereby avoiding duplicated or  
    conflicting work). When the IETF and the DMTF collaborate to develop  
    related standards, there is a need to share information and coordinate  
    the promotion of standards-track documents.  These coordinated  
    documents reflect a common definition and understanding of the subject  
    and allow normative references to be established between the documents.    
          
    Because the IETF is an open standards organization, works in progress  
    are generally available. Because the DMTF is a membership-based  
    standards organization, specific approvals must be secured to enable  
    open collaboration between the two organizations.  
          
    As interdependent works-in-progress in the two organizations progress  
    through their respective approval processes, there is a need to assure  
    that the documents are consistent and, where needed, normative  
    references meet the requirements of the IETF.    
          
    This best practices draft is based on the experiences coordinating  
    joint development work for RFC3060 [9], PCIM Extensions [10] and IPsec  
    Policy [11].  
          
          
  2. Open Sharing of Information  
          
    IETF work-in-process documents are available to the public [3] [6].   
    DMTF work-in-process documents are not generally available to non- 
    members.  The DMTF does, however, permit sharing of work-in-progress  
    information for the purposes of collaboration with other standards  
    organizations.  "If worked in Board-approved collaboration with another  
    standards body, the proposal may also be posted to the membership of  
    that standards body, using the guidelines of that standards body" [2].   
    Therefore, when an IETF Working Group collaborates with a DMTF Working  
    Group, the chair of the DMTF working group MUST assure that the  
    collaboration has been properly approved by the DMTF Board to permit  
    the free flow of work-in-progress information between the groups.  
          
          
  3. Approval Processes  
          
    To assure that documents are consistent and that normative references  
    meet IETF requirements [3], the standards-track documents from the two  
    organizations must have equivalent levels of stability and approval.  
    The approval processes for the two organizations are different in  
    several respects;  three of these differences are important for this  
    discussion.  They differ in the number of maturity levels (e.g.,  
    Proposed Standard, etc.), in the archival nature of those maturity 
    levels, and the timing when implementations are desired.  
          
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 2]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
  3.1. IETF Standards Process  
          
    The relevant portions of the IETF standards process are defined in "The  
    Internet Standards Process - Revision 3" [3] and "IETF Working Group  
    Guidelines and Procedures" [6].  They require open deliberation and  
    decision-making for standards-track documents and specify that works- 
    in-progress advance from Working Group Last-Call, to IESG Last-Call and  
    to the RFC Editor for publication as Proposed and Draft Standards.    
          
    A standards-track document is a permanent part of the IETF archival  
    record when it reaches Proposed Standard.  Further, IETF standards- 
    track technical specifications that have reached Proposed Standard are  
    available to be implemented.  Although such a specification may be  
    updated or obsoleted, proposed standards are frequently and widely used  
    in production networks.    
          
  3.2. DMTF Standards Process  
          
    The relevant portions of the DMTF standards process are defined in the  
    DMTF "Release Process" [2].  As previously discussed, the process  
    permits the sharing of information and deliberation on issues related  
    to this information. However, the decision-making process is open only  
    to DMTF members.    
          
    The DMTF approval process is similar to the IETF's, in that a  
    standards-track document goes through a working group approval that is  
    a process of achieving consensus, but is formally a voting process  
    within the working group.  Once approved by a working group, a  
    standards-track document is reviewed by the Technical Committee (a  
    technical steering committee) and by member companies to become a  
    Preliminary Standard.  The DMTF Board of Directors then approves a  
    Preliminary Standard to be made available to the general public, at  
    which time implementation experience is encouraged.  When the Technical  
    Committee (with the advice of the relevant working groups) believes the  
    standard is ready for general use, the Technical Committee and the  
    Board of Directors may approve it as a Final Standard. It is desired  
    but not required that at least two independent implementations of the  
    standard be available before approval as a Final Standard.  The DMTF  
    Technical Committee and Board can choose to override this position,  
    and release a standard without two implementations.   
          
    Only the final maturity level, Final Standard, is a permanent part of  
    the DMTF archival record.  Further, although the DMTF Preliminary  
    Standard level of document maturity is similar in purpose to the IETF  
    Proposed Standard in that it is intended for developing implementation  
    experience, Preliminary Standards are not part of the DMTF archival  
    record. They can be used in production environments, although  
    implementations are encouraged to move to Final Standards when they  
    become available.  A Preliminary Standard may differ from a Final  
    Standard if the implementation experiences dictate changes to the  
    Preliminary document.  
          
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 3]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
  3.3. Synchronizing Documents  
          
    Synchronization of the IETF and DMTF standards-track documents occurs  
    when coordinated specifications reach certain levels of maturity in  
    their respective standards organizations.  These levels are:  
          
      - Consensus and approval of the Working Groups   
          
      - DMTF Preliminary Standard and IETF Proposed Standard  
          
      - DMTF Final Standard and RFC Editor Release of the RFC  
          
    Specifications MUST be synchronized if they are interdependent in that  
    they document aspects of the same standard or otherwise require  
    normative references to one another.  Specifications SHOULD be  
    synchronized if they document related standards or there is a normative  
    reference in one specification to a specification of the other  
    standards organization.    
          
    The synchronization process is an optimized two-phase commit process in  
    which related documents are both stabilized and then approved.  The  
    stabilization process occurs as the works-in-progress progress through  
    their respective approval processes.  
          
            DMTF Process                          IETF Process  
          
      1.          Decision to coordinate and exchange info   
               (Info can originate in either standards body)  
          
      2.      Stabilize  <-----------------------> Stabilize  
          
      3.         Prelim  ------------------------>    
          
      4.                 <------------------------ Proposed  
          
      5.         Final   ------------------------> RFC Release  
               
          
      Figure 1.    Two-Phase Commit Metaphor  
          
    The figure above outlines the synchronization steps.   
          
    1. Based on industry needs and the intent of the IETF and DMTF working  
       groups, a decision is made to coordinate standards development.  The  
       DMTF working group chair secures the proper approval to permit the  
       open exchange of information.  
          
    2. The IETF and DMTF Working Groups collaborate on the overlap of the  
       two organizations' work-in-progress standards-track documents and  
       reach consensus on the issues.  These efforts are coordinated  
       by the IETF and DMTF Working Group chairs or by designees such as  
       the document editors.  Information is exchanged as needed using both  
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 4]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
       the DMTF and IETF mail lists, joint meetings may be held to  
       coordinate development activities, and representatives may present  
       the opinions and consensus of the alternate groups.  Ultimately,  
       both the IETF and the DMTF working groups will reach consensus and  
       have stable specifications for approval.    
          
    3. The first phase of the formal synchronization is begun with the DMTF  
       approval process.  The related DMTF specifications are submitted as  
       Preliminary Standards.  This is analogous to a "prepare to commit"  
          
    4. Once the DMTF document is approved and publicly available on the  
       DMTF web site as a Preliminary Standard, the IETF working group last  
       call process commences.  At this point, the related specifications  
       are still open to change and any recycling of the specification in  
       either standards organization MAY cause the stabilization process to  
       be restarted.  When the IETF specifications exit working group last  
       call, IESG last call and are approved by the IESG, the documents are  
       held by the RFC Editor waiting for external normative references to  
       be resolved.  This step is analogous to both the "prepared" and  
       "commit request" steps in a two-phase commit.  
          
    5. The last phase of the coordinated approval process consists of the  
       DMTF approving those Preliminary Standards that are coordinated with  
       the documents held by the RFC Editor.  The DMTF requests  
       implementation experience at this stage, which is not required by  
       the IETF.  However, the IETF process states that "such [implementation]  
       experience is highly desirable, and will usually represent a strong  
       argument in favor of a Proposed Standard designation." [3] The DMTF  
       standards would then be released as Final Standards, after which the  
       RFC Editor releases the RFCs with the resolution of the normative  
       references.  This is analogous to the final "committed" signal in an  
       optimized two-phase commit process.  
          
    The normal course of collaboration is to maintain the synchronization  
    in approval levels.  If, for some reason, the related specifications  
    fail to get through the approval process of one organization or the  
    other, the working groups and steering committees SHOULD either:  
          
    1. hold the related documents at their current levels of approval until  
       identified problems can be worked out by the working groups;  
         
    2. move the related documents back to an earlier approval state (e.g.,  
       preliminary in the DMTF and last call in the IETF) and apply  
       appropriate changes before progressing again; or  
          
    3. rollback the approval state and restart the approval process.  
          
    It should be noted that the related standards-track coordination is  
    severable.  Although the motivation of producing common industry  
    standards SHOULD NOT be abandoned lightly, the working groups and  
    steering committees of one or both of the organizations MAY conclude  
         
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 5]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
    that further collaboration is no longer necessary and proceed with  
    standards efforts independently.   
          
          
  4. Security Considerations  
          
    Security issues are not discussed in this memo.  
          
          
  5. Intellectual Property  
          
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any  
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain  
    to the implementation or use of the technology described in this  
    document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or  
    might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any  
    effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the IETF's  
    procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and standards- 
    related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  
          
    Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any  
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an  
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of  
    such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification  
    can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.  
          
    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any  
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights  
    that may cover technology that may be required to practice this  
    standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive  
    Director.  
          
          
  6. References  
          
  [1]  Distributed Management Task Force web site, http://www.dmtf.org/  
         
  [2]  DMTF "Release Process", DSP0129, September 27, 2001  
          
  [3]  Bradner, S., Editor, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",  
       BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.  
          
  [4]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement  
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  
          
  [5]  Hovey, R., and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in the IETF  
       Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October 1996.  
          
  [6]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures", BCP 25,  
       RFC 2418, September 1998  
          
          
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 6]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
  [7]  "Considerations for Internet Drafts", http://www.ietf.org/ID- 
       nits.html  
          
  [8]  "Recent and Proposed RFC Editorial Policy Changes", http://www.rfc- 
       editor.org/policy.html  
          
  [9]  Moore, B., and E. Ellesson, J. Strassner, A. Westerinen "Policy Core  
       Information Model -- Version 1 Specification", RFC 3060, February  
       2001.  
          
  [10] Moore, B., Rafalow, L., Ramberg, Y., Snir, Y., Westerinen, A.,  
       Chadha, R., Brunner, M., Cohen, R. and Strassner, J., "Policy Core  
       Information Model Extensions", draft-ietf-policy-pcim-ext-06.txt,  
       November 2001  Internet Draft work in progress  
          
  [11] Jason, J., Rafalow, L., and Vyncke, E., "IPsec Configuration Policy  
       Model", draft-ietf-ipsp-config-policy-model-04.txt, November 2001,  
       Internet Draft work in progress  
          
          
  7. Authors' Addresses  
         
    Lee Rafalow  
    IBM Corporation, BRQA/502  
    3039 Cornwallis Road  
    Research Triangle Park, NC 27709  
    Phone:   +1 919-254-4455  
    Fax:     +1 919-254-6243  
    E-mail:  rafalow@watson.ibm.com  
               
         
    Andrea Westerinen  
    Cisco Systems  
    Building 20  
    725 Alder Drive  
    Milpitas, CA  95035  
    Phone:  +1-408-853-8294  
    Fax:    +1-408-527-6351  
    E-mail:  andreaw@cisco.com  
               
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 7]  
  Internet Draft   Coordinating IETF and DMTF Joint Work       March 2002  
          
          
  8. Full Copyright Statement  
          
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.  
          
    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to  
    others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or  
    assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and  
    distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,  
    provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are  
    included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this  
    document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the  
    copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other  
    Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing  
    Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined  
    in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to  
    translate it into languages other than English.  
          
    The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be  
    revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
          
    This document and the information contained herein is provided on an  
    "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING  
    TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT  
    NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL  
    NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR  
    FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
          
               
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
  Rafalow, Westerinen         Expires: August 2002               [Page 8]  