Network Working Group                                          R. Coltun
Internet Draft                                              FORE Systems
Expiration Date: April 2000                                    V. Fuller
File name: draft-ietf-ospf-nssa-update-08.txt                 BBN Planet
                                                               P. Murphy
                                                    US Geological Survey
                                                            October 1999

                          The OSPF NSSA Option

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

















Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page i]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Table Of Contents

   1.0 Abstract .................................................  1
   2.0 Overview .................................................  2
   2.1 Motivation - transit networks ............................  2
   2.2 Motivation - corporate networks ..........................  3
   2.3 Proposed Solution ........................................  4
   3.0 NSSA Intra-area Implementation Details ...................  6
   3.1 The N-bit ................................................  6
   3.2 Type-7 Address Ranges ....................................  7
   3.3 Type-7 LSAs ..............................................  7
   3.4 Originating Type-7 LSAs ..................................  9
   3.5 Calculating Type-7 AS External Routes .................... 10
   3.6 Incremental Updates ...................................... 13
   3.7 Optionally Importing Summary LSAs ........................ 13
   4.0 Intra-AS implementation Details .......................... 14
   4.1 Type-7 Translator Election ............................... 14
   4.2 Translating Type-7 LSAs into Type-5 LSAs ................. 15
   4.3 Flushing Translated Type-7 LSAs .......................... 18
   5.0 Security Considerations .................................. 19
   6.0 Acknowledgments .......................................... 21
   7.0 References ............................................... 21
   8.0 Authors' Addresses ....................................... 22
   Appendix A: Type-7 LSA Packet Format ......................... 23
   Appendix B: The Options Field ................................ 24
   Appendix C: Router-LSAs ...................................... 25
   Appendix D: Configuration Parameters ......................... 27
   Appendix E: The P-bit Policy Paradox ......................... 28
   Appendix F: Differences from RFC 1587 ........................ 30


1.0  Abstract

   This memo documents an optional type of OSPF area which is somewhat
   humorously referred to as a "not-so-stubby" area (or NSSA).  NSSAs
   are similar to the existing OSPF stub area configuration option but
   have the additional capability of importing AS external routes in a
   limited fashion.

   The OSPF NSSA Option was originally defined in RFC 1587.  The
   functional differences between this memo and RFC 1587 are explained
   in Appendix F. All differences, while expanding capability, are
   backward-compatible in nature. Implementations of this memo and of
   RFC 1587 will interoperate.

   Please send comments to ospf@discuss.microsoft.com.





Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 1]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


2.0  Overview

2.1  Motivation - transit networks

   Wide-area transit networks often have connections to moderately-
   complex "leaf" sites.  A leaf site may have multiple IP network
   numbers assigned to it.  Typically, one of the leaf site's networks
   is directly connected to a router provided and administered by the
   transit network while the others are distributed throughout and
   administered by the site.  From the transit network's perspective,
   all of the network numbers associated with the site make up a single
   "stub" entity.  For example, BBN Planet has one site composed of a
   class-B network, 130.57.0.0, and a class-C network, 192.31.114.0.
   From BBN Planet's perspective, this configuration looks something
   like this:

                       192.31.114
                           |
                         (cloud)
                     -------------- 130.57.4
                           |
                           |
                        ------ 131.119.13 ------
                        |BR18|------------|BR10|
                        ------            ------
                                             |
                                             V
                                     to BBN Planet "core" OSPF system

   where the "cloud" consists of the subnets of 130.57 and network
   192.31.114, all of which are learned by RIP on router BR18.
   Topologically, this cloud looks very much like an OSPF stub area.
   The advantages of running the cloud as an OSPF stub area are:

      1. Type-5 routes (OSPF external link state advertisements (LSAs))
         are not advertised beyond the router labeled "BR10".  This is
         advantageous because the link between BR10 and BR18 may be a
         low-speed link or the router BR18 may have limited resources.

      2. The transit network is abstracted to the "leaf" router BR18 by
         advertising only a default route across the link between BR10
         and BR18.

      3. The cloud becomes a single, manageable "leaf" with respect to
         the transit network.

      4. The cloud can become, logically, a part of the transit
         network's OSPF routing system.



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 2]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


      5. Translated type-5 LSAs that are sent into the backbone from the
         cloud (which is a separate stub area) may be considered "leaf"
         nodes when performing the Dijkstra calculation.

   However, the current definition of the OSPF protocol [OSPF] imposes
   topological limitations which restrict simple cloud topologies from
   becoming OSPF stub areas.  In particular, it is illegal for a stub
   area to import routes external to OSPF; it is not possible for
   routers BR18 and BR10 to both be members of the stub area and to
   import the routes learned from RIP or other IP routing protocols as
   type-5 (OSPF external LSAs) into the OSPF routing domain.  In order
   to run OSPF out to BR18, BR18 must be a member of a non-stub area or
   the OSPF backbone before it can import routes other than its
   directly-connected network(s).  Since it is not acceptable for BR18
   to maintain all of BBN Planet's external (type-5) routes, BBN Planet
   is forced by OSPF's topological limitations to only run OSPF out to
   BR10 and to run RIP between BR18 and BR10.

2.2  Motivation - corporate networks

   In a corporate network which supports a large corporate
   infrastructure it is not uncommon for OSPF area 0 to have a large
   non-zero area infrastructure which injects large routing tables into
   area 0.  Organizations within the corporate infrastructure may
   routinely multi-home their non-0 OSPF areas to strategically located
   backbone area 0 routers, either to provide backbone redundancy or to
   increase backbone connectivity or both.  Because of these large
   routing tables, OSPF aggregation via summarization is routinely used
   and recommended.  Stub areas are also recommended to keep the size of
   the non-zero routing tables small.  Organizations within the
   corporation are administratively autonomous and compete for corporate
   backbone resources. They also want isolation from each other in order
   to protect their own network resources within the organization.

   Consider a typical backbone connection, as shown on the next page,
   where routers A1, B1 and A2, B2 are connected to area 1 and area 2
   respectively, and where routers A0 and B0 are border routers which
   connect to both area 1 and area 2. Assume the 192.243.192/20 and
   192.243.208/22 clouds are subnetted with a protocol foreign to the
   corporate OSPF process.  These processes could be RIP, IGRP, or
   second and third OSPF processes separate from the corporate OSPF
   backbone process.

   As a matter of policy, the corporate network administrators want
   192.243.192/20 and 192.243.208/22 aggregated to the backbone.  This
   policy conflicts with both Area 1 and Area 2's desire to see the
   subnetted infrastructures learned from Area 1's internal routers, A1
   and B1, and Area 2's internal routers, A2 and B2, aggregated in such



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 3]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


                  +---A0------Area 0 cloud------B0---+
                  |   |                          |   |
                  |   |                          |   |
                  |   |T1                   56kbs|   |
             56kbs|   |                          |   |T1
                  |   |                          |   |
                  |   |       Area 1 cloud       |   |
                  |   A1-----192.243.192/20-----B1   |
                  |                                  |
                  +---A2                        B2---+
                       |                         |
                       |       Area 2 cloud      |
                       +------192.243.208/22-----+


   a way that A0 and B0 can make efficient routing decisions.  The
   current standard OSPF stub area has no mechanism to support the
   redistribution of routes for 192.243.192/20 and 192.243.208/22
   subnets within their respective areas.  If one assumes that both the
   Area 1 and Area 2 clouds are extremely large with internally very
   large routing tables originating from a complex OSPF link state
   topology and subnetting scheme, neither Area 1 or Area 2 wants to be
   at the mercy of the other area's summary LSAs or external LSAs, which
   a standard OSPF area setting would force them to carry.

   Any solution to this dilemma must honor Area 1's path of choice
   through A0 with redundancy through B0 while at the same time honoring
   Area 2's path of choice through B0 with redundancy through A0.
   Furthermore, such a solution must support the aggregation of the
   externally learned subnetted routing subdomains.

2.3 Proposed Solution

   This document describes a new optional type of OSPF area, somewhat
   humorously referred to as a "not-so-stubby" area (or NSSA), which has
   the capability of importing external routes in a limited fashion.

   The OSPF specification defines two general classes of area
   configuration. The first allows type-5 LSAs to be flooded throughout
   the area.  In this configuration, type-5 LSAs may be originated by
   routers internal to the area or flooded into the area by area border
   routers.  These areas, referred to herein as type-5 capable areas (or
   just plain areas in the OSPF specification), are distinguished by the
   fact that they can carry transit traffic.  The backbone is always a
   type-5 capable area.  The second type of area configuration, called
   stub, allows no type-5 LSAs to be propagated into/throughout the area
   and instead depends on default routing to external destinations.




Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 4]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   NSSAs are defined in much the same manner as existing stub areas.  To
   support NSSAs, a new option bit (the "N" bit) and a new type of LSA
   (type-7) are defined.  The "N" bit ensures that routers belonging to
   an NSSA agree on its configuration.  Similar to the stub area's use
   of the "E" bit, both NSSA neighbors must agree on the setting of the
   "N" bit or the OSPF neighbor adjacency will not form.

   Type-7 LSAs provide for carrying external route information within an
   NSSA. Type-7 AS External LSAs have virtually the same syntax as the
   Type-5 AS External LSAs with the obvious exception of the link-state
   type (see section 3.3 for more details).  There are two major
   semantic differences between type-5 and type-7 LSAs.

      o Type-7 LSAs may be originated by and advertised throughout an
        NSSA; as with stub areas, type-5 LSAs are not flooded into NSSAs
        and do not originate there, except on NSSA border routers.

      o Type-7 LSAs are advertised only within a single NSSA; they are
        not flooded into the backbone area or any other area by border
        routers, though the information which they contain may be
        propagated into the backbone area (see section 4.2).

   In order to allow limited exchange of external information across an
   NSSA border, NSSA border routers will translate selected type-7 LSAs
   received from the NSSA into type-5 LSAs.  These type-5 LSAs will be
   flooded to all type-5 capable areas.  NSSA border routers may be
   configured with address ranges so that several type-7 LSAs may be
   represented by a single type-5 LSA. The NSSA border routers which
   perform translation are configurable thus creating efficient
   forwarding via type-5 LSAs originating from aggregated type-7 LSAs.

   In addition, an NSSA border router may originate a default type-7 LSA
   (IP address of 0.0.0.0) into the NSSA, and must if no NSSA internal
   type-7 default route exists. Note this also insures compatibility
   with RFC 1587 which does not have a type-3 summary default. Default
   routes are necessary because NSSAs do not receive full routing
   information and must have a default route in order to route to AS-
   external destinations.  Like stub areas, NSSAs may be connected to
   the backbone at more than one area border router, but may not be used
   as a transit area.  Note that the default route originated by an NSSA
   border router is never translated into a type-5 LSA, however, a
   default route originated by an NSSA internal AS boundary router (one
   that is not also an area border router) may be translated into a
   type-5 LSA.

   Like stub areas, the importing of OSPF summary routes (type-3 LSAs)
   into NSSAs is a configuration option.  However particular care should
   be taken to ensure that OSPF internal routes are always chosen over



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 5]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   OSPF external (type-7) routes.  This may happen when other IGPs, like
   RIP and ISIS, leak routing information between an OSPF NSSA and
   another OSPF area.  In these cases, all OSPF summary routes should be
   imported into the effected NSSAs. The recommended default behavior is
   to import OSPF summary routes into NSSAs.

   When summary routes are not imported, a type-3 summary LSA for the
   default route should originate from NSSA border routers. The type-3
   summary default route insures intra-AS connectivity to the rest of
   the OSPF domain, as it takes precedence over any type-7 external
   default route which might originate on an NSSA internal router. This
   type-3 summary default route prevents the OSPF domain's internal
   traffic, which is normally forwarded by OSPF summary routes, from
   exiting the AS via any NSSA type-7 external default route originated
   by an NSSA internal router.  Type-7 external defaults generated on
   NSSA internal routers and the no-summary option are mutually
   exclusive.  When summary routes are imported into the NSSA, only
   type-7 default routes (as opposed to type-3) originate into the NSSA
   from NSSA border routers.

   One final note, NSSA border routers never generate type-4 summary
   LSAs for their NSSA ASBRs as their type-7 external advertisements are
   never flooded beyond the NSSA's borders.

   In our transit topology examples the subnets of 130.57 and network
   192.31.114 will still be learned by RIP on router BR18 but now both
   BR10 and BR18 can be in an NSSA and all of BBN Planet's external
   routes are hidden from BR18; BR10 becomes an NSSA border router and
   BR18 becomes an AS boundary router internal to the NSSA.  BR18 will
   import the subnets of 130.57 and network 192.31.114 as type-7 LSAs
   into the NSSA.  BR10 then translates these routes into type-5 LSAs
   and floods them into BBN Planet's backbone.

   In our corporate example, the subnets of 192.243.192/20 and
   192.243.208/22 are learned via their respective routing process,
   redistributed throughout NSSAs 1 and 2, and then aggregated during
   the translation process into a single Type-5 LSA which is flooded
   into Area 0.  Area 1 may configure A0 to perform translation with B0
   standing by as a backup translator, while Area 2 configures B0 as its
   translator with A0 its backup.

3.0  NSSA Intra-area Implementation Details

3.1  The N-bit

   The N-bit ensures that all members of an NSSA agree on the area's
   configuration.  Together, the N-bit and E-bit reflect an interface's
   (and consequently the interface's associated area) external LSA



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 6]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   flooding capability.  As explained in section 10.5 of the OSPF
   specification, if type-5 LSAs are not flooded into/throughout the
   area, the E-bit must be clear in the option field of the received
   Hello packets.  Interfaces associated with an NSSA will not send or
   receive type-5 LSAs on that interface but may send and receive type-7
   LSAs.  Therefore, if the N-bit is set in the options field, the E-bit
   must be cleared.

   To support the NSSA option an additional check must be made in the
   function that handles the receiving of the Hello packet to verify
   that both the N-bit and the E-bit found in the Hello packet's option
   field match the value of the options that have been configured for
   the receiving interface.  A mismatch in the options causes processing
   of the received Hello packet to stop and the packet to be dropped.

3.2  Type-7 Address Ranges

   NSSA border routers may be configured with type-7 address ranges.
   Each address range is defined as an [address,mask] pair.  Many
   separate type-7 networks may then be represented by a single address
   range, just as a subnetted network is composed of many separate
   subnets.  NSSA border routers may then summarize type-7 routes by
   advertising a single type-5 route for each type-7 address range.  The
   type-5 route, resulting from a type-7 address range match will be
   distributed to all type-5 capable areas. Section 4.2 gives the
   details of generating type-5 routes from type-7 address ranges.

   A type-7 address range includes the following configurable items.

      o An [address,mask] pair.

      o A status indication of either Advertise or DoNotAdvertise.

      o An external route tag.

3.3  Type-7 LSAs: NSSA External Link State Advertisements

   External routes are imported into NSSAs as type-7 LSAs by NSSA AS
   boundary routers.  An NSSA AS boundary router (ASBR) is a router
   which has an interface associated with the NSSA and is exchanging
   routing information with routers belonging to another AS.  Like OSPF
   ASBRs, an NSSA router indicates it is an NSSA ASBR by setting the E-
   bit in its router-LSA.  As with type-5 LSAs a separate type-7 LSA is
   originated for each destination network.  To support NSSAs, the
   link-state database must therefore be expanded to contain a type-7
   LSA.

   Type-7 LSAs are identical to type-5 LSAs except for the following



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 7]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   (see section 12.4.4 "AS external links" in the OSPF specification).

      1. The type field in the LSA header is 7.

      2. Type-7 LSAs are only flooded within the originating NSSA.  The
         flooding of type-7 LSAs follows the same rules as the flooding
         of type-1 and type-2 LSAs.

      3. Type-7 LSAs are only listed within the OSPF area data
         structures of their respective NSSAs, making them area
         specific.  Type-5 LSAs, which are flooded to all type-5 capable
         areas, have global scope and are listed in the OSPF protocol
         data structure.

      4. At the NSSA border router, selected type-7 LSAs are translated
         into type 5-LSAs and flooded into the OSPF domain's transit
         topology.

      5. Type-7 LSAs have a propagate (P) bit which, when set, tells an
         NSSA border router to translate the type-7 LSA into a type-5
         LSA.  Examples of how the P-bit is used for loop avoidance are
         described in section 4.2.

      6. Those type-7 LSAs that are to be translated into type-5 LSAs
         must have their forwarding address set.

   Type-5 LSAs that have been translated from type-7 LSAs normally
   contain a forwarding address.  The exception to this is if the
   translation to a type-5 LSA is the result of an address range match,
   in which case the type-5 LSA may not contain a forwarding address
   (see section 4.2 for details).  The forwarding address contained in
   type-5 LSAs will result in more efficient routing to the AS external
   networks when there are multiple NSSA border routers.  Having the
   forwarding address in the type-7 LSAs will ease the translation of
   type-7 into type-5 LSAs as the NSSA border router will not be
   required to compute the forwarding address.

   If the network between the NSSA AS boundary router and the adjacent
   AS is advertised into OSPF as an internal OSPF route, the forwarding
   address should be the next hop address as is currently done in type-5
   LSAs.  If the intervening network is not advertised into OSPF as an
   internal OSPF route and the type-7 LSA's P-bit is set, a generic
   forwarding address should be selected from one of the router's active
   OSPF interface addresses which belong to the NSSA.  If no such
   addresses exist, then no type-7 LSAs with the P-bit set should
   originate for the NSSA from this router.

   When a router is forced to pick a generic forwarding address,



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 8]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   precedence should be given first to the router's internal addresses
   (provided internal addressing is supported).  If an internal address
   is not used and the selected forwarding address's interface
   transitions to a Down state (see OSPF Section 9.3), one must select a
   new generic forwarding address for any type-7 LSAs which reference
   the previously selected forwarding address and then re-originate
   these type-7 LSAs.  If internal addresses are not available,
   preference should be given to the router's active OSPF stub network
   addresses. If the router must chose a transit network address, then
   NSSA routers on the other side of the transit network are viewed as
   neighboring the adjacent AS, and parts of the AS may incur an extra
   hop in reaching the adjacent AS.

   Type-5 and type-7 metrics and path types are directly comparable.

3.4 Originating Type-7 LSAs

   NSSA AS boundary routers may only originate type-7 LSAs.  All NSSA
   border routers must have the capability of translating type-7 LSAs
   into type-5 LSAs as described in Section 4.2.  NSSA border routers
   must set bit E (external bit) in their router (type-1) LSAs to their
   directly attached transit areas and NSSAs.

   An NSSA internal AS boundary router must set the P-bit in the LSA
   header's option field of any type-7 LSA whose path it wants
   advertised into the OSPF domain's full transit topology. The LSAs of
   these networks must have a valid non-zero forwarding address. If the
   P-bit is clear the LSA is not translated into a type-5 LSA by NSSA
   border routers.

   When an NSSA border router originates both a type-5 and a type-7 LSA
   for the same network,  the P-bit must be clear in the type-7 NSSA so
   that the type-7 LSA isn't again translated into a type-5 LSA by
   another NSSA border router.  If the border router only originates a
   type-7 LSA, it may set the P-bit, thus allowing the network to be
   aggregated/propagated during type-7 translation. If an NSSA
   originates a type-5 LSA with a forwarding address which is part of
   the NSSA, it should also originate a type-7 LSA into the NSSA.

   A type-7 default route (network 0.0.0.0) may be originated into the
   NSSA by any NSSA router.  The type-7 default route originated by the
   NSSA border router must have the P-bit clear.  The type-7 default
   route originated by an NSSA ASBR which is not an NSSA border router
   may have the P-bit set. A type-7 default route may be installed by
   NSSA border routers if and only if its P-bit is set (see Appendix E).

   An LSA for the default destination must be originated by all the
   NSSA's border routers in order to support intra-AS routing and



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                          [Page 9]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   inter-AS routing.  This default destination is advertised in either a
   type-3 or type-7 LSA, as described in the Section 3.7.

3.5 Calculating Type-7 AS External Routes

   This calculation must be run when type-7 LSAs are processed during
   the AS external route calculation.  This calculation may process
   type-5 LSAs, but is written that way only for comparison sake.  It
   emphasizes that NSSA ASBR routing table entries are to be used only
   for the address calculation of type-7 LSAs originating from the same
   NSSA, and not for the ASBR address calculation of type-7 LSAs
   originating from a different NSSA or any type-5 LSA.  In addition,
   type-5 LSAs with a forwarding address pointing into a directly
   attached NSSA are skipped during the AS external route calculation as
   their installation status is triggered by the type-7 LSAs from which
   they were translated.

   Non-default type-7 LSAs with the P-bit clear may be installed in the
   OSPF routing table of NSSA border routers.  Since these LSAs are not
   propagated throughout the OSPF domain, traffic which originates
   external to an NSSA and which passes through one of the NSSA's border
   routers may be unexpectedly diverted into the NSSA by a route
   installed from the processing of a type-7 LSA with the P-bit clear.
   (See Appendix E).

   An NSSA border router should examine both type-5 LSAs and type-7 LSAs
   if either type-5 or type-7 routes need to be updated or recalculated.
   This is done as part of the AS external route calculation.  An NSSA
   internal router should examine type-7 LSAs when type-7 routes need to
   be recalculated.

   What follows is only a modest modification of the OSPF Version 2
   Specification Section 16.4.  Original text is suffixed with [OSPF].
   NSSA specific text is suffixed with [NSSA].

   AS external routes are calculated by examining AS-external-LSAs, be
   they type-5 or type-7.  Each of the AS-external-LSAs is considered in
   turn. Most AS-external-LSAs describe routes to specific IP
   destinations.  An AS-external-LSA can also describe a default route
   for the Autonomous System (Destination ID = DefaultDestination,
   network/subnet mask = 0x00000000). For each AS-external-LSA [~OSPF]:

      (1) If the metric specified by the LSA is LSInfinity, or if the
          age of the LSA equals MaxAge, then examine the next LSA.
          [OSPF]

      (2) If the LSA was originated by the calculating router itself,
          examine the next LSA.  [OSPF]



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 10]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


      (3) Call the destination described by the LSA N.  N's address is
          obtained by masking the LSA's Link State ID with the
          network/subnet mask contained in the body of the LSA.  Look up
          the routing table entries (potentially one per attached area)
          for the AS boundary router (ASBR) that originated the LSA. If
          no entries exist for the ASBR (i.e. the ASBR is unreachable),
          do nothing with this LSA and consider the next in the list.
          [OSPF]

          Else if the destination is a type-7 default route (destination
          ID = DefaultDestination) and one of the following is true,
          then do nothing with this LSA and consider the next in the
          list:

             o  The calculating router is a border router and the LSA
                has its P-bit clear. Appendix E describes technique for
                border router type-7 default installation without
                propagation. [NSSA]

             o  The calculating router is suppressing the import of
                summary (type-3) LSAs.

          Else, this LSA describes an AS external path to destination N.
          Examine the forwarding address specified in the AS-external-
          LSA.  This indicates the IP address to which packets for the
          destination should be forwarded.  [OSPF]

          If the forwarding address is set to 0.0.0.0 then packets
          should be sent to the ASBR itself. If the LSA is type-5, from
          among the multiple non-NSSA routing table entries for the ASBR
          (both NSSA and non-NSSA ASBR entries might exists on an NSSA
          border router), select the preferred entry as follows [~OSPF]:

                If RFC1583Compatibility is set to "disabled", prune the
                set of routing table entries for the ASBR as described
                in OSPF Section 16.4.1.  In any case, among the
                remaining routing table entries, select the routing
                table entry with the least cost; when there are multiple
                least cost routing table entries the entry whose
                associated area has the largest OSPF Area ID (when
                considered as an unsigned 32-bit integer) is chosen.
                [OSPF]

          Note that preference is well defined for NSSA ASBRs since
          their routing table entries are always non-backbone intra-
          area. Furthermore, since type-7 LSAs only have areawide
          flooding scope, ASBR path preference must be restricted to the
          NSSA where the type-7 originated. [NSSA]



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 11]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


          If the forwarding address is non-zero look up the forwarding
          address in the routing table.  The matching routing table
          entry must specify an intra-area or inter-area path; if no
          such path exists then do nothing with this LSA and consider
          the next in the list.  [OSPF]

      (4) Let X be the cost specified by the preferred routing table
          entry for the ASBR/forwarding address, and Y the cost
          specified in the LSA.  X is in terms of the link state metric,
          and Y is a type 1 or 2 external metric.  [OSPF]

      (5) Now, look up the routing table entry for the destination N.
          If no entry exists for N, install the AS external path to N,
          with the next hop equal to the list of next hops to the
          ASBR/forwarding address, and advertising router equal to ASBR.
          If the external metric type is 1, then the path-type is set to
          Type-1 external and the cost is equal to X + Y.  If the
          external metric type is 2, the path-type is set to Type-2
          external, the link-state component of the route's cost is X,
          and the type 2 cost is Y.  [OSPF]

      (6) Otherwise compare the AS external path described by the LSA
          with the existing paths in N's routing table entry.  If the
          new path is preferred, it replaces the present paths in N's
          routing table entry.  If the new path is of equal preference,
          it is added to N's routing table entry's list of paths. [OSPF]

          Preference is defined as follows:

          (a) Intra-area and inter-area paths are always preferred over
              AS external paths.  [OSPF]

          (b) Type 1 external paths are always preferred over type 2
              external paths. When all paths are type 2 external paths,
              the paths with the smallest advertised type 2 metric are
              always preferred.  [OSPF]

          (c) If the new AS external path is still indistinguishable
              from the current paths in N's routing table entry, and
              RFC1583Compatibility is set to "disabled", select the
              preferred paths based on the intra-AS paths to the
              ASBR/forwarding addresses, as specified in Section 16.4.1.
              Here intra-NSSA paths are equivalent to intra-area paths
              with non-backbone regular OSPF areas. [NSSA]

          (d) If the new AS external path is still indistinguishable
              from the current paths in N's routing table entry, select
              the preferred path based on a least cost comparison.  Type



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 12]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


              1 external paths are compared by looking at the sum of the
              distance to the forwarding address and the advertised type
              1 metric (X+Y).  Type 2 external paths advertising equal
              type 2 metrics are compared by looking at the distance to
              the forwarding addresses.  [OSPF]


          (e) If the new paths are still indistinguishable the following
              priorities apply (listed from highest to lowest) for
              breaking the tie.

              a. A type-7 LSA with the P-bit set and the forwarding
                 address non-zero.

              b. Any other type-5 or type-7 LSA.  [NSSA]

3.6 Incremental Updates

   Incremental updates for type-7 LSAs should be treated the same as
   incremental updates for type-5 LSAs (see section 16.6 of the OSPF
   specification).  That is, if a new instance of a type-7 LSA is
   received it is not necessary to recalculate the entire routing table.
   If there is already an OSPF internal route to the destination
   represented by the type-7 LSA, no recalculation is necessary.

   Otherwise, the procedure in the proceeding section will have to be
   performed but only for the external routes (type-5 and type-7) whose
   networks describe the same networks as the newly received LSA.

3.7 Optionally Importing Summary LSAs

   In order for backbone summary internal routes to be preferred over
   external type-7 routes, all implementations must support the optional
   import of summary LSAs from the backbone into an NSSA. The default
   behavior is to import type-3 summary LSAs. A new area configuration
   parameter, ImportSummaries, has been added. When set to enabled,
   type-3 summary routes are imported. When set to disabled, summary
   routes are not imported. The default setting is enabled.

   If type-3 summary LSAs are not imported into the NSSA, a type-3
   summary LSA for the default route must be originated by NSSA border
   routers.  This protects the NSSA from routing intra-AS traffic out
   the AS via a type-7 external default route originating from an
   internal NSSA router. Unlike the stub area case, when summary routes
   are imported into the NSSA, a type-3 summary default route must not
   be injected into the NSSA, otherwise the type-3 summary default route
   would be chosen over all and potentially more preferred type-7
   default routes.



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 13]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


4.0 Intra-AS implementation Details

4.1 Type-7 Translator Election

   It is not recommended that multiple NSSA border routers perform the
   translation unless the efficient routing of packets through area 0 to
   an NSSA partitioned by aggregation requires it.  It is normally
   sufficient to have only one NSSA border router perform the
   translation.  Excessive numbers of type-7 translators unnecessarily
   increase the size of the OSPF link state data base.

   A new area configuration parameter, NSSATranslatorRole, is defined in
   Appendix D.  It specifies whether or not an NSSA router will
   unconditionally translate type-7 LSAs to type-5 LSAs when acting as
   an NSSA border router.  When set to Always, type-7 LSAs are always
   translated regardless of the translator state of other NSSA border
   routers.  When set to Candidate and acting as an NSSA border router,
   an NSSA router will participate in the translator election process
   described below.

   A new bit called Nt is added to the router-LSA.  NSSA border routers,
   which are configured to unconditionally translate type-7 LSAs into
   type-5 LSAs, set bit Nt in their NSSA router-LSA.  All other routers
   clear bit Nt in their NSSA router-LSAs.

   A new area parameter called the NSSATranslatorState is maintained in
   the OSPF area data structure.  By default all NSSA routers initialize
   NSSATranslatorState to disabled.  When an NSSA router attains border
   router status and has its NSSATranslatorRole set to Always, it sets
   NSSATranslatorState to enabled and begins the unconditional
   translation of Type-7 LSAs into Type-5 LSAs for the NSSA.  When an
   NSSA border router loses its border router status,
   NSSATranslatorState is always reset to disabled and the Nt bit is
   cleared in a new router LSA.

   If an NSSA border router has its NSSATranslatorState set to disabled
   and, from the subset of NSSA border routers which are reachable over
   the NSSA and reachable as ASBRs over the AS's transit topology, no
   such router exists either with bit Nt set in its router-LSA or with
   higher router ID, then this router begins to perform the translation
   of type-7 LSAs into type-5 LSAs for the NSSA and it sets
   NSSATranslatorState to elected.  The Nt bit of an elected translator
   is always clear.  These conditions may result in more than one
   elected translator for the NSSA, should one of the NSSA border
   routers lose connectivity to area 0.

   All NSSA border routers must set the E-bit in their router-LSA to
   directly attached transit areas and NSSAs even when they are not



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 14]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   translating.  This allows other NSSA border routers to see their ASBR
   status across the AS's transit topology.  Failure to do so may cause
   the election algorithm to elect unnecessary translators.  Every NSSA
   border router is a potential translator.

   An elected translator will continue to perform translation duties
   until supplanted by a reachable NSSA border router whose Nt bit is
   set to true or whose router ID is greater.  Such an event might be
   triggered by the manual setting of the NSSATranslatorState to enabled
   in one of the NSSA border routers or a topological rejoining of a
   partitioned NSSA.  Any change in the membership of the reachable NSSA
   border router set, both over the NSSA and as ASBRs over the AS's
   transit topology, or the appropriate change in a reachable NSSA
   border router Nt bit setting resulting from a updated router-LSAs
   should force an NSSA border router to recheck its type-7 translation
   status. If an elected translator determines its services are no
   longer required, it should continue to perform its translation duties
   for the additional time interval defined by a new area configuration
   parameter, TranslatorStabilityInterval. This minimizes excessive
   flushing of translated type-7s and provides for a more stable
   translator transition. The default value for the
   TranslatorStabilityInterval parameter has been defined as 40 seconds
   (see Appendix D).

   Note that during the translation of type-7 LSAs into aggregated
   type-5 LSAs, the highest router ID is not necessarily the best choice
   for an advertising router, as all packets which are forwarded by a
   type-5 LSA routing table entry originating from aggregated type-7
   LSAs during translation are sent to the translator (Note, as
   described below, the forwarding address is not set in type-5 LSAs
   which originate from aggregated type-7 LSAs).  The NSSATranslatorRole
   parameter allows the network designer to configure the most preferred
   route to the NSSA's type-5 LSAs which originate from aggregation
   during the translation of type-7 LSAs.  In cases of aggregate
   partitioning of the NSSA, multiple translators may be required to
   effect efficient routing. Indeed, all NSSA border routers could be
   configured to perform translation, if required.

4.2 Translating Type-7 LSAs into Type-5 LSAs

   This step is performed as part of the NSSA's Dijkstra calculation
   after type-5 and type-7 routes have been calculated.  If the
   calculating router is currently not an NSSA border router translator,
   then this translation algorithm should be skipped. All installed
   type-7 LSA's should be examined including those type-7s originated by
   the router itself (a set which may differ between NSSA border routers
   of the same NSSA).  This allows NSSA border routers to propagate
   and/or aggregate locally originated type-7s during the translation.



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 15]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   Note that translating all installed type-7s with the same
   [address,mask] pair by utilizing the available host bits to generate
   link state IDs may result in host bit exhaustion, as is always the
   case when there are multiple installed paths for a type-7 host route.
   Implementations may simply choose to pick for translation a single
   installed type-7 for each routable [address,mask] pair.
   Unfortunately, when there are multiple ABRs, routing inefficiencies
   can occur which may necessitate the configuration of additional
   translators. The translation of multiple installed type-7s with the
   same [address,mask] pair is beyond the scope of this specification.

   If a type-7 LSA is contained in a type-7 address range, (i.e., the
   [address,mask] pair of the LSA's network is equal to or a more
   specific instance of the [address,mask] pair of the type-7 address
   range) and the LSA is not contained in any more specific type-7
   range, then the containing range will be called the parent range and
   this type-7 LSA is said to be an offspring of the range. A type-7
   range's descendant type-7 LSAs are offspring of type-7 ranges
   subsumed by the range.

   For each installed type-7 LSA perform the following:

      (1) If the type-7 LSA has the P-bit clear, or its forwarding
          address is set to 0.0.0.0, or it is the offspring of a parent
          type-7 range with DoNotAdvertise status then do nothing with
          this type-7 LSA and consider the next one in the list.

      (2) Else if the type-7 LSA is not contained in any explicitly
          configured type-7 address range, or it is and the type-7
          parent range's [address,mask] pair is the same as the
          [address,mask] pair of the type-7 LSA's network plus the
          type-7 parent range has no installed type-7 LSA offspring
          whose networks are strictly subsumed by its [address,mask]
          pair, then a type-5 LSA should be originated if

            o there currently is no type-5 LSA originated from this
              router corresponding to the type-7 LSA, or there is and

            o the path type or the metric in the corresponding type-5
              LSA is different from the type-7 LSA or

            o the forwarding address in the corresponding type-5 LSA is
              different from the type-7 LSA.

          The newly originated type-5 LSA will describe the same network
          and have the same network mask, metrics, forwarding address,
          external route tag and path type as the type-7 LSA. However,
          the advertising router field will be the router ID of this



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 16]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


          area border router. The link-state ID is equal to the LSA's
          network address (in the case of multiple installed type-7s
          with the same network address, the link-state ID can also have
          one or more of the range's "host" bits set).

      (3) Else the installed type-7 LSA must be aggregated by its
          containing type-7 parent range. The parent type-7 range's path
          type is always set to the highest path type of those installed
          type-7 LSAs which are its offspring. The metric for the type-7
          parent range is assigned as follows:

            o if the path type is external type 2, the type-7
              parent range's metric should be set to the largest
              type-7 metric + 1 of the its installed type-7
              offspring LSAs, including those with equal mask.

            o if the path type is external type 1, the type-7
              parent range's metric should be set to the largest
              metric of its installed type-7 offspring LSAs,
              including those with equal mask.

         A type-5 LSA is generated from the type-7 parent range
         provided

            o there currently is no type-5 LSA originated from this
              router corresponding to the type-7 parent range, or
              there is and

            o the path type or the metric in the corresponding
              type-5 LSA is different from the currently computed
              path type or metric of the type-7 parent range.

         The newly generated type-5 LSA will have link-state ID equal to
         the type-7 parent range's address (if necessary, the link-state
         ID can also have one or more of the range's "host" bits set),
         the network mask, external route tag will be set to the type-7
         parent range's configured values.  The advertising router field
         will be the router ID of this area border router.  The
         forwarding address will not be set.  The path type and metric
         are set to the type-7 parent range's path type and metric as
         defined above.

         Further processing of installed type-7 LSAs which are offspring
         of the type-7 parent range is suppressed. Thus at most a single
         type-5 LSA is made for each type-7 parent range with installed
         type-7 offspring LSAs which it strictly subsumes.

   For example, given a parent range of [10.0.0.0, 255.0.0.0] for an



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 17]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   area which has the following type-7 offspring routes:

                 10.1.0.0 path type 1, metric 10
                 10.2.0.0 path type 1, metric 11
                 10.3.0.0 path type 2, metric 5

   a type-5 LSA will be generated with a path type of 2 and a metric 6.

   Given a parent range of [10.0.0.0, 255.0.0.0] for an area which has
   the following type-7 offspring routes:

                 10.1.0.0 path type 1, metric 10
                 10.2.0.0 path type 1, metric 11
                 10.3.0.0 path type 1, metric 5

   a type-5 LSA will be generated with a path type of 1 and a metric 11.

   These type-7 range metric and path type rules will avoid routing
   loops in the event that path types 1 and 2 are both used within the
   area.

   As with all newly originated type-5 LSAs, a type-5 LSA that is the
   result of a type-7 to type-5 translation (type-7 range or default
   case) is flooded to all attached type-5 capable areas.

   Like type-3 ranges, a type-7 range performs the dual function of
   setting propagation policy via its Advertise/DoNotAdvertise parameter
   and aggregation via its network address and mask pair. Unlike type-3
   summary links, type-5 translation may result in more efficient
   routing when the forwarding address is set, as is done during step
   (2) of the translation procedure.

   Another important feature of this translation process is that it
   allows a parent type-7 range to apply different properties
   (aggregation, forwarding address, and Advertise/DoNotAdvertise
   status) for its offspring routes from those assigned to its
   descendant routes by type-7 ranges it subsumes.

4.3 Flushing Translated Type-7 LSAs

   If an NSSA border router has translated an installed type-7 LSA into
   a type-5 LSA which should no longer be translated, the type-5 LSA
   should be flushed, i.e. set to MaxAge and flooded (See Section 4.2
   Step (2)).  Similarly, if an NSSA border router has advertised a
   type-7 address range which no longer needs advertising, its
   appropriate type-5 LSA should also be flushed. (See Section 4.2 Step
   (3)).




Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 18]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   If an NSSA border router is translating type-7 LSA's into type-5
   LSA's with

                NSSATranslatorState = elected

   and the NSSA border router has determined that its translator
   election status has been deposed by another NSSA border router, then,
   as soon as the TranslatorStabilityInterval has expired without the
   router reelecting itself as a translator, type-5 LSAs generated by
   translating type-7 address ranges are flushed.   Conversely Type-5
   LSAs generated by translating type-7 LSAs are not immediately
   flushed, but are allowed to remain in the OSPF routing domain as if
   the border router's translator state was still elected.  This
   minimizes the impact on translators which are flapping in and out of
   elected translator status and minimizes the attendant flooding of
   translated type-5 LSAs.

5.0 Security Considerations

   There are two types of issues that need be addressed when looking at
   protecting routing protocols from misconfigurations and malicious
   attacks. The first is authentication and certification of routing
   protocol information.  The second is denial of service attacks
   resulting from repetitive origination of the same router
   advertisement or origination of a large number of distinct
   advertisements resulting in database overflow. Note that both of
   these concerns exist independently of a router's support for the NSSA
   option.

   The OSPF protocol addresses authentication concerns by authenticating
   OSPF protocol exchanges.  OSPF supports multiple types of
   authentication; the type of authentication in use can be configured
   on a per network segment basis.  One of OSPF's authentication types,
   namely the Cryptographic authentication option, is believed to be
   secure against passive attacks and provides significant protection
   against active attacks.  When using the Cryptographic authentication
   option, each router appends a "message digest" to its transmitted
   OSPF packets.  Receivers then use the shared secret key and the
   received digest to verify that each received OSPF packet is
   authentic.

   The quality of the security provided by the Cryptographic
   authentication option depends completely on the strength of the
   message digest algorithm (MD5 is currently the only message digest
   algorithm specified), the strength of the key being used, and the
   correct implementation of the security mechanism in all communicating
   OSPF implementations.  It also requires that all parties maintain the
   secrecy of the shared secret key.  None of the standard OSPF



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 19]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   authentication types provide confidentiality.  Nor do they protect
   against traffic analysis.  For more information on the standard OSPF
   security mechanisms, see Sections 8.1, 8.2, and Appendix D of [OSPF].

   [DIGI] describes the extensions to OSPF required to add digital
   signature authentication to Link State data and to provide a
   certification mechanism for router data.  [DIGI] also describes the
   added LSA processing and key management as well as a method for
   migration from or co-existence with standard OSPF V2.

   Repetitive origination of advertisements are addressed by OSPF by
   mandating a limit on the frequency that new instances of any
   particular LSA can be originated and accepted during the flooding
   procedure.  The frequency at which new LSA instances may be
   originated is set to once every MinLSInterval seconds, whose value is
   5 seconds (see Section 12.4 of [OSPF]).  The frequency at which new
   LSA instances are accepted during flooding is once every MinLSArrival
   seconds, whose value is set to 1 (see Section 13, Appendix B and G.5
   of [OSPF]).

   Proper operation of the OSPF protocol requires that all OSPF routers
   maintain an identical copy of the OSPF link state database.  However,
   when the size of the link state database becomes very large, some
   routers may be unable to keep the entire database due to resource
   shortages; this is termed "database overflow".  When database
   overflow is anticipated, the routers with limited resources can be
   accommodated by configuring OSPF stub areas and NSSAs.  [OVERFLOW]
   details a way of gracefully handling unanticipated database
   overflows.






















Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 20]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


6.0 Acknowledgments

   This document was produced by the OSPF Working Group, chaired by John
   Moy.

   In addition, the comments of the following individuals are also
   acknowledged:

                  Phani Jajjarvarpu  cisco
                  Dino Farinacci     cisco
                  Jeff Honig         Cornell University
                  Acee Lindem        IBM
                  John Moy           Sycamore Networks, Inc.
                  Doug Williams      IBM

7.0 References

   [DIGI] S. Murphy, M. Badger, B. Wellington, "OSPF with Digital
      Signatures", RFC 2154, Trusted Information Systems, June 1997.

   [MUEX] Moy, J., "Multicast Extensions to OSPF", RFC 1584, Proteon,
      Inc., March 1994.

   [OSPF] Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, Cascade Communications
      Corp., April 1998.

   [OPAQUE] Coltun, Rob, "The OSPF Opaque LSA Option", RFC 2370, FORE
      Systems, July 1998.

   [OVERFLOW] Moy, J., "OSPF Database Overflow", RFC 1765, Cascade,
      March 1995.




















Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 21]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


8.0 Authors' Addresses

      This update uses much of the original text from RFC 1587 authored by

      Rob Coltun
      Fore Systems
      1595 Sprint Hill Road,
      5th Floor
      Vienna, VA 22182

      Phone: (703) 245-4543
      EMail: rcoltun@fore.com


      Vince Fuller
      GTE Internetworking
      3801 East Bayshore Road
      Palo Alto, California 94303

      Phone: (415) 528-7227
      EMail: vaf@BBNPlanet.com


      New sections, edits and revisions have been added by

      Pat Murphy
      US Geological Survey
      345 Middlefield Road
      Menlo Park, California 94560

      Phone: (415) 329-4044
      EMail: pmurphy@noc.doi.net



















Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 22]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Appendix A: Type-7 LSA Packet Format

          0                                32
          -----------------------------------
          |                | OPTS   |   7   |
          |                ------------------
          |        Link-State Header        |
          |                                 |
          -----------------------------------
          | Network Mask                    |
          -----------------------------------  ______
          |E| TOS  |        metric          |  .
          -----------------------------------  .  repeated for each TOS
          | Forwarding Address              |  .
          -----------------------------------  .
          | External Route Tag              |  ______
          -----------------------------------

   The definitions of the link-state ID, network mask, metrics and
   external route tag are the same as the definitions for the type-5
   LSAs (see A.4.5 in the OSPF specification) except for the forwarding
   address. If the network between the NSSA AS boundary router and the
   adjacent AS is advertised into OSPF as an internal OSPF route, the
   forwarding address should be the next hop address, but if the
   intervening network is not advertised into OSPF as an internal OSPF
   route, the forwarding address should be any one of the router's
   active OSPF interface addresses (see Section 3.3).
























Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 23]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Appendix B: The Options Field

   The OSPF options field is present in OSPF Hello packets, Database
   Description packets and all link state advertisements.  See appendix
   A.2 in [OSPF] and [OPAQUE] for a description of the options field.
   Six bits are assigned but only two (the E-bit and the N/P bit) are
   described completely in this section.

                   --------------------------------------
                   | * | O | DC | EA | N/P | MC | E | * |
                   --------------------------------------

                       The Type-7 LSA options field

      E-bit:  Type-5 AS external LSAs are not flooded into/through OSPF
              stub areas and NSSAs. The E-bit ensures that all members
              of a stub area agree on that area configuration.  The E-
              bit is meaningful only in OSPF Hello and Database
              Description packets.  When the E-bit is clear in the Hello
              packet sent out a particular interface, it means that the
              router will neither send nor receive type-5 AS external
              LSAs on that interface (in other words, the interface
              connects to a stub area or NSSA).  Two routers will not
              become neighbors unless they agree on the state of the E-
              bit.

      N-bit:  The N-bit describes the router's NSSA capability.  The N-
              bit is used only in Hello packets and ensures that all
              members of an NSSA agree on that area's configuration.
              When the N-bit is set in the Hello packet and sent out a
              particular interface, it means that the router will send
              and receive type-7 LSAs on that interface.  Two routers
              will not form an adjacency unless they agree on the state
              of the N-bit.  If the N-bit is set in the options field,
              the E-bit must be clear.

      P-bit:  The P-bit is used only in the type-7 LSA header. It flags
              the NSSA border router to translate the type-7 LSA into a
              type-5 LSA. The default setting for the P-bit is clear.












Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 24]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Appendix C: Router-LSAs

   Router-LSAs are the Type-1 LSAs.  Each router in an area originates a
   router-LSA. The LSA describes the state and cost of the router's
   links (i.e., interfaces) to the area. All of the router's links to
   the area must be described in a single router-LSA. For details
   concerning the construction of router-LSAs, see the OSPF
   Specification, Section 12.4.1.

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |            LS age             |     Options   |       1       |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                        Link State ID                          |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                     Advertising Router                        |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                     LS sequence number                        |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |         LS checksum           |             length            |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |  0  Nt|W|V|E|B|        0      |            # links            |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                          Link ID                              |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                         Link Data                             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |     Type      |     # TOS     |        TOS 0 metric           |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |      TOS      |        0      |            metric             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                              ...                              |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |      TOS      |        0      |            metric             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                          Link ID                              |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                         Link Data                             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                              ...                              |

   In router-LSAs, the Link State ID field is set to the router's OSPF
   Router ID.  The T-bit is set in the LSA's Option field if and only if
   the router is able to calculate a separate set of routes for each IP
   TOS.  Router-LSAs are flooded throughout a single area only.





Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 25]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


      bit V
          When set, the router is an endpoint of one or more fully
          adjacent virtual links having the described area as Transit
          area (V is for virtual link endpoint).

      bit E
          When set, the router is an AS boundary router (E is for
          external). ALL NSSA border routers must set bit E in the
          router-LSAs to directly attached transit areas and NSSAs. (See
          Section 4.1 for details).

      bit B
          When set, the router is an area border router (B is for
          border).

      bit W
          When set, the router is a wild-card multicast receiver (W is
          for wild).

      bit Nt
          When set, the router is an NSSA border router which is
          unconditionally translating type-7 LSAs into type-5 LSAs (Nt
          is for NSSA translation). Note that such routers have their
          NSSATranslatorRole area configuration parameter set to Always
          (See Appendix D and Section 4.1).

   The remainder of the router links specification is as defined in the
   OSPF Specification, Section A.4.2.























Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 26]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Appendix D:  Configuration Parameters

   Appendix C.2 in the OSPF specification lists the area configuration
   parameters.  The area ID and the list of address ranges for type-3
   summary routes remain unchanged.  Section 3.2 of this document lists
   the configuration parameters for type-7 address ranges.  The
   following area configuration parameters have been added:

      NSSATranslatorRole

         Specifies whether or not the router will unconditionally
         translate type-7 LSAs to type-5 LSAs when acting as an NSSA
         border router. When set to Always, type-7 LSAs are always
         translated regardless of the translator state of other NSSA
         border routers. When set to Candidate and acting as an NSSA
         border router, it participates in the translator election
         process described in Section 4.1. The default setting is
         Candidate.

      TranslatorStabilityInterval

         Defines the length of time an elected type-7 translator will
         continue to perform its translator duties once it has
         determined that translator status has been deposed by another
         NSSA border router translator as described in Section 4.1 and
         4.3. The default setting is 40 seconds.

      ImportSummaries

         When set to enabled, type-3 summary LSAs are imported into the
         NSSA. When set to disabled, type-3 summary LSAs are not
         imported into the NSSA. The default setting is enabled.

   Implementations must provide a vehicle for setting the P-bit of
   external routes imported into the NSSA as type-7 LSAs. Without
   configuration, the default setting of the P-bit is clear (see Section
   3.3 and Appendix B).

   For NSSAs the ExternalRoutingCapability area configuration parameter
   must be set to accept type-7 external routes.  Additionally there
   must be a way of configuring an NSSA border router to advertise a
   default route into the NSSA with configurable metric type (1 or 2)
   and cost.








Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 27]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Appendix E: The P-bit Policy Paradox.

   Type-7 LSAs with the P-bit clear may be installed in the OSPF routing
   table of NSSA border routers (see Section 3.5).  These LSAs are not
   propagated throughout the OSPF domain as translated type-5 LSAs (see
   Section 4.2). Thus traffic which is external to an NSSA and which
   passes through one of the NSSA's border routers may be hijacked into
   the NSSA by a route installed from the processing of a type-7 LSA
   with the P-bit clear.  This may be contrary to the expected path at
   the source of the traffic.  It may also violate the routing policy
   intended by the type-7 LSA's clear P-bit.  Depending on how strongly
   the NSSA enforces its clear P-bit policy, packet forwarding success
   is unpredictable.

   This paradox is best illustrated by the following example.  Consider
   an OSPF domain (AS 1842) with connections for default Internet
   routing and to the external AS 4156.  OSPF 1842 NSSA 1 and OSPF Area
   2 are partially defined in the following diagram:


                        AS 4156
                          |
      Area 2              |
                          |
        A2                A0   Area 0      C0-----Internet Default
        |                 |                |
        |                 |                |
        |                 |                |
        +-----------------B0---------------+
                          /\
                         /  \
                        /    \
   Internet------------A1    B1------AS 4156 (P-bit clear)
   Default (P-bit clear)

                        NSSA 1

   Here A0, B0, and C0 are Area 0 routers, A1 and B1 are NSSA 1 routers,
   and A2 is an Area 2 router.  B0 is a border router for both NSSA 1
   and Area 2.

   NSSA 1 would like its routes for AS 4156 installed on B0 so that the
   NSSA 1 tree below A1 can take advantage of it.  If access through
   NSSA 1 is protected by a policy filter, then neither the area 2
   subtree below router A2 or the entire AS 1842 subtree behind C0 can
   see AS 4156 over the expected path through A0.

   Moreover, should NSSA 1's Internet default through A1 be installed on



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 28]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


   B0, then source based outgoing ISP filters block A2's Internet bound
   traffic in addition to limits placed by NSSA 1's policy filters.
   Section 3.5 handles this obvious shortcoming by not installing any
   type-7 default route with a clear P-bit on any NSSA border router.

   All implementations should support some form of OSPF NSSA type-7
   route filtering at the borders.  The setting of the type-7 address
   range status to either Advertise or DoNotAdvertise is manually
   configurable as discussed in Section 3.3.  Defining a type-7 address
   range with DoNotAdvertise status will allow the routing table
   installation of a default type-7 LSA with the P-bit set without
   translation and propagation (see Section 4.2).  Note that these basic
   tools are limited in scope and do not provide a complete solution to
   this paradox.





































Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 29]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


Appendix F: Differences from RFC 1587

   This section documents the differences between this memo and RFC
   1587.  All differences are backward-compatible.  Implementations of
   this memo and of RFC 1587 will interoperate.

   F.1 Enhancements to OSPF summary LSAs.                      .

       The flooding of backbone summary LSAs (type-3 LSAs) into the NSSA
       is now optional.  In RFC 1587 the flooding of backbone summary
       LSAs was mandated in order to guarantee inter-area routes are
       preferred over external routes. The current recommended default
       behavior is to flood summary LSAs. When summary routes are not
       imported, a type-3 summary default route (as opposed to type-7)
       is originated into the NSSA by its border routers.

       See Sections 2.2 and 3.4 for details.

   F.2 Changes to type-7 LSAs.

       The setting of the forwarding address in Type-7 LSAs has been
       further refined.

       See Section 3.3 for details.

   F.3 Changes to the type-7 AS external routing calculation.

       The type-7 external route calculation has been revised.  Most
       notably:

          o The path preference defined in OSPF Section 16.4.1 has been
            included.

          o A type-7 default route with the P-bit clear will not be
            installed on an NSSA border router.  This protects the
            default routing of other OSPF Areas.  (See Appendix E.)

       See Section 3.5 for details.

   F.4 Changes to translating type-7 LSAs into type-5 LSAs

       The translator election algorithm of RFC 1587 has been updated to
       close a bug which results when the translator with the highest
       router ID loses connectivity to the AS's transit topology.  The
       default translator election process occurs only in the absence of
       a translator amongst the reachable NSSA border router set.

       NSSA border routers which perform the translation are now



Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 30]


Internet Draft              OSPF NSSA Option                October 1999


       optionally configurable, with more than one allowed.  This allows
       the network designer to choose the most cost effective intra-AS
       route for NSSA type-7 aggregates propagated into the AS.
       Furthermore, since different NSSA border routers may install
       different sets of type-7 LSA routes, the cost effectiveness of
       non-aggregated type-7 propagation may also be maximized.

       All installed type-7 LSA's plus those originated by the NSSA
       border router are processed for translation.  This allows the
       NSSA border router to propagate and/or aggregate locally
       originated type-7s utilizing the type-5 translation process.
       NSSA RFC 1587 required locally originated type-7 LSAs be paired
       with locally originated type-5 LSAs for the external path to be
       seen by the AS (Note that locally originated type-7s are skipped
       during the external route calculation).

       The translation process has been strengthened to close some of
       the weak points of RFC 1587.

       See Sections 4.1 and 4.2 for details.

   F.5 Changes to flushing translated type-7 LSAs

       An NSSA border router, which was elected by the augmented RFC
       1587 translator selection process defined in Section 4.1 and has
       been deposed from translation duties by another NSSA border
       router, flushes from the AS type-5 LSAs that resulted from the
       aggregation of translated type-7 LSAs.  This prevents these
       obsolete translations from short circuiting the preferred path
       through the new translator(s) during the MaxAge cycle. A deposed
       translator continues to perform its flushing duties on the non-
       aggregated translated type-7s until they age out normally. This
       minimizes the amount of flushing required during the translation
       ascension cycle.

       See Section 4.3 for details.

   F.6 P-bit additions

       The P-bit default has been defined as clear. RFC 1587 had no
       default setting. See Appendix C.

       A discussion on the packet forwarding impact of installing type-7
       LSAs with the P-bit clear on NSSA border routers has been added
       as Appendix E.






Coltun, Fuller, Murphy                                         [Page 31]
