


Network Working Group                                            C. Vogt
Internet-Draft                               Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
Expires: April 27, 2006                                         J. Arkko
                                            Ericsson Research NomadicLab
                                                        October 24, 2005


      A Taxonomy and Analysis of Enhancements to Mobile IPv6 Route
                              Optimization
               draft-irtf-mobopts-ro-enhancements-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 27, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document describes and evaluates strategies to enhance Mobile
   IPv6 Route Optimization, on the basis of existing proposals, in order
   to motivate and guide further research in this context.






Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1  A Note on Public Key Infrastructures . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2  A Note on Source Address Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.   Objectives for Route Optimization Enhancement  . . . . . . .   7
     3.1  Latency Optimizations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2  Security Enhancements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.3  Signaling Optimizations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.4  Robustness Enhancements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.   Enhancements Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.1  IP-Address Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.2  Protected Tunnels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.3  Optimistic Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.4  Proactive IP-Address Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.5  Concurrent IP-Address Tests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     4.6  Diverted Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.7  Credit-Based Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.8  Heuristic Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     4.9  Crypto-Based Idendifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     4.10   Pre-Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     4.11   Opportunistic Security Associations  . . . . . . . . . .  23
     4.12   Prefix-Based Certificates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     4.13   Mobile and Correspondent Routers . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   5.   Discussion and Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     5.1  Research at Other Protocol Layers  . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     5.2  Further Route Optimization Research  . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     5.3  Experimentation and Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   6.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   7.   Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   8.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  37

















Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


1.  Introduction

   RFC 3775 [39] specifies mobility support for IPv6, or Mobile IPv6,
   which allows mobile nodes to migrate active transport connections and
   application sessions from one IPv6 address to another.  For backward
   compatibility with correspondent nodes that do not implement the
   recommended mobility extensions, RFC 3775 introduces a "home agent",
   which proxies a mobile node at a permanent "home address".  A roaming
   mobile node connects to the home agent through a bidirectional tunnel
   and can so communicate, from its local "care-of address", as if it
   was present at the home address.  The mobile node keeps the home
   agent updated on its current care-of address.  Signaling messages are
   protected through IPsec.

   In order to reduce the increased packet-propagation delays of
   bidirectional tunneling, RFC 3775 defines Route Optimization.  This
   enables nodes to communicate on the direct path provided that the
   correspondent node can cache a binding between the mobile node's home
   address and current care-of address.  The challenge with Route
   Optimization is that an administrative relationship between the
   mobile node and the correspondent node can generally not be
   presupposed.  So how can the two authenticate and authorize the
   signaling messages that they exchange?

   Mobile IPv6 solves this problem by verifying a routing property of
   the mobile node.  Specifically, the mobile node is checked to be
   reachable at its home address and current care-of address.  This is
   called the "return-routability procedure".  It takes place right
   before a mobile node registers a new care-of address with a
   correspondent node and is periodically repeated in case the mobile
   node does not move for a while.

   The advantage of the return-routability procedure is that it is
   lightweight and does not require pre-shared authentication material.
   It also requires no state at the correspondent node.  On the other
   hand, the two reachability tests can lead to a handoff delay
   unacceptable for many real-time or interactive applications like
   voice over IP (VoIP) and video conferencing.  Also, the security that
   the return-routability procedure guarantees might not be sufficient
   for security-sensitive applications.  And finally, periodically
   refreshing a registration at a correspondent node implies a hidden
   signaling overhead that may prevent mobile nodes from hibernation
   during times of inactivity.

   Accordingly, a willingness to enhance Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization
   can be observed.  This document describes and evaluates different
   route-optimization enhancement strategies on the basis of existing
   proposals.  It is meant to provide a conceptual framework for further



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   work, which was found to be inevitable in the context of Route
   Optimization.  Many scientists volunteered to review this document.
   Their names are duely recorded in Section 2.  Section 3 analyzes the
   strengthes and weaknesses of Route Optimization and identifies
   potential objectives for enhancement.  Different enhancement
   strategies are discussed, based on existing proposals, in Section 4.
   Section 5 discusses the different approaches and identifies
   opportunities for further research.  Section 6 and Section 7 conclude
   the document.

1.1  A Note on Public Key Infrastructures

   Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization verifies a mobile node's authenticity
   through a routing property.  An alternative is cryptographic
   authentication, which requires a binding between a node's identity
   and some sort of secret information.  While some proposals suggest to
   install shared secrets into end nodes when possible (cf.
   Section 4.10), pre-configuration is not an option for general
   Internet use for scalability reasons.  Authentication based on a
   public-key infrastructure (PKI) does not require pair-wise pre-
   configuration.  Here, the secret information is the private component
   of a public/private key pair, and the binding between a node's
   identity and private key exists indirectly through the cryptographic
   properties of public/private key pairs and a binding between the
   identity and the public key.  An authority trusted by both end nodes
   issues a certificate which effects this latter binding.

   Large-scale use of a PKI, however, was considered insuitable for
   mobility management due to the following reasons.

   o  There are differing opinions on whether a PKI could scale up to
      hundreds of millions of mobile nodes.  Some people argue they do,
      as there are already examples of certification authorities
      responsible for millions of certificates.  But more important than
      the expected increase in the number of certificates would be a
      shift in application patterns.  Nowadays, public-key cryptography
      is used only for those applications that require strong,
      cryptographic authentication.  If it was used for mobility
      management as well, certificate checks would become mandatory for
      any type of application, leading to more checks per user.  Busy
      servers with mobility support might not be reluctant to spent the
      processing resources required for this depending on the service
      they provide.

   o  Revoked certificates are identified on Certificate Revocation
      Lists (CRLs), which correspondent nodes with mobility support
      would have to acquire from certification authorities.  CRLs must
      be kept up to date, requiring periodic downloads.  This and the



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


      act of checking a certificate against a CRL create overhead which
      some correspondent nodes might be unwilling to spend.

   o  Certificate verification may take some time and hence interrupt
      ongoing applications.  This can be disturbing from the user's
      perspective, especially when Route Optimization starts in the
      middle of a session, or the session is very short-term anyway.

   o  The bigger a PKI grows, the more attractive it becomes as an
      attack target, endangering the Internet as a whole.

   o  There is little experience with using home addresses as
      identifiers in the certificates.  Although the home address could
      theoretically be placed into a certificate's Alternate Name field,
      the entities responsible for IP-address assignment and
      certification are usually not the same, and it may not be easy to
      coordinate the two.


   For these reasons, this document does not consider direct
   authentication of mobile nodes based on a PKI.  Nevertheless, it does
   evaluate certificate-based techniques which make the problems
   identified above more tractable (cf. Section 4.12).

1.2  A Note on Source Address Filtering

   RFC 3775 uses care-of-address tests to probe a mobile node's presence
   at its claimed location.  Alternatively, verification of care-of
   addresses may be based on infrastructure in the mobile node's local
   access network.  For instance, the infrastructure can verify that the
   IP source addresses of all packets leaving the network are correct.
   "Ingress filtering" [49][47] provides this feature to the extent that
   it inspects the prefix of IP source addresses and ensures topological
   correctness.  Network-access providers who use ingress filtering
   normally deploy the technique in their first-hop and site-exit
   routers.  Similarly, ISPs may filter packets originating from a
   downstream network.

   Ingress filtering may eventually provide a way to replace care-of-
   address tests.  But there are still a number of uncertainties today:

   o  By definition, ingress filtering can prevent source-address
      spoofing only from those networks that do deploy the technique.
      As a consequence, ingress filtering needs to be widely, preferably
      universally, deployed in order to constitute Internet-wide
      protection.  As long as an attacker can get network access without
      filters, all Internet nodes remain vulnerable.




Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   o  There is little incentive for ISPs to deploy ingress filtering
      other than conscientiousness.  Legal or regulatory prescription as
      well as financial motivation does not exist.  A corrupt ISP might
      even have a financial incentive to not deploy the technique, if
      redirection-based DoS attacks using Route Optimization ever become
      possible and are exploited for financial gain.  A similar issue
      was, e.g., observed with email spam.

   o  Ingress filtering is most effective, and easiest to configure, at
      the first-hop router.  However, since only prefixes are checked,
      the filters inevitably get less precise the further upstream they
      are enforced.  This issue is inherent in the technique, so the
      best solution is checking packets as close to the originating
      nodes as possible, preferably in the first-hop routers themselves.

   o  A popular implementation of ingress filtering is "Reverse Path
      Forwarding" (RPF).  This technique relies on routes to be
      symmetric, which is oftentimes the case between edge networks and
      ISPs, but far less often between peering ISPs.  Alternatives to
      RPF are either manual configured access lists, or dynamic
      approaches which are more relaxed, and thereby less secure, than
      RPF [47].

   o  Another problem with ingress filtering is multi-homing.  When a
      router attempts to forward to one ISP a packet with a source-
      address prefix from another ISP, filters at the second ISP would
      block the packet.  The IETF seeks to find a way around this [38].
      For instance, one could tunnel the packet to the topologically
      correct ISP, or one could allow source-address changes by means of
      a locator-identifier split [23].

   o  Finally, RFC 3775 defines an Alternative Care-of Address option
      that mobile nodes can use to carry a care-of address within a BU
      outside of the IPv6 header.  Such an address is not subject to
      inspection by ingress filtering and would have to be verified
      through other means [6].

   Although these problems are expected to get solved eventually, there
   is currently little knowledge on how applicable and deployable, as a
   candidate for care-of-address verification, ingress filtering will
   be.  High investments or administrative hurdles could prevent a
   large, preferably universal deployment of ingress filtering, which
   would hinder Internet-wide protection, as mentioned in the first
   bullet.  For these reasons, this document does not consider ingress
   filtering as a viable alternative to care-of-address tests, although
   things may be different in the future.





Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


2.  Acknowledgements

   This document was thoroughly reviewed, in alphabetical order, by
   Samita Chakrabarti, Francis Dupont, Thierry Ernst, Gerardo Giaretta,
   James Kempf, Rajeev Koodli, Gabriel Montenegro, Vidya Narayanan, and
   Fan Zhao.  The authors wish to thank these folks for their valuable
   comments and suggestions.

3.  Objectives for Route Optimization Enhancement

   Endeavors to enhance RFC 3775 Route Optimization generally strive for
   reduced signaling latency, higher security, lower signaling overhead,
   or increased protocol robustness.  These objectives are herein
   discussed from a requirements perspective; the technical means to
   reach the objectives is not considered, nor is the feasibility of
   achieving them.

3.1  Latency Optimizations

   One important objective for improvement is the handoff latency of
   Route Optimization.  In fact, it may take up to 3.5 round trips after
   handoff until a correspondent node knows the mobile node's new
   care-of address, assuming that the home-address test dominates the
   care-of-address test in terms of latency:  one round trip for the
   home registration, one round trip between the mobile node and the
   home agent plus another round trip between the home agent and the
   correspondent node for the home-address test, and a one-way time from
   the mobile node to the correspondent node for the propagation of the
   Binding Update message.  When the care-of-address test takes longer
   the home-address test, updating the correspondent node consumes 2.5
   round trips accordingly.  In both cases, the first packet sent to the
   new care-of address requires an additional one-way time to propagate
   from the correspondent node to the mobile node.  The total handoff
   delay visible at the mobile node's side is hence either four or three
   round-trip times.  The mobile node can resume communications right
   after it has dispatched the Binding Update message.  But if the
   mobile node requests a Binding Acknowledgement message,
   communications are usually delayed until this is received.

   These delays may cause perceptible quality degradations for
   interactive and real-time applications such as voice over IP.  TCP
   bulk-data transfers are likewise affected since long handoff
   latencies may lead to successive retransmission timeouts and so cause
   detrimental throughput degradations.  Handoff latencies are usually
   additive; they are not subsumed by other delays at IP layer or link
   layer.

   Note that the delay for the return-routability procedure is sometimes



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   approximated as 1.5 round-trip times.  This simple estimation does
   not reflect situations in which the home agent is either far away
   from the communicating peers, or on the path between them.

3.2  Security Enhancements

   The return-routability procedure was designed with the objective to
   provide a level of security which compares to that of today's non-
   mobile Internet.  This is reasonable given that the Internet as a
   whole cannot become any safer than the non-mobile Internet.

   E.g., the return-routability procedure prevents impersonation attacks
   unless the attacker is on the path between its victim and the
   victim's correspondent node.  An impersonator in such a position can
   spoof a Home Test Init message on behalf of the victim and eavesdrop
   on the returning Home Test message.  This enables the attacker to
   send the victim's peer a Care-of Test Init message with a care-of
   address through which it is itself reachable.  The attacker thus
   learns the tokens necessary to generate an authenticated Binding
   Update message on behalf of the victim.

   Similarly, the return-routability procedure protects against
   redirection-based flooding attacks unless the attacker is already on
   the path between the victim and the correspondent node.  Such an
   attacker can launch a flooding attack already without the help of
   Mobile IPv6, through establishment of upper-layer connections on
   behalf of the victim.  For instance, an on-path attacker can use its
   victim's IP address for a TCP handshake and thus cause a large file
   download from an FTP server to the victim.

   A related issue is location privacy.  RFC 3775 fails to conceal a
   mobile node's current position as route-optimized packets always
   carry both home and care-of addresses.  Both the correspondent node
   and a third party can therefore track the mobile node's whereabouts.
   A workaround is to fall back to bidirectional tunneling where
   location privacy is needed.  Packets carrying the mobile node's
   care-of address are thus only transferred between the mobile node and
   the home agent, where they can be encrypted through IPsec ESP
   [36][14].  But even then should the mobile node periodically re-
   establish its IPsec security associations so as to become untrackable
   through its SPIs.  Early efforts on location privacy in Route
   Optimization include [11][5][26][27].

   Applications that require a security level higher than the return-
   routability procedure can provide are generally advised to use end-
   to-end protection such as IPsec or TLS.  But even then are they
   vulnerable to denial of service.  Better Route Optimization security
   may thus become necessary, in particular if future technological



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   improvements mitigate some of the existing mobility-unrelated
   vulnerabilities.  E.g., Secure Neighbor Discovery [24] solves
   existing address-ownership problems.

3.3  Signaling Optimizations

   Correspondent registrations have a maximum lifetime of seven minutes
   and must be refreshed in case they are not updated to a different
   care-of address in the meantime.  The reason for this is to
   reasonably reduce the window of vulnerability to time- and space-
   shift attacks, where an attacker eavesdrops on unencrypted
   authentication material exchanged during the return-routability
   procedure and launches an impersonation attack at a later time and
   from a different, probably more amenable location.  Periodic re-
   registrations limit the likelihood and feasibility of such off-path
   attacks, since the attacker would have to get back on path whenever
   the authentication material is due to be refreshed.

   A calculation in [2] shows that the seven-minute refreshment interval
   implies a signaling overhead of 7.16 bits per second when a mobile
   node communicates with a stationary node.  The overhead doubles if
   both peers are mobile.  On one hand, this signaling overhead is
   certainly negligible when the nodes actually communicate.  On the
   other hand, it may cause problems for mobile nodes that are inactive
   and stay at the same location for a while, but still want to have
   Route Optimization ready with some correspondent node.  These nodes
   typically prefer to go to standby mode to conserve battery power.
   Finally, the periodic refreshments consume a fraction of the wireless
   bandwidth that one could use more efficiently.  This shows that an
   optimization for reduced signaling would be benefical and could have
   an impact on the deployment of Mobile IPv6.

3.4  Robustness Enhancements

   Route Optimization has the potential to enable mobile and
   correspondent nodes to continue communication during periods when the
   home agent is temporarily unavailable.  The protocol defined in RFC
   3775 does not achieve this independence from the home agent, however,
   as the home agent plays an active role in the return-routability
   procedure.  Besides, the lifetime of a correspondent registration
   must be no longer than the lifetime of the corresponding home
   registration, which means that the home registration must hence be
   successfully accomplished before a Binding Update message can be sent
   to a correspondent node.  Appropriate changes or modifications to
   these rules would allow for higher independence of the home agent,
   and thus enable robust Route Optimization even in the temporary
   absence of the home agent.




Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


4.  Enhancements Toolbox

   A large body of effort has recently gone into improving Mobile IPv6
   Route Optimization.  Some of the proposed techniques are
   modifications to the return-routability procedure, while others
   replace the procedure by alternative mechanisms.  Some of them
   operate end-to-end, others extend the functionality of network
   entities.  It is important to mention that many enhancement
   techniques are insufficient or insecure when applied on their own,
   because the scope of each of them is usually limited to a certain
   sub-issue.  It is the combination of a set of techniques that makes
   an efficient and secure route-optimization mechanism possible.

   Common to all proposals is that they affect a trade-off between
   effectiveness on one hand, in terms of low latency, reduced
   signaling, or increased security, and economical deployability and
   wide applicability.  Standard Route Optimization as per RFC 3775 uses
   the return-routability procedure to avoid costly pre-configuration or
   new network entities.  So do variants with proactive behavior and
   concurrent reachability verification.  Crypto-Based Identifiers
   (CBIDs) allow for public-key authentication without a public-key
   infrastructure, hence constitute a more secure alternative to home-
   address tests.  This is most effective when combined with concurrent
   reachability verification.  Pre-configuration is another approach to
   avoid home address tests.  It does without computationally expensive
   public-key algorithms, but requires pair-wise set-ups.  Where
   suitable infrastructure is available, end nodes may delegate
   authentication and encryption tasks to trusted network entities,
   which in turn vouch for the end nodes.

4.1  IP-Address Tests

   RFC 3775 uses IP-address tests to ensure that a mobile node is live
   and on the path to a specific destination address:  The home-address
   test provides evidence that the mobile node owns the home address it
   wants to use; the care-of-address test serves to preventing flooding
   attacks related to spoofed care-of addresses.  The use of two IP-
   address tests requires four messages.  Both tests can be performed in
   parallel, so they can be completed in one round-trip time.  As
   specified in RFC 3775, IP-address tests can be stateless for the
   correspondent node, making their use in denial-of-service attacks
   harder.

   A home-address test can most efficiently be initiated by the mobile
   node itself, as the correspondent node can thus delay state creation
   until the mobile node has authenticated.  Yet, conceptually, either
   the mobile node or the correspondent node could start a care-of-
   address test.  RFC 3775 uses mobile-node-initiated IP-address tests,



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   whereas [8] proposes a way to have the correspondent node send the
   first message. [13] follows this latter approach as well.  The
   correspondent-node-driven approach has advantages when authentication
   is done through other means than a home-address test.  Since RFC 3775
   does use the home-address test for authentication, letting the mobile
   node initiate both IP-address test allows for more efficient
   parallelization.

   IP-address tests are a zero-configuration approach that is
   independent of ancillary infrastructure.  The subsequent disadvantage
   is that IP-address tests can only guarantee that a peer is on the
   path to the probed IP address, not that the peer truly owns this IP
   address.  On the other hand, the types of attacks that an on-path
   attacker can do with Route Optimization are the same that an on-path
   attacker can do without Route Optimization anyway, so there is
   actually no significant new threat.

4.2  Protected Tunnels

   RFC 3775 protects part of the signaling communications between a
   mobile node and its home agent through an authorized and, optionally,
   encrypted tunnel.  This prevents other nodes on the path between the
   mobile node and the home agent---potentially eavesdroppers in the
   mobile node's wireless access network---from seeing a home-address
   test.

   Given the starting point that we cannot assume a pre-existing end-to-
   end security relationship between the mobile node and the
   correspondent node, this protection exists only for the mobile node's
   side.  In case the correspondent node is stationary, the path between
   the home agent and the correspondent node remains unprotected.  An
   attacker on that path can still perform attacks, but these attacks
   are similar to those that an on-path attacker can anyway do without
   Route Optimization.  So, as with IP-address tests, the intent here is
   not to introduce any significant new threat to the Internet.  The
   same is true in case the correspondent node is mobile.  It then has
   its own home agent, and it is the path between the two home agents
   that stays unprotected.

4.3  Optimistic Behavior

   Mobile nodes generally await a successful home registration before
   they initiate the correspondent registration.  In contrast to such
   "conservative" behavior, a more "optimistic" approach is to execute
   the home registration and the return-routability procedure in
   parallel [56].  Conservative behavior avoids a useless return-
   routability procedure in case the home registration fails.  This
   comes at the cost of an additional round-trip delay when the home



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   registration is successful.  Optimistic behavior requires one round-
   trip time of signaling time less, but the return-routability
   procedure will be in vain should the corresponding home registration
   fail.

   RFC 3775 does not permit mobile nodes to send a Binding Update
   message to a correspondent node before the Binding Acknowledgement
   message has returned from the home agent.  This is usually not a
   problem because the return-routability procedure is likely to take
   longer than the home registration anyway.  However, some
   optimizations (cf. Section 4.4) reduce the delay caused by the
   return-routability, in which case the restriction of RFC 3775 becomes
   more critical.  A useful improvement is here to allow Binding Update
   messages to correspondent nodes to be sent even before the home
   registration has been acknowledged.

   The drawback of the described optimistic behavior is that a dropped,
   re-ordered, or rejected BU can cause data packets to be dropped.
   Such packet loss would also have an effect on pessimistic signaling,
   however.  As a result, further experimentation and simulation may be
   needed to quantify to the effects of optimistic techniques under
   different conditions.

4.4  Proactive IP-Address Tests

   Let the post-movement time period during which a mobile node and
   correspondent node cannot fully communicate be the "critical phase".
   The critical phase spans a home registration and a correspondent
   registration including a return-routability procedure.  One technique
   to shorten the critical phase is to move some of these tasks to an
   earlier stage.  In particular, the home-address test can be done
   proactively before a handover, instead of doing it afterwards,
   without violating the base specification.  This is discussed in [31].

   A home keygen token is generally valid for 3.5 minutes.
   Consequently, the mobile node must initiate a proactive home-address
   test at least every 3.5 minutes if it seeks to have available a fresh
   home keygen token at all times.  This is especially helpful if the
   mobile node cannot foresee the next handover.  Alternatively, the
   mobile node may be able to receive a trigger from its local link
   layer indicating that a handover is imminent.  In this case, the
   mobile node may initiate the home-address test right in time instead
   of doing it periodically every 3.5 minutes.  Note, however, that the
   mobile node must re-initiate the correspondent registration anyway--
   and, thus, the home-address test--after the maximum binding lifetime
   of seven minutes.  Link-layer triggers can therefore save the mobile
   node at most every second home-address test.  The frequency of
   proactive home-address tests could be reduced by additional



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   techniques such as [2].

   Another optimization possibility is performing a care-of address test
   before the movement.  This is possible only if the mobile node is
   capable of attaching to two networks simultaneously.

4.5  Concurrent IP-Address Tests

   If one assumes that a mobile node can attach to only a single network
   at a time, executing the care-of-address test proactively before a
   handover is not an option.  However, one may authorize a mobile node
   to start using a new care-of address right after the handover,
   without doing the care-of-address test first, with the restriction
   that a care-of-address test be initiated rightaway.  The peers could
   then already exchange packets through the new care-of address while
   the test is being executed.  In recent literature, one refers to the
   care-of address as "unverified" when the correspondent node does not
   yet know the result of the concurrent care-of-address test, and one
   calls it "verified" thereafter.  The lifetime of the associated
   binding can be limited to a few seconds as long as the care-of
   address is unverified, and it can be extended once it becomes
   verified.

   It is important to understand that concurrency is legitimate only for
   care-of-address tests.  In contrast, home-address tests are done for
   mobile-node authentication, which must be done before any signaling
   messages are accepted.  Authentication guarantees that only the
   legitimate mobile node can create or update a binding pertaining to
   its home address.  However, both IP-address tests are in general
   simultaneously performed during the critical handover period, and one
   can expect the home-address test to have a longer latency than the
   care-of-address test.  The full benefit of eliminating the care-of-
   address tests from the critical handover period by means of
   concurrency can therefore only unfold if some other mechanism is used
   to move the home-address tests out of the critical handover period as
   well.  For instance, one can do the home-address tests proactively
   before a handover as suggested in Section 4.4, or one may use
   cryptographically generated home addresses as proposed further down
   in Section 4.9.  Figure 1 illustrates concurrent care-of-address
   tests as used in [31].











Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   Mobile                                              Correspondent
    Node                      Home Agent                    Node
      |                           |                           |
      |                           |                           |
      |--Home Test Init (HoTI)--->|-------------------------->|
      |                           |                           |
      |                           |                           |
      |<--------------------------|<---------Home Test (HoT)--|
      |                           |                           |
      |                                                       |
    ~~+~~ Handover                                            |
      |                                                       |
      |--Early Binding Update (EBU)-------------------------->|
      |<==========Resume Upper-Layer Communications==========>|
      |--Care-of Test Init (CoTI)---------------------------->|
      |                                                       |
      |                                                       |
      |<----------------------------Early Binding Ack (EBA)---|
      |<---------------------------------Care-of Test (CoT)---|
      |                                                       |
      |                                                       |
      |--Binding Update (BU)--------------------------------->|
      |                                                       |
      |                                                       |
      |<------------------------------------Binding Ack (BA)--|
      |                                                       |

                Figure 1: Concurrent Care-of Address Tests


   Concurrent care-of-address tests were first proposed in [31] where
   they were combined with proactive home-address tests.  In [31], as
   soon as the mobile node has configured a new care-of address after a
   handover, it sends to the correspondent node an Early Binding Update
   (EBU) message.  The mobile node signs the EBU with a message-
   authentication code keyed only with the home keygen token that the
   mobile node has previously retrieved through a proactive home-address
   test.  Upon reception of the EBU, the correspondent node creates a
   tentative binding for the new care-of address, which can then be used
   while the care-of-address test is being executed.  When the care-of-
   address is done, the mobile node sends a standard BU to the
   correspondent node, concluding the registration procedure.

   From the reception of an EBU to the reception of the corresponding
   standard BU, the correspondent node cannot be sure whether the mobile
   node is actually present at the claimed new care-of address.  A
   malicious node may misuse this property to redirect packets to a
   third party's IP address during this phase of uncertainty.  Under



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   many circumstances, this will not be acceptable even if the lifetime
   for an unverified care-of address is tentative only, and there needs
   to be external protection.  Techniques like those described in
   Section 4.7 or Section 4.8 can help.

4.6  Diverted Routing

   Given that the per-movement signaling takes some time, a mobile node
   can optionally request its traffic to be routed through its home
   address while this signaling is being completed.  The performance
   impact of this technique depends on the length of the critical phase
   as well as on the capacity and latency of the direct path and the
   path through the home agent.  With respect to the packets that the
   correspondent node sends, the following analysis can be made.

   The correspondent node does not know that the mobile node has moved
   until it has been told.  It continues to send packets to the mobile
   node's old care-of address until that time.  These packets are
   usually lost and must be retransmitted by upper-layer mechanisms.  In
   addition, even the request to delete or deactivate a binding requires
   some security-related signaling to prevent misuse by unauthorized
   nodes.  Zero packet loss can generally only be achieved through local
   repair techniques in the mobile node's access network, or if the
   mobile node can simultaneously attach to two IP networks.

   Once the correspondent node knows that the old care-of address is
   stale, it can send further packets to the home address.  If one
   assumes that the correspondent registration for the new care-of
   address involves messages through the home agent, it is obvious that
   at least some of these packets reach the mobile node before the new
   binding is set up.  After all, signaling and data packets travel the
   same path.

   It depends on the capacity and latency of the path through the home
   agent relative to the latency of the direct path for how long the
   correspondent node should continue to send packets to the home
   address.  If the former path has a high latency, it might be better
   to queue some of the packets until the correspondent registration is
   complete and packets can be directly sent to the mobile node.  One
   potential research direction is to look at whether the properties of
   the paths could be learned during the signaling and then used to
   decide the optimal time when the correspondent node should start
   queueing packets.

   The situation for the packets that the mobile node sends is similar:
   Although the mobile node knows immediately that it has moved, RFC
   3775 does not allow the mobile node to route-optimize packets from
   new care-of address until it has formally updated the correspondent



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   node about the new care-of address.  Of course, the mobile node may
   buffer packets until the correspondent registration is done so that
   no packets get lost.

   Diverted routing appeared originally in [31] and has since been used
   also in [9].

4.7  Credit-Based Authorization

   As described in Section 4.5, handover latency may be reduced by
   already using a new care-of address while the care-of-address test is
   in progress.  The prerequesite is that sufficient protection is
   provided against redirection-based third-party flooding.  One way of
   doing this is through Credit-Based Authorization.  Credit-Based
   Authorization for concurrent care-of-address tests prevents
   illegitimate packet redirection until the validity of the address has
   been established.  This is accomplished based on the following three
   hypotheses:

   1.  A flooding attacker typically seeks to somehow multiply the
       packets it generates itself for the purpose of its attack because
       bandwidth is an ample resource for many attractive victims.
   2.  An attacker can always cause unamplified flooding by sending
       packets to its victim directly.
   3.  Consequently, the additional effort required to set up a
       redirection-based flooding attack would pay off for the attacker
       only if amplification could be obtained this way.

   On this basis, rather than eliminating malicious packet redirection
   in the first place, Credit-Based Authorization prevents any
   amplification that can be reached through it.  This is accomplished
   by limiting the data a correspondent node can send to an unverified
   care-of address of a mobile node by the data recently received from
   that mobile node.  (See Section 4.5 for a definition on when a
   care-of address is verified and when it is unverified.)  Redirection-
   based flooding attacks thus become less attractive than, e.g., pure
   direct flooding, where the attacker itself sends bogus packets to the
   victim.

   Figure 2 illustrates Credit-Based Authorization:  The correspondent
   node measures the bytes received from the mobile node.  When the
   mobile node changes to a new care-of address, the correspondent node
   labels this address UNVERIFIED and sends packets there as long as the
   sum of the packet sizes does not exceed the measured, received data
   volume.  The mobile node's reachability at the new care-of address
   meanwhile gets verified.  When the care-of-address test completes
   with success, the correspondent node relabels the care-of address
   from UNVERIFIED to VERIFIED.  As of then, packets can be sent to the



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   new care-of address without restrictions.  When insufficient credit
   is left while the care-of address is still UNVERIFIED, the
   correspondent node stops sending further packets until address
   verification completes.

       +-------------+       +--------------------+
       | Mobile Node |       | Correspondent Node |
       +-------------+       +--------------------+
              |                        |
      address |----------------------->| credit += size(packet)
     verified |                        |
              |----------------------->| credit += size(packet)
              |<-----------------------| don't change credit
              |                        |
              + address change         |
      address |<-----------------------| credit -= size(packet)
   unverified |----------------------->| credit += size(packet)
              |<-----------------------| credit -= size(packet)
              |                        |
              |<-----------------------| credit -= size(packet)
              |                        X credit < size(packet) ==> drop!
              |                        |
              + address change         |
      address |                        |
     verified |<-----------------------| don't change credit
              |                        |

                   Figure 2: Credit-Based Authorization


   The correspondent node ensures that the mobile node's acquired credit
   gradually decrease over time.  Such "credit aging" prevents a
   malicious node from building up credit at a very slow speed and using
   this, all at once, for a severe burst of redirected packets.

   Allocating a mobile node's credit based on the packets that the
   mobile node sends and reducing the credit based on packets that the
   mobile node receives is defined as "CBA Inbound Mode".  (The
   correspondent node is in control of credit allocation, and it
   computes the credit based on inbound packets received from the mobile
   node.)  A nice property of CBA Inbound Mode is that it does not
   require support from the mobile node.  The mobile node neither needs
   to understand that CBA is effective at the correspondent node, nor
   does it have to have an idea of how much credit it currently has.

   With applications that send comparable data volumes into both
   directions, CBA Inbound Mode works fine.  On the other hand, in
   Inbound Mode, CBA may prevent the mobile node from collecting the



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   amount of credit it needs for a handover when applications with
   asymmetric traffic patterns are in use.  For instance, file transfers
   and media streaming are characterized by high throughput towards the
   client, typically the mobile node, and comparably little throughput
   towards the serving correspondent node.  To better accommodate such
   applications, "CBA Outbound Mode" was designed.

   With CBA Outbound Mode, credit allocation is based on packets that
   the mobile node receives from the correspondent node rather than on
   packets that the mobile node sends.  New credit is allocated while
   the mobile node's current care-of address is verified; existing
   credit is used up while the care-of address is unverified.  Thus, it
   is the data flow from the correspondent node to the mobile node that
   is responsible for both credit allocation and reduction, resolving
   the issue with applications producing asymmetric traffic patterns.

   It is less obvious for CBA Outbound Mode why it outrules flooding-
   attack amplification than it is for CBA Inbound Mode.  The key
   observation is that a mobile node invests comparable effort for
   packet reception as for packet transmission in terms of bandwidth,
   memory, and processing capacity.  It is therefore legitimate to give
   a mobile node credit for packets that it has received and processed.
   The question is, though, how the correspondent node can determine how
   many of the packets sent to a mobile node are actually received and
   processed by that mobile node.  Relying on transport-layer
   acknowledgements is not an option as such messages can easily be
   faked.  CBA Outbound Mode hence defines its own feedback mechanism,
   Care-of Address Spot Checks, which is robust to spoofing.  With
   Care-of Address Spot Checks, the correspondent node periodically tags
   packets that it sends to the mobile node with a random, unguessable
   number, a so-called Spot Check Token.  When the mobile node receives
   a packet with an attached Spot Check Token, it buffers the token
   until it sends the next packet to the correspondent node.  The Spot
   Check Token is then included in this packet.  Upon reception, the
   correspondent node verifies whether the returned Spot Check Token
   matches a token recently sent to the mobile node.  New credit is
   allocated in proportion to the ratio between the number of
   successfully returned Spot Check Tokens and the total number of
   tokens sent.  This implies that new credit is approximately
   proportional to the fraction of packets have made their way at least
   up to the mobile node's IPv6 stack.  The preciseness of Care-of
   Address Spot Checks can be traded with overhead through the frequency
   with which packets are tagged with Spot Check Tokens.

   An interesting question is whether CBA Outbound Mode could be misused
   by an attacker that has an asymmetric connection to the Internet.
   Wide-spread digital subscriber lines (DSL), for instance, typically
   have a much higher download rate than upload rate.  The limited



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   upload rate would render most denial-of-service attempts through
   direct flooding meaningless.  But the strong download rate could be
   misused to illegitimately build up credit at one or many
   correspondent nodes.  The credit could then be used for a more
   potent, redirection-based flooding attack.  The reason why this has
   so far not been considered an issue is that, in order to build up
   enough credit at the remote end, the attacker would first have to
   expose itself to the same packet flood that it could then redirect
   towards the victim.

4.8  Heuristic Monitoring

   Heuristic approaches to protect concurrent care-of-address tests are
   conceivable as well.  For instance, one may consider a lifetime limit
   for unverified care-of addresses which, supplemented by a heuristic
   for misuse detection, can prevent, or at least effectually
   discourage, misuse of such addresses.  The challenge here seems to be
   a feasible heuristic: On one hand, the heuristic must be sufficiently
   rigid to catch any malicious intents at the other side.  On the other
   hand, it should not have a negative impact on a fair-minded mobile
   node's communications.

   Another problem with heuristics is that they are usually reactive.
   The correspondent node can only respond to misbehavior after it
   appeared.  If the response comes quickly, attacks may simply not be
   worthwhile.  But premature actions should be avoided, of course.  One
   must also bear in mind that an attacker may be able to use different
   home addresses, and it is in general impossible for the correspondent
   node to see that the set of home addresses belongs to the same node.
   The attacker may also use multiple correspondent nodes for its attack
   in an attempt to amplify the result.

4.9  Crypto-Based Idendifiers

   A crypto-based identifier (CBID) is an identifier with a strong
   cryptographic binding to the public component of its owner's public/
   private key pair [51].  CBIDs offer three main advantages: First,
   spoofing attacks against a CBID are much harder than attacks against
   a non-cryptographic identifier like a domain name or a Mobile IPv6
   home address.  Though an attacker may always create its own CBID, it
   is unlikely to find a public/private key pair that produces someone
   else's.  Second, CBIDs fulfill exactly the purpose that certificates
   do, so they do not depend on a certification infrastructure.  Third,
   CBID can be used to bind a public key to an IP address, in which case
   they are called Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA) [52][53].

   A CGA is syntactically just an ordinary IPv6 address.  It has a
   standard routing prefix and an interface identifier generated from a



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   hash on the CGA owner's public key and some additional parameters.  A
   CGA allows the owner to assert a claim on its address:  It can sign a
   to-be-authenticated message with its private key and attach its
   public key along with the parameters necessary to recompute the CGA.
   The recipient of this message can then verify whether the address is
   correct.

   Many applications are conceivable where CGAs can be advantageous.  In
   Mobile IPv6, CGAs can bind a mobile node's home or care-of address to
   its public key.  CGAs were originally described in [52] and in [53],
   and they have later been used in [30], [42], [9], and others.  It
   should be mentioned that, although CGAs are a replacement for the
   home-address test in most cases, at least one initial home-address
   test must be made.  This ensures that the network prefix of the home
   address is correct, and that the mobile node is really reachable at
   this address.  Being able to omit the home-address test in subsequent
   correspondent registrations allows the peers to communicate
   independently of home-agent availability.

   Since only the interface identifier of a CGA is cryptographically
   generated, flooding a network or a link is still an issue.  As a
   result, CGAs should be employed together with a care-of-address test
   in scenarios where redirection-based flooding attacks are a concern.
   An initial home-address test is typically required, too, in order to
   avoid that the deletion of a binding causes a flood upon a faked home
   address.

   One limitation of CGAs compared to other types of CBIDs is that the
   hash on the CGA owner's public key can only be 62 bits long.  The
   rest of the address is occupied by a 64-bit routing prefix as well as
   the universal/local and individual/group bits.  A brute-force
   attacker might thus be able to find a public/private key pair that
   produces a certain CGA.  It could then claim ownership over this CGA.
   The threat can usually be contained by including the address prefix
   in the hash computation, so that an attacker, in case it did find the
   right public/private key pair, could not form CGAs for multiple
   networks from it.

   To resolve collisions in case CGAs are used as care-of addresses, a
   collision count is part of the input to the CGA hash function.
   Increasing the collision count by one changes the result of the hash
   function, so new CGAs can be successively tried until an unused one
   is found.  On the other hand, the collision count also helps an
   attacker in faking a CGA: It may use the same private/public-key pair
   to efficiently generate multiple CGAs.  For this reason, the
   collision count is usually limited to a few bytes only.

   Higher security can be achieved through longer CBIDs.  For instance,



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   a node's primary identifier in the "Host Identity Protocol" (HIP)
   [28] is a 128-bit hash on the node's public key.  It is used as an
   IP-address replacement at stack layers above IP.  This CBID is not
   routable, so there needs to be some external location mechanism if a
   node wants to contact a peer of which it only knows the identifier.

4.10  Pre-Configuration

   The return-routability procedure was designed for communication peers
   that do not share an a-priori security association.  In order to
   thwart off-path attacks nonetheless, the procedure can establish only
   very short-living security associations.  However, in certain,
   restricted scenarios, it may be possible to pre-configure mobile and
   correspondent nodes with security associations.  Such security
   associations can have much longer lifetimes because pre-configuration
   is inherently more secure than the plaintext token exchange from the
   return-routability procedure.

   Pre-configuration has two major benefits.  The first one is strong,
   cryptographic authentication and encryption, which can be applied to
   both signaling and data packets.  The second advantage is lower
   signaling delay, because the additional round-trip time otherwise
   needed for the return-routability procedure can be spared.  The
   obvious disadvantage of pre-configuration is its limited
   applicability.

   It is important to recognize the necessity to unambiguously bind a
   security association to the home address that it is to protect.  With
   regards to the return-routability procedure, this binding is realized
   by routing the HoTI and HoT through the home address.  In the case of
   a pre-configured security association, the association must be
   related to the home address as part of the configuration.  Note that
   this affects both secret-key and public-key cryptography.

   Two proposals for pre-configuration are currently under discussion in
   the IETF as optional enhancements to RFC 3775. [19] re-uses most from
   the standard authentication and authorization procedure defined in
   RFC 3775.  The only difference is that mobile nodes are endowed with
   the information they need to compute Home and care-of keygen tokens
   themselves rather than having to obtain them through the return-
   routability procedure. [7] replaces the standard RFC-3775 concepts
   with IPsec and the Internet Key Exchange (IKE) protocol.

   From a technical standpoint, a pre-configured security association
   can only replace a home-address test, not a care-of-address test.
   After all, a correspondent node cannot verify, based on the
   association alone, whether a mobile node is actually present at the
   announced care-of address.  The problem is circumvented in [19] by



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   postulating that the correspondent node has sufficient trust in the
   mobile node to believe that the care-of address is correct.  However,
   this assumption discourages the use of pre-configuration in scenarios
   where such trust is unavailable.  For instance, a mobile-phone
   operator may be able to configure subscribers with secret keys for
   authorization to a particular service, but it may not be able to
   vouch that all subscribers use this service in a trustworthy manner.
   And even if peers initially trust each other, subsequently one or the
   other can be infected with malware and become untrustworthy.

   Another way to avoid the problem of care-of-address verification is
   to rely on access networks to filter out packets with incorrect IP
   source addresses (cf. Section 1.2).  This approach is taken in [7].
   However, the problem with local filtering is that it must be deployed
   everywhere an attacker may possibly access the Internet in order to
   be fully protective.  Otherwise, an attacker can always find a place
   from where a spoofing attack is possible, endangering IP nodes
   anywhere.  As things stand, the assumption that deployment of
   filtering techniques be universal is speculative.

   Both of the above two assumptions can be eliminated through care-of-
   address tests, facilitating the use of pre-configuration in spite of
   lacking trust relationships or the existence of access networks
   without local filtering techniques.  Of course, using a care-of-
   address test partly vitiates the handover-latency improvement that
   can be reached otherwise.  But there may still be a positive impact
   on handover latency, because pre-configuration eliminates the
   triangular home-address test through the home agent, whereas the
   care-of-address test uses the direct, and typically faster, path
   between the communicating nodes.  For increased performance, a
   concurrent care-of-address test can be used in combination with
   credit-based authorization or heuristic monitoring.  It should also
   be noted that pre-configuration facilitates stronger authentication
   mechanisms than the return-routability procedure, and thus the use of
   Route Optimization may become more suitable for applications with
   high security requirements.

   That said, it seems like a good idea to make the pre-configuration
   protocol customizable to different environments.  Is there a small
   group of people who trust each other?  Then group members are
   unlikely to spoof care-of addresses, and the care-of-address test
   might be omitted.  Or is the group of users large and users are
   primarily unknown to each other like the customer base of a big ISP?
   Then, proper authentication does usually not imply trust, and it is
   infeasible to use pre-configured keys without checking a mobile
   node's reachability.  Traceability techniques are not necessarily a
   compensation for the missing care-of-address test, because they are a
   reactive measure, whereas a care-of-address test is a proactive one.



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


4.11  Opportunistic Security Associations

   An intermediate approach between short-term security associations
   from the return-routability procedure on one hand, and static
   security associations available via pre-configuration on the other,
   is to set up an "opportunistic", medium-term security association
   upon first contact.  Subsequent signaling can then be unambiguously
   bound to the initial contact.  Such security associations can be used
   over a longer period of time than those afforded by the return-
   routability procedure.

   On-demand security associations for IPsec are traditionally
   established by executing IKE between two peers.  This works well when
   the negotiated keys are securely bound to the entity that they are to
   protect.  However, the to-be-protected entity in Mobile IPv6 is a
   plain IPv6 home address, which is syntactically indistinguishable
   from other IPv6 addresses.  Given that no direct authentication
   between the peers is generally feasible, there is no way for a mobile
   node to prove possession of its home address either.  This would
   allow an attacker to do the IKE exchange pretending to own an
   arbitrary victim's IP address, and to at will redirect the victim's
   traffic from that time on.  Although the attacker would have to be on
   the path between the victim and the correspondent node while running
   IKE, it could move off the path once the keys have been exchanged.
   As the victim lacks the keys, it cannot even re-claim its IP address.

   As a result, opportunistic security associations must be bound to the
   right home addresses through some additional technique when used in
   the context of Mobile IPv6.  For instance, they can be combined with
   an initial, one-time home-address test, or IKE can be run through the
   home address.  Another way is using CGAs as proposed in [9].

   No matter how they are secured, opportunistic security associations
   cannot be leveraged to prove the correctness of a care-of address.
   They hence fail to solve the problem with redirection-based flooding
   attacks, and should only be applied in conjunction with care-of-
   address tests.  Semi-permanent security associations were first
   developed in [4] where they were called "Purpose Built Keys" (PBK).

4.12  Prefix-Based Certificates

   The Mobile IPv6 base specification avoids strong authentication
   cryptography for signaling between mobile nodes and correspondent
   nodes.  One reason for this is that PKI for general Internet use has
   generally been considered impossible to set up.  This is primarily
   due to the current separation of IP-address assignment and security
   infrastructures.  Another reason is that limited power resources and
   processing capacity at the mobile nodes generally rule out any



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   complex cryptographic operations.  Robustness to resource-exhaustion
   attacks requires a similar restrictiveness on the correspondent-node
   side.

   However, Certificate-based Binding Updates (CBU) [29] are a useful
   simplification:  A home agent is assigned a certificate that binds
   the home-network prefix to the home agent's public key.
   Correspondent nodes can trust the home agent based on the
   certificate, and the home agent vouches for the trustworthiness of
   the mobile nodes it serves.  The advantage is that, rather than
   having to issue a certificate per mobile node, only a certificate per
   home-network prefix is required.  This makes the infrastructure
   problem more tractable.

   The reduction in the number of potentially required certificates
   makes certificate-based approaches to mobile-node authentication more
   feasible than it is today.  The approach also avoids heavy
   computations at mobile nodes since public-key cryptography is handled
   by the home agent.  On the other hand, the processing overhead at
   correspondent nodes actually increases compared to standard
   correspondent registrations.  This may not be an issue since
   resources at stationary correspondent nodes are usually higher than
   those of many mobile devices.  But it may be an issue if the
   correspondent node is a popular web server or other central resource
   that cannot afford doing complex cryptographic operations.  One
   should, however, bear in mind that the increased overhand implies a
   higher risk to resource-exhaustion attacks.

   CBU does not solve the issue with care-of-address spoofing: A
   vouching home agent does not prevent a malicious mobile node from
   faking its care-of address.  The culprit could cheat its home agent,
   or it could cooperate with it.  This said, CBU should be combined
   with a care-of-address test that rules out redirection-based flooding
   attacks.  A combination of concurrent care-of-address tests and CBA
   (cf. Section 4.7) can be used to keep the signaling delay during
   handover as low as it currently is in [29].

4.13  Mobile and Correspondent Routers

   A special scenario where mobility optimizations are useful is one
   where an entire network moves.  Mobile nodes within a moving network
   stick together and connect to the Internet through a single "mobile
   router".  It is relatively straightforward to support network
   mobility [41] by using a single home agent and a single tunnel
   between the mobile router and that home agent.  Mobile nodes then
   don't have to be mobility-aware.  On the other hand, supporting Route
   Optimization for moving networks [34][35][3][33] is more complicated.
   One way of doing this is to have the mobile router handle Route



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   Optimization on behalf of the mobile nodes.  This requires the mobile
   router to modify incoming and outgoing packets such that they can be
   routed on the direct path between the end nodes.  The mobile router
   would also have to perform Mobile IPv6 signaling on behalf of the
   mobile nodes.

   A similar optimization applies to a network of correspondent nodes.
   Those could communicate with mobile nodes, through a "correspondent
   router", in a route-optimized way without themselves being mobility-
   aware.  While RFC 3775 Route Optimization requires all correspondent
   nodes to be modified, this can be avoided if mobility is managed by a
   router in the correspondent nodes' network.  Note that neither a
   mobile router nor a correspondent router needs to be the first-hop
   router.  It may also be located further down the path between the
   communicating end nodes.

5.  Discussion and Future Research

   Route Optimization enhancement strategies ultimately attempt to gain
   significant improvement in many scenarios at low costs, but trade-
   offs are oftentimes necessary.  Accordingly, the techniques can be
   characterized in three respects:  (a) their benefit, in terms of
   reduced latency, higher security, lower signaling overhead, or
   increased robustness; (b) their costs, in terms of hardware upgrades,
   software modifications, and manual configuration; and (c) their
   applicability to different scenarios and ease of deployability.

   IP-address tests don't require any upgrades to the network
   infrastructure and work well for peers that do not know each other.
   Proactivity and CBA can be used to conduct the tests in parallel with
   regular user traffic.  Yet, address tests suffer from relatively high
   signaling overhead and a vulnerability to on-path attackers.  Pre-
   configuration and CBIDs mitigate these issues, although they apply to
   acquainted nodes only or require computationally complex public-key
   cryptography, respectively.

   Authentication mechanisms like pre-configuration or CBIDs cannot
   prevent misuse by authenticated nodes and must hence be combined with
   care-of-address tests in general.  This does not necessarily imply a
   performance penalty, however, since CBA allows reachability
   verification to occur concurrently.  In fact, CBA can be integrated
   into any mobility protocol that verifies IP addresses through
   probing.  CBA-based concurrent care-of-address tests could even be
   proscribed for home registrations in scenarios where a home agent
   cannot trust in the correctness of the registered mobile nodes'
   care-of addresses.

   Delegating authentication to network entities, as it can be done with



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   CBUs, may resurrect the use of certificates for the purpose of
   mobility support.  The technique effects a compromise between the
   strong authentication facilitated through certificates on one side as
   well as applicability and ease of deployability on the other side.
   On the other hand, delegation increases the dependency on external
   entities, such as the home agent in case of CBUs.

   Mobility-related optimizations are currently actively studied by many
   researchers at different protocol layers.  While some of the basic
   methods are fairly well understood and are being deployed, there are
   a number of interesting, newer approaches that deserve to be studied
   in more detail.  The following discusses research directions that
   appear fruitful, or necessary in the future, and that go beyond the
   existing proposals described so far.

5.1  Research at Other Protocol Layers

   The efficiency and security related to movements does not depend on
   Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization alone, even if researchers often pose
   their analysis in that light.  A movement that is visible at the IP
   layer involves all lower layers as well.  This includes layer 2
   attachment procedures; layer 2 security mechanisms such as
   negotiation, authentication, and key agreement; IPv6 Router and
   Neighbor Discovery; as well as IPv6 Address Autoconfiguration and
   Duplicate Address Detection.  A complete network attachment typically
   requires over twenty link- and IP-layer messages, assuming that
   features necessary for a commercial deployment (such as security) are
   turned on.

   A significant research question is the performance of the network-
   access stack as a whole.  Current protocol stacks have a number of
   limitations in addition to the long attachment delays [44], such as
   denial-of-service vulnerabilities, difficulties in trusting a set of
   access nodes distributed to physically insecure locations, or the
   inability to retrieve sufficient information for making a handoff
   decision.

   A number attempts are ongoing to improve various parts of the stack,
   mostly focusing on handover performance.  These include link-layer
   enhancements, parameter tuning [55], network-access authentication
   mechanisms [1], fast-handover mechanisms [50], AAA architectures
   [25], and IP-layer attachment improvements [16].  It is uncertain how
   far this optimization can be taken by only looking at the different
   parts individually.  An integrated approach may be necessary to gain
   more significant improvements [45].

   It is also unclear at this time which components are the most
   critical ones. [44] suggests that mobility-related signaling



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   contributes only under 10% of the overall delay in an IEEE 802.11
   environment.  The most significant delays are caused at the link
   layer and for IPv6 attachment.  However, the results are not
   conclusive due to the high deviation between the measurements.  The
   results can also be affected by a number of conditions, such as the
   availability of specific link-layer optimizations, or the type of
   security mechanism used for Mobile IPv6 home registrations.

5.2  Further Route Optimization Research

   The primary driver to improve Route Optimization appears to be better
   efficiency for a few usage scenarios, such as fast movements or the
   ability to reduce signaling frequencies for hosts in standby mode.
   Ongoing work addresses these aspects already quite well, and many of
   the suggested methods are reasonably stable in this regard.  It is
   expected that further, perhaps smaller improvements will continue to
   be achieved through research and parameter tuning far into the
   future.

   Research on infrastructure-based Route Optimization like [43] is
   clearly a longer-term project.  Mobile and correspondent routers can
   be advantageous in large networks of mobile or correspondent nodes,
   respectively, especially if the end nodes don't support Route
   Optimization themselves.  It would also be interesting to investigate
   into how mobile and correspondent routers can be integrated with
   infrastructure-based security solutions, such as [48].  Also, the
   ideas of the Certificate-Based Binding Update Protocol could be
   useful in this light.

   The following is a list of interesting ideas for new route-
   optimization research.

   o  Local mobility or local repair optimizations that require no
      configuration.

   o  Care-of-address verification mechanisms that employ lower-layer
      assistance or Secure Neighbor Discovery.

   o  The introduction of optimizations developed in the context of
      Mobile IPv6 to HIP or other mobility protocols, or to link-layer
      mobility solutions.

   o  The extension of the developed techniques to full multi-
      addressing, including also multi-homing.

   o  Further development of techniques that are based on "asymmetric
      cost wars" [46], such as CBA.




Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   o  Integrated techniques taking into account both link and IP layer
      mobility tasks.


5.3  Experimentation and Simulation

   As discussed earlier, the contribution of different stack parts to
   the overall movement latency is still unclear.  The following is a
   list of areas where measurements and experimentation can yield
   further, valuable insight.

   o  Measurements of a realistic network scenario, enabling all
      features that would likely be needed in a commercial deployment.
      These features include link-layer access control, for instance.
      Similarly, it is necessary to consider support for existing
      enhancement proposals.

   o  Measurements and simulations of the performance impacts that
      existing enhancement proposals have on the different parts of the
      stack.

   o  Measurements and comparisons of different implementations that are
      based on the same specification.  For instance, it would be
      valuable to know how much implementations differ with regards to
      the use of parallelism that RFC 3775 allows in home and
      correspondent registrations, or with respect to early packet
      transmission before reception of a BA.

   o  Measurements of the impact that network conditions such as packet
      loss can have on existing and new route-optimization mechanisms.

   o  Statistical data collection on the behavior of mobile nodes in
      different networks.  Route-optimization techniques behave
      differently depending on what the frequency of movements is, or
      what traffic streams appear during a mobile node's lifetime.

   o  Measurements or simulations of the performance that existing
      route-optimization schemes show under different application
      scenarios, such as the use of applications with symmetric vs.
      asymmetric traffic patterns.

6.  Security Considerations

   Security issues related to Route Optimization are an integral part of
   this paper and are as such discussed throughout the paper.






Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


7.  Conclusions

   Mobility-related optimizations are currently actively studied by many
   researchers.  Some of the basic techniques--such as the return-
   routability procedure, pre-configured keys, or CGAs--are either
   already being deployed or can expected to be in the near future.  A
   growing number of new proposals are being studied that attempt to
   optimize these basic techniques further, or to make them better
   applicable to a particular scenario.

   Many of the current proposals are mature enough to withstand close
   scrutiny.  Their relative advantages are rather subjective, however.
   For instance, some proposals are very efficient, but have a high cost
   in terms of configuration, whereas others do not require
   configuration, but are slower.  It hence appears likely that more
   than one new method will have to be standardized.  Deployment
   experience is also important, so publication of a few alternative
   methods as RFCs would be desirable.

   It is interesting to see that most if not all current proposals had
   predecessors that were shown to be insecure.  For instance, the
   initial return-routability procedure as well as the first versions of
   CGAs were published before the threat of flooding attacks was fully
   understood.  Concurrent care-of-address tests were also first
   suggested with insufficient protection against flooding attacks.  And
   several proposals employing semi-permanent security associations have
   initially suffered from impersonation attacks.  This shows the need
   to reserve a sufficient amount of time for community analysis and
   review of new methods.

   Another interesting observation is that most mature proposals combine
   a number of techniques and do not rely on any single approach.  This
   is due to the intricate nature of the problem: to build a mechanism
   that is efficient and at the same time avoids a quite significant
   number of potential security vulnerabilities.

   On the other hand, it is also necessary to avoid overly expensive or
   complex solutions.  For instance, in evaluating the security needs
   for Route Optimization, it is important to compare these needs to
   other vulnerabilities, e.g., denial-of-service attacks, that already
   exist for on-path attackers in an Internet without mobility support.
   Of course, a mobility-management protocol should not make these
   vulnerabilities worse.  But since the issues already exist, it is not
   necessarily a requirement that they be solved by a mobility-
   management protocol.

   There is a natural performance limit of Route Optimization due to
   end-to-end signaling.  Future applications may have latency



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   requirements that Route Optimization cannot satisfy.  This is where
   local optimizations such as FMIPv6 and HMIPv6 become necessary.
   While HMIPv6 still benefits from enhancements to Route Optimization,
   FMIPv6 allows peers to postpone global signaling and parallelize it
   with upper-layer communications.  This is an exemplar for the trade-
   off between good performance and high investment costs.

   A significant research question is the overall performance of the
   network stack in a mobile setting.  This includes mobility management
   at the IP layer, but is not limited to it.  Current network-access
   protocol stacks have a number of limitations, such as long attachment
   and movement latencies or significant denial-of-service
   vulnerabilities.  It is uncertain whether further, significant
   benefits can be achieved if one continues to look at the different
   parts of the network stack individually.  Most likely, a more
   comprehensive approach is needed.  It is also unclear at this time
   which components of the network stack are the most critical ones to
   optimize.

   Other significant research questions include what effect network
   conditions such as packet loss can have on current proposals, and to
   what degree proposals depend on specific application patterns.  Our
   current understanding about the different traffic patterns and their
   effects on mobility is limited, and experiments, modelling, and
   simulations will be needed.  Finally, an interesting piece of
   research would be to measure the performance of Route Optimization
   relative to bidirectional tunneling from a user's perspective.
























Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


8.  References

   [1]   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, "Local and
         Metropolitan Area Networks: Port-Based Network Access Control",
         IEEE Standard 802.1X, September 2001.

   [2]   Arkko, J. and C. Vogt, "Credit-Based Authorization for Binding
         Lifetime Extension",
         draft-arkko-mipv6-binding-lifetime-extension-00 (work in
         progress), May 2004.

   [3]   Bernardos, C., "Mobile IPv6 Route Optimisation for Network
         Mobility (MIRON)", draft-bernardos-nemo-miron-00 (work in
         progress), July 2005.

   [4]   Bradner, S., Mankin, A., and J. Schiller, "A Framework for
         Purpose-Built Keys (PBK)", draft-bradner-pbk-frame-06 (work in
         progress), June 2003.

   [5]   Daley, G., "Location Privacy and Mobile IPv6",
         draft-daley-mip6-locpriv-00 (work in progress), January 2004.

   [6]   Dupont, F., "A note about 3rd party bombing in Mobile IPv6",
         draft-dupont-mipv6-3bombing-01 (work in progress),
         January 2005.

   [7]   Dupont, F. and J. Combes, "Using IPsec between Mobile and
         Correspondent IPv6 Nodes", draft-dupont-mipv6-cn-ipsec-01 (work
         in progress), June 2004.

   [8]   Dupont, F. and J. Combes, "Care-of Address Test for MIPv6 using
         a State Cookie", draft-dupont-mipv6-rrcookie-00 (work in
         progress), January 2005.

   [9]   Haddad, W., Madour, L., Arkko, J., and F. Dupont, "Applying
         Cryptographically Generated Addresses to Optimize MIPv6  (CGA-
         OMIPv6)", draft-haddad-mip6-cga-omipv6-02 (work in progress),
         June 2004.

   [10]  Haddad, W. and S. Krishnan, "Optimizing Mobile IPv6 (OMIPv6)",
         draft-haddad-mipv6-omipv6-01 (work in progress), February 2004.

   [11]  Haddad, W., "Privacy for Mobile and Multi-homed Nodes: MoMiPriv
         Problem Statement", draft-haddad-momipriv-problem-statement-00
         (work in progress), October 2004.

   [12]  Moskowitz, R., "Host Identity Protocol", draft-ietf-hip-base-00
         (work in progress), June 2004.



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   [13]  Nikander, P., "End-Host Mobility and Multi-Homing with Host
         Identity Protocol", draft-ietf-hip-mm-01 (work in progress),
         February 2005.

   [14]  Kent, S., "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)",
         draft-ietf-ipsec-esp-v3-08 (work in progress), March 2004.

   [15]  Loughney, J., "IPv6 Node Requirements",
         draft-ietf-ipv6-node-requirements-11 (work in progress),
         August 2004.

   [16]  Moore, N., "Optimistic Duplicate Address Detection for IPv6",
         draft-ietf-ipv6-optimistic-dad-01 (work in progress),
         June 2004.

   [17]  Patel, A., Leung, K., Khalil, M., Akhtar, H., and K. Chowdhury,
         "Authentication Protocol for Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-mip6-auth-protocol-00 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [18]  Patel, A., "Problem Statement for bootstrapping Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-mip6-bootstrap-ps-00 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [19]  Perkins, C., "Preconfigured Binding Management Keys for Mobile
         IPv6", draft-ietf-mip6-precfgKbm-00 (work in progress),
         April 2004.

   [20]  Nikander, P., Arkko, J., Aura, T., Montenegro, G., and E.
         Nordmark, "Mobile IP version 6 Route Optimization Security
         Design Background", draft-ietf-mip6-ro-sec-01 (work in
         progress), July 2004.

   [21]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6",
         draft-ietf-mipshop-fast-mipv6-02 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [22]  Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., Malki, K., and L. Bellier,
         "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management (HMIPv6)",
         draft-ietf-mipshop-hmipv6-02 (work in progress), June 2004.

   [23]  Huston, G., "Architectural Approaches to Multi-Homing for
         IPv6", draft-ietf-multi6-architecture-04 (work in progress),
         February 2005.

   [24]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfeld, B., Zill, B., and P.
         Nikander, "SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)",
         draft-ietf-send-ndopt-06 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [25]  Arbaugh, W. and B. Aboba, "Experimental Handoff Extension to
         RADIUS", draft-irtf-aaaarch-handoff-04 (work in progress),



Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


         November 2003.

   [26]  Koodli, R., "IP Address Location Privacy and IP Mobility",
         draft-koodli-mip6-location-privacy-00 (work in progress),
         February 2005.

   [27]  Koodli, R., "Solutions for IP Address Location Privacy in the
         presence of IP Mobility",
         draft-koodli-mip6-location-privacy-solutions-00 (work in
         progress), February 2005.

   [28]  Moskowitz, R., Nikander, P., and P. Jokela, "Host Identity
         Protocol", draft-moskowitz-hip-09 (work in progress),
         February 2004.

   [29]  Bao, F., "Certificate-based Binding Update Protocol (CBU)",
         draft-qiu-mip6-certificated-binding-update-02 (work in
         progress), August 2004.

   [30]  Roe, M., Aura, T., O'Shea, G., and J. Arkko, "Authentication of
         Mobile IPv6 Binding Updates and Acknowledgments",
         draft-roe-mobileip-updateauth-02 (work in progress),
         March 2002.

   [31]  Vogt, C., Bless, R., Doll, M., and T. Kuefner, "Early Binding
         Updates for Mobile IPv6",
         draft-vogt-mip6-early-binding-updates-00 (work in progress),
         February 2004.

   [32]  Vogt, C., Arkko, J., Bless, R., Doll, M., and T. Kuefner,
         "Credit-Based Authorization for Mobile IPv6 Early Binding
         Updates", draft-vogt-mipv6-credit-based-authorization-00 (work
         in progress), May 2004.

   [33]  Wakikawa, R., "Optimized Route Cache Protocol (ORC)",
         draft-wakikawa-nemo-orc-01 (work in progress), November 2004.

   [34]  Zhao, F., Wu, F., and S. Jung, "NEMO Route Optimization Problem
         Statement and Analysis", draft-zhao-nemo-ro-ps-01 (work in
         progress), February 2005.

   [35]  "NEMO Route Optimisation Problem Statement",
         draft-clausen-nemo-ro-problem-statement-00 (work in progress),
         October 2004.

   [36]  Kent, S. and R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security Payload
         (ESP)", RFC 2406, November 1998.




Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   [37]  Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344,
         August 2002.

   [38]  Abley, J., Black, B., and V. Gill, "Goals for IPv6 Site-
         Multihoming Architectures", RFC 3582, August 2003.

   [39]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [40]  Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V., and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to
         Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home
         Agents", RFC 3776, June 2004.

   [41]  Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert,
         "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963,
         January 2005.

   [42]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
         RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [43]  Vadali, R., Li, J., Wu, Y., and G. Cao, "Agent-Based Route
         Optimization for Mobile IP", Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular
         Technology Conference, October 2001.

   [44]  Alimian, A. and B. Aboba, "Analysis of Roaming Techniques",
         IEEE Contribution 11-04-0377r1 2004.

   [45]  Arkko, J., Eronen, P., Nikander, P., and V. Torvinen, "Secure
         and Efficient Network Access", Extended abstract to be
         presented in the DIMACS workshop, November 2004.

   [46]  Arkko, J. and P. Nikander, "Weak Authentication: How to
         Authenticate Unknown Principals without Trusted Parties",
         Proceedings of Security Protocols Workshop 2002, Cambridge, UK,
         April 16-19,  2002.

   [47]  Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed
         Networks", BCP 84, RFC 3704, March 2004.

   [48]  Castelluccia, Claude., Montenegro, Gabriel., Laganier, Julien.,
         and Christoph. Neumann, "Hindering Eavesdropping via IPv6
         Opportunistic Encryption", Proceedings of the European
         Symposium on Research in Computer Security , September 2004.

   [49]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
         Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
         Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000.




Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   [50]  Mishra, A., Shin, M., Arbaugh, W., Lee, I., and K. Jang,
         "Proactive Key Distribution to Support Fast and Secure
         Roaming", IEEE Contribution 11-03-084r1-I, January 2003.

   [51]  Montenegro, G. and Claude. Castelluccia, "Crypto-Based
         Identifiers (CBIDs): Concepts and Applications", ACM
         Transactions on Information and System Security Vol.  7, No.
         1, February 2004.

   [52]  Nikander, P., "Denial-of-Service, Address Ownership, and Early
         Authentication in the IPv6 World", Proceedings of the Cambridge
         Security Protocols Workshop, April 2001.

   [53]  O'Shea, G. and M. Roe, "Child-proof Authentication for MIPv6",
         Computer Communications Review, April 2001.

   [54]  Paxson, V., "An Analysis of Using Reflectors for Distributed
         Denial-of-Service Attacks",  Computer Communication Review
         31(3)., July 2001.

   [55]  Velayos, H. and G. Karlsson, "Techniques to Reduce IEEE 802.11b
         MAC Layer Handover Time", Laboratory for Communication
         Networks, KTH, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
         Sweden, TRITA-IMIT-LCN R 03:02, April 2003.

   [56]  Vogt, C., "Samitas Review of
         draft-irtf-mobopts-ro-enhancements-00", IETF MIP6 and Mobopts
         mailing lists, http://www.atm.tut.fi/list-archive/MIPv6-2005/
         msg00677.html, June 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Christian Vogt
   Institute of Telematics
   Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
   P.O.  Box 6980
   76128 Karlsruhe
   Germany

   Email: chvogt@tm.uka.de
   URI:   http://www.tm.uka.de/~chvogt/









Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson Research NomadicLab
   FI-02420 Jorvas
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com













































Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft    MIP6 Route Optimization Enhancements      October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Vogt & Arkko             Expires April 27, 2006                [Page 37]

