
   ForCES Working Group                                                   
   Internet Draft                                     D. Putzolu (editor) 
   Document: draft-ietf-forces-evaluation-00.txt                    Intel 
   Expires: June 2004                                       December 2003 
    
    
                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document provides an evaluation of the applicability of three 
   proposed approaches for a ForCES protocol: FACT[2], GRMP[3], and 
   Netlink2[4]. A summary of each of the proposed protocols against the 
   ForCES requirements[5] and the ForCES framework[6] is provided. 
   Compliancy of each of the protocols against each requirement is 
   detailed.  A conclusion summarizes how each of the protocols fares in 
   the evaluation.  
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [7]. 





 
 
Putzolu                  Expires - June 2004                 [Page 1] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Protocol Proposals.............................................3 
      2.1 FACT.......................................................4 
      2.2 GRMP.......................................................5 
      2.3 Netlink2...................................................6 
   3. Architectural Requirements Compliance Evaluation...............8 
      3.1 FACT.......................................................8 
      3.2 GRMP.......................................................8 
      3.3 Netlink2..................................................10 
   4. Model Requirements Compliance Evaluation......................12 
      4.1 FACT......................................................12 
      4.2 GRMP......................................................12 
      4.3 Netlink2..................................................13 
   5. Protocol Requirements Compliance Evaluation...................13 
      5.1 Protocol Requirement: Configuration of Modeled Elements...14 
      5.2 Protocol Requirement: Support for Secure Communication....15 
      5.3 Protocol Requirement: Scalability.........................16 
      5.4 Protocol Requirement: Multihop............................17 
      5.5 Protocol Requirement: Message Priority....................18 
      5.6 Protocol Requirement: Reliability.........................19 
      5.7 Protocol Requirement: Interconnect Independence...........20 
      5.8 Protocol Requirement: CE Redundancy or CE Failover........21 
      5.9 Protocol Requirement: Packet Redirection/Mirroring........22 
      5.10 Protocol Requirement: Topology Exchange..................23 
      5.11 Protocol Requirement: Dynamic Association................24 
      5.12 Protocol Requirement: Command Bundling...................25 
      5.13 Protocol Requirement: Asynchronous Event Notification....26 
      5.14 Protocol Requirement: Query Statistics...................26 
      5.15 Protocol Requirement: Protection Against Denial of Service 
      Attacks.......................................................27 
      5.16 Protocol Requirement Summary Table.......................28 
   Security Considerations..........................................29 
   References.......................................................29 
   Author's Addresses...............................................30 
    
    
1.   Introduction 
    
   This document provides an evaluation of the applicability of FACT, 
   GRMP, and Netlink2 as the ForCES protocol.  This evaluation provides 
   overviews of the protocols and general statements of applicability 
   based upon the ForCES framework and requirements documents. The 
   format and structure as well as some of the introductory content of 
   this document is based on and taken from a similar document being 
   produced in the MIDCOM working group[8]. 
    

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 2] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   The process for protocol evaluation found in this document consists 
   of individuals providing sections evaluating a specific protocol.  
   These sections are incorporated by the editor of the document, and 
   are subject to feedback and changes based on the consensus of the 
   ForCES working group.  Some protocols that might be considered as 
   potentially applicable as the ForCES protocol are not evaluated in 
   this document since there where no champions to submit evaluations 
   for them.  
    
   Section 2 of this document is a list of the proposed protocols along 
   with background information about each of the protocols. 
    
   Section 3 of this document is an evaluation of the proposed protocols 
   against the architectural requirements found in section 5 of the 
   ForCES requirements. The purpose of this section is to determine how 
   well each of the proposed protocols maps to the ForCES architecture. 
    
   Section 4 of this document is an evaluation of the proposed protocols 
   against the model requirements found in ForCES requirements.  The 
   purpose of this section is to determine how well each of the proposed 
   protocols can be used with FEs that meet the ForCES model 
   requirements.   
    
   Section 5 of this document is an item level evaluation of the 
   proposed protocols against the protocol requirements found in the 
   ForCES requirements.  The purpose of this section is to determine how 
   well each of the proposed protocols satisfies each of the protocol 
   requirements.  
    
   Section 6 summarizes the evaluation, and includes a table with a 
   breakdown for each of the protocols versus the requirements. The 
   following categories of compliance are used: Fully met, partially met 
   through the use of extensions, partially met through other changes to 
   the protocol, or not met. This summary is not a conclusive statement 
   of the suitability of the protocols, but rather to provide 
   information to be considered as input into the overall protocol 
   decision process. 
    
    
2.   Protocol Proposals 
    
   The following protocols have been submitted to the ForCES WG for 
   consideration: 
      o FACT 
      o GRMP 
      o Netlink2 
    
   The following sections provide overviews of each of the protocols as 
   well as relevant background information about each protocol. 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 3] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
    
2.1     FACT 
    
   Network Elements (NE) such as routers are becoming more and more 
   complex as they try to cope with demanding features like policy based 
   routing, firewalls and NATs, and QoS aware routing. As a result, 
   issues like scalability, (the ability to cost-effectively grow a 
   network as demand increases) and extensibility (the ability to 
   dynamically configure the network for some specific services by 
   programming the NEs that handle those services) become very 
   important. The ForCEs protocol has been specified to help resolve 
   these issues by decoupling control and forwarding elements of a 
   network element, and also adding extensibility features to the NE. 
    
   FACT (Forwarding And Control ElemenT) protocol has been designed for 
   exchanging information between control elements (CEs) and forwarding 
   elements (FEs) distributed in a ForCES network element (NE). The 
   relationship between CEs and FEs is a master/slave one. The FACT 
   protocol is logically separated into a base protocol and an 
   extensible data model defined in [9]. It consists of a common, fixed 
   size header and variable size payload which carries the information 
   defined by the data model. All FACT messages are 32-bit aligned. 
    
   FACT's messages are grouped into six (6) classes namely:  
    1) Connection and Association messages, which help establish 
       logical connections between FEs and CEs, 
    2) Capabilities Control messages, which the CE uses to query and 
       configure the capabilities of the FE, 
    3) State Maintenance messages, which are used to track element 
       states, 
    4) Traffic Maintenance messages, which are used exchanging control 
       packets between CEs and FEs, 
    5) Event Notification messages used for reporting asynchronous 
       events, and 
    6) Vendor Specific messages which are used to extend the protocol 
       beyond its current capabilities.  
    
   FACT supports versioning and priority, and its unique design of 
   separating control and data traffic into different channels helps 
   reduce the threat of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks making the 
   protocol more robust. It provides reliability by using a reliable 
   transport protocol, thus simplifying the protocol design. It also 
   provides failover mechanisms that can exploit redundant elements in 
   the system or network element.  
    
   The FACT protocol follows the basic design principles of simplicity, 
   reuse of existing mechanisms and enabling easy interoperability. In 
   this respect, FACT reuses existing transport and security protocols 
   which are widely available and avoids building such mechanisms into 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 4] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   the protocol which can increase complexity. It also mandates single 
   transport, security mechanisms and payload encapsulation which help 
   with enabling easy interoperability. The clean separation of FACT 
   base protocol and data model also helps with simplicity and 
   extensibility. 
    
2.2     GRMP 
    
   General Router Management Protocol (GRMP) Version 1 intends to be as 
   a ForCES protocol, which acts at the Fp reference point in the ForCES 
   framework. GRMP is designed to meet all the requirements for the 
   ForCES protocol at the Fp reference point.  
    
   GRMP protocol is a master-slave protocol. CEs act as masters and FEs 
   as slaves. Slaves have rights to send to masters request, response or 
   report messages, while masters can send command messages to slaves as 
   well as send request, response, or report messages. GRMP protocol 
   acts in a mode of a base-protocol associated with a data model, where 
   GRMP is as a base-protocol and ForCES FE model as a Data Model. GRMP 
   defines basic management messages, while managed data are defined in 
   the associated ForCES FE model. Most of the data types and functional 
   descriptions related to specific IP services such as routing service 
   conforming to RFC 1812, QoS configurations, high-touch capabilities 
   like NAT and firewall should be expressed by Logical functional 
   Blocks (LFBs) and LFB topologies. The ForCES protocol application 
   layer is responsible on how to configure the LFBs and the LFB 
   topologies based on the FE capabilities in order to implement 
   specific IP services and QoS resources deployment. 
    
   GRMP is developed separately from General Switch Management Protocol 
   (GSMP) protocol. However, GRMP has been considering its possible 
   compatibility with GSMP. 
    
   GRMP protocol is composed of protocol messages. GRMP organizes these 
   messages according to the different object types and layers in ForCES 
   architecture the protocol intends to manage, as follows: 
    
   1. FE Coarse Layer  
   . FE management messages 
   These messages take a whole FE as the managed object. Messages of 
   this type include that for operation of FE join or leave, FE action, 
   FE attribute, FE event report, etc. Messages of this type also 
   include that for GRMP slave management, which is a module GRMP 
   protocol has defined in a FE that is responsible for protocol message 
   interpreting, executing, generating, and encapsulating at the FE 
   side. 
    
   2. FE Fine Layer 
   . LFB management messages 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 5] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   This type of messages is for the management of LFB layer operation. 
   It takes LFBs as its managed objects. Messages of this type include 
   that for operation of LFB action, LFB attribute, etc. 
    
   . Datapath management messages 
   This type of messages is for the management of datapaths in an FE. 
   It takes datapathes as the managed objects. 
    
   3. CE Layer 
   . CE Informing messages 
   This type of messages takes CE as the operated object. Because CE 
   acts as a master in ForCES protocol, allowed operations to CE from FE 
   are only that like CE attribute query, CE event report, etc.  
    
   4. Protocol Layer and others 
   Messages of this type include:  
   . GRMP ACK message  
   . Packet redirection messages 
   . GRMP Batch messages 
   . Managed Object(MO) management messages 
   In order to support network management tools like SNMP in ForCES 
   architecture, GRMP provides these management messages. The messages 
   take Managed Objects (MOs) defined in some specific network 
   management tools as their operating objects. Operations of MOs are 
   that like MO get, MO set, and MO response. 
    
   From the perspective of the message communication in between CE and 
   FE, GRMP messages can be divided into following types: 
    
   1. Messages for query and response types. These messages can be from 
      CE to FE, or from FE to CE. 
    
   2. Messages for command and configuration types. These messages are 
      only from CE to FE. 
    
   3. Messages for report types. These messages can be from CE to FE, 
      or from FE to CE. 
    
   GRMP has defined a "Object Class" prefix [3 Section 3.4.5] to allow 
   managed objects to be defined inside GRMP protocol, by different 
   versions of ForCES FE models, or by vendors, in order to make GRMP 
   protocol more scalable and flexible regarding its managed entities. 
    
    
2.3     Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 [4] is a proposal for the ForCES post-association phase 
   protocol.  It is derived from Linux Netlink [10], and as such it 
   builds on the experience gained by use of Netlink for forwarding and 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 6] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   control separation in thousands of Linux-based NEs such as routers, 
   security gateways, NATs, bridges, etc.  Netlink2 has incorporated 
   extensions to Netlink to allow multi-host distributed operation 
   across local and global networks. 
    
   The key features of Netlink2 are the following: 
    
   -  Peer-to-peer protocol which can be used between an arbitrarily 
      large set of addressable elements (CEs or FEs). 
    
   -  Embedded addressing of source and destination addressable 
      elements. 
    
   -  Support for unicast, logical, and broadcast addressing. 
    
   -  Separation from the underlying transport protocol.  Netlink2 can 
      run directly over unreliable IP/UDP, or can run over TCP/IP or 
      SCTP/IP.  It can also run directly over native link-layer 
      protocols (e.g., Ethernet, PCI). 
    
   -  Application-layer support for synchronization, sequencing, and 
      acknowledgement (not dependent on the underlying transport) 
      provides for element association, reliable or unreliable message 
      exchanges, and atomic transactions. 
    
   -  Congestion control by means of underlying transport protocol or by 
      means of Netlink2 flow control between addressable entities. 
    
   -  Support for message priority. 
    
   -  Support for message bundling and fragmentation. 
    
   -  Simultaneous support for unicast and multicast communication.  
      Multiple Netlink2 wires can be established between CEs and FEs for 
      efficient message exchange.  Multicast wires can enhance 
      scalability in certain local circumstances. 
    
   -  Flexible ACK strategy support to minimize multicast ACK implosion. 
    
   -  Support for FE_instance:LFB_instance and FE_group:LFB_class 
      addressing. 
    
   -  Support for a variety of command/query modes. 
    
   -  Authentication support by means of option headers. 
    
   -  Support for protocol versioning and extension headers. 
    
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 7] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
3.   Architectural Requirements Compliance Evaluation 
    
   This section contains a review of each protocol proposal's level of 
   compliance to the ForCES architecture requirements.  Many of the 
   architectural requirements will be instantiated in some fashion in 
   the protocol selected.  Given that the architectural requirements are 
   not direct protocol requirements, the review below will consist of 
   prose rather than specific levels of compliance as is used in the 
   protocol section below. 
    
3.1     FACT 
    
   FACT fulfills all the protocol requirements listed in section 5. By 
   doing this it in turn supports all the architectural requirements 
   defined in the ForCES Requirements [5]. FACT supports the separation 
   of the NE into CE and FE components, with CE handling roles such as 
   control, signaling and routing data calculation. The CE configures 
   the FE with all the information necessary for the FE's proper 
   operation. The FE's functions could be layer-3 forwarding, NAT, 
   metering, shaping, firewall, etc. Also, FACT state maintenance 
   messages help resolve the various states of the distributed CEs and 
   FEs to provide a unified state of the NE. 
    
3.2     GRMP 
    
   GRMP protocol is designed based on the ForCES architecture 
   requirements. We review its compliance to the individual requirement 
   items as below: 
    
   1) For architecture requirement #1  
   GRMP packets can be transported via any suitable mediums, such as 
   TCP/IP, Ethernet, ATM fabrics, and bus backplanes. 
     
   2) For architecture requirement #2 
   ForCES requires that FEs MUST support a minimal set of capabilities 
   necessary for establishing network connectivity (e.g., interface 
   discovery, port up/down functions). This process is usually out of 
   the range of the ForCES protocol, but GRMP protocol has no 
   restriction on this functionality.  
     
   3) For architecture requirement #3 
   By properly configuring FEs with their LFBs in a NE via GRMP 
   protocol, packets can arrive at one FE and depart at the other FE or 
   FEs. In the case where more than one CE work simultaneously in a NE, 
   the consistency and synchronization of control of the CEs is 
   basically required, but which is beyond the scope of the ForCES 
   protocol. 
     
   4) For architecture requirement #4 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 8] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   By properly configuring LFBs in FEs in a NE via GRMP protocol, the NE 
   can appear as a single functional device in a network. In the case 
   more than one CE work simultaneously in a NE, the consistency and 
   synchronization for the CEs to control FEs is basically required, but 
   this is beyond the scope of the ForCES protocol. 
     
   5) For architecture requirement #5 
   ForCES protocol requirement #2 has comprised this architecture 
   requirement, refer to Section 5.2.2 for details on GRMP compliance to 
   this requirement. 
     
   6) For architecture requirement #6 
   Please refer to Section 5.13.2 for details.  
     
   7) For architecture requirement #7 
   Please refer to Section 5.8.2 for details.  
     
   8) For architecture requirement #8 
   Please refer to Section 5.9.2 for details.  
     
   9) For architecture requirement #9 
   GRMP supports RFC1812 compliant router functions by means of 
   following mechanisms in GRMP: 
   -Fully supporting ForCES FE model 
   -Packet redirection messages 
   -Datapath management messages 
   -Managed Object(MO) management messages 
     
   10) For architecture requirement #10 
   In GRMP, FE topology query and response messages [3 Section 4.1.3] 
   are used for CEs to query FE topology information in a NE.  
     
   11) For architecture requirement #11 
   Please refer to Section 5.3.2 for details.  
     
   12) For architecture requirement #12 
   Please refer to Section 5.11.2 for details. 
     
   13) For architecture requirement #13 
   GRMP supports multiple FEs working together in a NE by using FE 
   identifiers and by allowing CEs to be informed of FE topology 
   information. GRMP supports multiple CEs working together in a NE by 
   supporting CE redundancy or failover functionality. 
     
   14) For architecture requirement #14 
   GRMP defines Managed Object (MO) management messages [3 Section 4.5] 
   to meet the requirement. 
    

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                 [Page 9] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   A MO is an object defined by some network management tool, such as 
   the object defined by Object Identifier in SNMP MIBs. MO management 
   messages work in the way as below: 
    
   1. Query of MOs resident in an FE can be directly implemented by 
   network management tools.  
   2. Change of MOs resident in an FE can only be made via a CE. To do 
   this, the high touch LFBs in the FE will redirect all network 
   management protocol messages like SNMP messages concerning MO changes 
   to the CE, then the CE will use the MO management messages described 
   in this section to change values of MOs in the FE. Of course, if 
   necessary, query of the MOs can also be made via the CE. 
   3. MOs resident in a CE can be directly queried or changed by the CE 
   with CE high touch capability. Before the CE can do this, network 
   management messages still need to be redirected from FEs to the CE. 
    
3.3     Netlink2 
    
   Section 5 of [5] identifies a set of ForCES architecture 
   requirements, some of which have an impact on the design and features 
   of the ForCES post-association phase protocol.  The following items 
   document the compliance of the Netlink2 proposal [4] to the each of 
   the ForCES architectural requirements. 
    
   1. Netlink2 is capable of operating over IP, therefore it is capable 
      of operating over any link-layer technology supporting IP.  
      Netlink2 is also capable of operating directly over link-layer 
      technologies in the absence of IP.  This is made possible due to 
      the inclusion of the following protocol mechanisms: 
       
      - Source and Destination element addresses. 
      - Message priority 
      - Message length 
      - Sequence number 
      - ACK/NACK support 
      - Checksum option (available in the Netlink2 extension header) 
       
      Note that in the case of both IP and direct link-layer operation, 
      Netlink2 depends on the pre-association protocol to associate 
      Netlink2 CE/FE addresses to link-layer (and, if applicable, IP) 
      addresses. 
    
   2. Not applicable. 
    
   3. Netlink2 supports generic unicast transmission to/from any 
      particular FE. 
    


 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 10] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   4. Netlink2 supports a state machine and the necessary protocol 
      messages to support the transition from pre-association to post-
      association phase. 
           
   5. Netlink2 supports CE and FE authentication by means of 
      authentication and name protocol options.  The authentication 
      mechanism design is not documented in [4].  The qualified name 
      mechanism is intended to be derived from [11]. 
    
   6. Netlink2 supports autonomous message generation by FEs. 
    
   7. Netlink2 supports NOOP messages which can be used to implement a 
      heartbeat protocol between addressable elements.  One component of 
      CE redundancy (state synchronization) is enabled by allowing 
      secondary CEs to be participants in Netlink2 multicast wires. 
    
   8. Netlink2 allows multiple unicast and/or multicast wires to be 
      established between CEs and FEs, allowing separate channels for 
      data and control exchanges.  Configuration of the necessary LFBs 
      for enabling packet redirection is opaque to Netlink2. 
    
   9. Netlink2 messages can be addressed to individual LFBs on an FE (or 
      to all LFBs of a class on all FEs within a particular multicast 
      group). The configuration commands for specific FE LFBs is opaque 
      to Netlink2.  Command templates derived from [10] are documented 
      in [4] and may be used with Netlink2. 
    
   10.FE topology information may be conveyed by Netlink2 (but is not 
      defined by it). 
    
   11.Netlink2 includes a variety of mechanisms to enhance scalability. 
      Message exchanges (e.g., physical interface configuration) 
      specific to a particular FE can be unicast to/from that FE.  
      Message exchanges applicable to a set of multiple FEs (e.g., 
      nexthop updates) can be multicast to all FEs within the set.  
      Netlink2 messages include sufficient addressing information to 
      allow recipients on a multicast wire to quickly filter out 
      messages not intended for them.  Partial ACK support is provided 
      to allow reliable multicast communication without ACK implosion at 
      the message originator.  ACKs/NACKs for multicast messages can be 
      returned on a unicast wire to the message originator. 
    
   12.Netlink2 supports a state machine and the necessary protocol 
      messages for CEs and FEs to join and leave association 
      dynamically. 
    
   13.Netlink2 allows support for up to 64K addressable elements (using 
      the currently specified addressing structure). 
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 11] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   14.Not applicable. 
    
4.   Model Requirements Compliance Evaluation 
    
   This section contains a review of each protocol's level of compliance 
   to the ForCES model requirements.  The ForCES model will indirectly 
   relate to the protocol in that the protocol will be used to carry 
   information that the model represents.  Given that the model 
   requirements are only indirectly related to the protocol selection, 
   the review below will consist of prose rather than specific levels of 
   compliance as is used in the protocol section below. 
    
4.1     FACT 
    
   The FACT protocol is logically separated into a base protocol and an 
   extensible payload which can be used to carry the FE, Logical 
   Functional Block (LFB) specific data which is defined by the FE Model 
   [9]. Thus the FACT protocol is cleanly separated from the data model 
   that it carries. The FE Model draft [9] defines the data model for 
   the Forwarding Element and meets all the Model requirements. 
    
   FACT's Configure Request and Configure Response message types under 
   the Capabilities Control message group provide a flexible way to 
   configure the functionality of the FE according to the FE Model [9]. 
   The specific parameters needed to assign functionalities and 
   behaviors to the Logical Functional Blocks (LFBs) in the FEs are 
   dictated by the FE Model. 
    
   Vendor Specific functions are supported by VS-Data request and VS-
   Data response messages in the Vendor Specific message group. 
    
4.2     GRMP 
    
   GRMP protocol is designed to use ForCES FE model as a base data model 
   for the protocol functionality. GRMP aims to support all operations 
   to all elements defined in ForCES FE model. Following elements for 
   ForCES FE model (including capability model and state model) with 
   their operations are presented in current version of GRMP document: 
   -FE capabilities 
   -FE attributes, including FE statistics 
   -FE events 
   -LFBs with their attributes (including capabilities, statistics, 
   etc), their actions, and their topologies 
   -Datapaths 
   Section 5.1.2 has described GRMP support for the management of the 
   modeled elements. Along with the progress in FE model work, a 
   modification of GRMP can be made to coordinate with the modification 
   in the FE model. 
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 12] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   GRMP protocol supports ForCES FE model to meet following model 
   requirements without any restriction from the protocol: 
    
   1. Types of logical functions 
   2. Variations of logical functions 
   3. Ordering of logical functions 
   4. Flexibility 
   5. Minimal set of logical functions 
    
4.3     Netlink2 
    
   The Forces FE Information Model [9] will define schemas for 
   describing the capabilities and attributes of FEs and LFBs.  From 
   these, protocol TLVs will be derived.  These TLVs will be 
   communicated as the payload of ForCES protocol messages.  The payload 
   of Netlink2 messages is opaque to Netlink2, with the exception that 
   the Netlink2 header includes a message type field which can be used 
   to convey information about the content of the message payload (this 
   feature could be ignored by defining a generic NLMSG_FECMD type).  
   Netlink2 supports message addressing at the granularity of 
   FE_instance:LFB_instance or FE_group:LFB_class.  Further, it supports 
   a variety of flag fields (request, root, match, atomic, replace, 
   exclusive, create, and append) which support efficient atomic 
   transaction, configuration, and query exchanges as may be required by 
   the FE model. 
    
5.   Protocol Requirements Compliance Evaluation 
    
   This section contains a review of each protocol's level of compliance 
   to the ForCES protocol requirements.  Given that the protocol 
   requirements are directly related to the protocol proposals, a very 
   concrete method is used in reviewing compliance - the following key 
   identifies the level of compliance for each of the following 
   protocols to each protocol requirement in the ForCES requirements 
   RFC: 
    
   T = Total compliance. Meets the requirement fully. 
    
   P+ = Partial compliance. Fundamentally meets the requirement through 
   the use of extensions (e.g. packages, additional parameters, etc.) 
    
   P = Partial compliance. Meets some aspect of the requirement, 
   however, the necessary changes require more than an extension and/or 
   are inconsistent with the design intent of the protocol. 
    
   N = Not compliant.  Does not meet the requirement. 
    
   Each subsection of this section begins with the specific protocol 
   requirement text found in the ForCES requirements. 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 13] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
    
5.1     Protocol Requirement: Configuration of Modeled Elements 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST allow the CEs to determine the capabilities 
   of each FE.  These capabilities SHALL be expressed using the FE model 
   whose requirements are defined in Section 6.  Furthermore, the 
   protocol MUST provide a means for the CEs to control all the FE 
   capabilities that are discovered through the FE model. The protocol 
   MUST be able to add/remove classification/action entries, set/delete 
   parameters, query statistics, and register for and receive events. 
    
  5.1.1 FACT 
    
   FACT's Capabilities Control message class contains Configure Request 
   and Configure Response messages that can be used to configure the 
   FE's behavior from the CE. Also, the Capability request and response 
   messages can be used by the CE to query and learn the FE 
   capabilities. Please see section 5.2 in [2] for more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.1.2 GRMP 
    
   Most of GRMP protocol messages are for the management of modeled 
   elements in ForCES FEs. They are listed as follows:  
    
   1) FE capability query and response messages [3 Section 4.1.4] 
   2) FE attribute manipulate message [3 Section 4.1.6] 
   3) FE attribute query and response messages [3 Section 4.1.7] 
   4) FE event report message [3 Section 4.1.8] 
   5) LFB action manipulate message [3 Section 4.2.1].  
   6) LFB topology query and response messages [3 Section 4.2.2] 
   7) LFB attribute manipulate message [3 Section 4.2.3].  
   8) LFB attribute query and response messages [3 Section 4.2.4] 
   9) Datapath Manipulate Message [3 Section 4.3.1] 
   10) Datapath query and response messages [3 Section 4.3.2] 
     
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.1.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 includes service template definitions that allow modeled 
   elements to be configured using TLVs. As the model gets refined, 
   appropriate modifications to those TLVs can be made without modifying 
   the Netlink2 base protocol. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 14] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
5.2     Protocol Requirement: Support for Secure Communication 
    
   a) FE configuration will contain information critical to the 
      functioning of a network (e.g. IP Forwarding Tables). As such, it 
      MUST be possible to ensure the integrity of all ForCES protocol 
      messages and protect against man-in-the-middle attacks.  
   b) FE configuration information may also contain information derived 
      from business relationships (e.g. service level agreements).  
      Because of the confidential nature of the information, it MUST be 
      possible to secure (make private) all ForCES protocol messages.  
   c) In order to ensure that authorized CEs and FEs are participating 
      in a NE and defend against CE or FE impersonation attacks, the 
      ForCES architecture MUST select a means of authentication for CEs 
      and FEs.  
   d) In some deployments ForCES is expected to be deployed between CEs 
      and FEs connected to each other inside a box over a backplane, 
      where physical security of the box ensures that man-in-the-middle, 
      snooping, and impersonation attacks are not possible. In such 
      scenarios the ForCES architecture MAY rely on the physical 
      security of the box to defend against these attacks and protocol 
      mechanisms May be turned off.  
   e) In the case when CEs and FEs are connected over a network, 
      security mechanisms MUST be specified or selected that protect the 
      ForCES protocol against such attacks.  Any security solution used 
      for ForCES MUST specify how it deals with such attacks. 
    
  5.2.1 FACT 
    
   FACT uses TLS when its endpoints are running over an IP network or in 
   an insecure environment. For a closed box or physically secure 
   environment, it is possible to turn off the protocol security 
   functions. The security association between the CEs and FEs is 
   established before any FACT association establishment messages are 
   exchanged. Also, FACT recommends using rate limiting mechanisms on 
   the FE to protect against DoS attacks. Please see section 8 in [2] 
   for more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.2.2 GRMP 
    
   1) When GRMP messages are encapsulated in a IP based medium, GRMP 
   protocol recommends to use IPsec or TLS [3 Section 4.1.2] to 
   authenticate the CEs and FEs and to secure the communication between 
   CEs and FEs to defend against possible man-in-the-middle or replay 
   attacks. GRMP has no restrictions on using other approaches for 
   secure communications. When GRMP messages are transported over bus 
   backplanes or in the case CEs and FEs are physically all in one box, 

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 15] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   the secure mechanism to defend man-in-the-middle attach MAY be turned 
   off. 
    
   2) [3 Section 4.6] has addressed the GRMP mechanism to prevent DoS 
   attacks.  
    
   3) [3 Section 4.1.2] has addressed the method to prevent possible FE 
   join or leave flood attacks. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.2.3 Netlink2 
    
   Secure communication is supported at the Netlink2-wire level using 
   pre-configured mechanisms (TLS, IP-SEC, MSEC, etc), in the case 
   security cannot be achieved by physical means only.  Netlink2 
   introduces ForCES qualified names (fqn) that permit the 
   authentication of FEs and CEs based on names instead of potentially 
   variable addresses.  The definition of fqns remains to be completed. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( P+ ) 
    
5.3     Protocol Requirement: Scalability 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST be capable of supporting (i.e., must scale 
   to) at least hundreds of FEs and tens of thousands of ports.  For 
   example, the ForCES protocol field sizes corresponding to FE or port 
   numbers SHALL be large enough to support the minimum required 
   numbers.  This requirement does not relate to the performance of a NE 
   as the number of FEs or ports in the NE grows. 
    
  5.3.1 FACT 
    
   FACT can support up to 64K FEs and 64K CEs at the same time due its 
   16 bit addressing range of both the CE-Tag and FE-Identifier fields. 
   Please see section 4.1 in [2] for more details on this. In addition, 
   it uses TCP (for IP interconnection between CEs and FEs) which 
   provides congestion control and thus helps in supporting the 
   scalability requirement. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.3.2 GRMP 
    
   In GRMP, a FE is identified by a 16 bits FE Identifier [3 section 
   3.2], which is theoretically able to identify up to 64k FEs.  
    
   Possible limitation in GRMP protocol to FE port number may be from FE 
   port address space, maximum number of list elements in "list data 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 16] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   format" [3 section 3.4.3], and LFB instance identifier space. The 
   evaluations of scalability for them are as follows: 
    
   1) An Addressable Entity (AE) address data format is defined in GRMP 
   [GRMP_3.4.4], which is theoretically capable of describing any length 
   of addresses of AEs, therefore FE port address space is not limited.  
    
   2) Element number of a list in "list data format" [3 Section 3.4.3] 
   is expressed with 16 bits data space, which theoretically limits list 
   element number within 64k.  
    
   3) LFB instance ID [3 Section 4.2.1] is expressed using 16 bits data 
   space, which can also theoretically represent 64k instances of one 
   kind of LFB such as a port LFB. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
    
  5.3.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 includes a flexible multicast-capable addressing mechanism 
   (32-bits).  This allows it to take full advantage of wires capable of 
   supporting multicast/broadcast, such as IP multicast-based wires or 
   Ethernet multicast-based wires (for the local scope environment).  In 
   addition, Netlink2 does not limit the number and types of wires that 
   can be used (instead of a single pair of unicast-based control and 
   data channels).  Netlink2 wires are configured during pre-
   association.  Support for multicast at the ForCES level is key for 
   scalable distribution (in terms of CPU usage and bandwidth) of 
   identical routing tables from a CE to multiple FEs, for instance.  
   Note that depending on the available transport mechanisms (or lack 
   thereof), a ForCES multicast wire may be implemented using suboptimal 
   multi-unicast TCP connections, for instance. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.4     Protocol Requirement: Multihop 
    
   When the CEs and FEs are separated beyond a single hop, the ForCES 
   protocol will make use of an existing RFC2914 compliant L4 protocol 
   with adequate reliability, security and congestion control (e.g. TCP, 
   SCTP) for transport purposes. 
    
  5.4.1 FACT 
    
   FACT uses TCP as the transport protocol which is congestion aware and 
   meets the transport requirements for multi-hop IP networks. Please 
   see section 3.2 in [2] for more details on this. 
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 17] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.4.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP aims to be capable of supporting remote control that allows CEs 
   and FEs to separate multihops away, as well as supporting close or 
   very close proximity control of CEs and FEs. When the CEs and FEs are 
   separated beyond a single hop, GRMP RECOMMENDS using an RFC2914 
   compliant L4 protocol such as TCP, SCTP for the protocol message 
   transmission with adequate reliability, security and congestion 
   control [3 Section 3.3].  
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.4.3 Netlink2 
    
   Congestion control and flow control may be necessary depending on the 
   scope in which the ForCES protocol operates.  Congestion control is 
   particularly relevant in the global scope, and can be provided by the 
   transport mechanisms used for the Netlink2 wires.  Flow control may 
   be provided either by the transport mechanism, by means of 
   backpressure (such as local scope case with a switching fabric 
   interconnecting CEs and FEs) or by an appropriate windowing of 
   Netlink2 messages.  Netlink2 accomodates multi-hop wires (i.e., 
   global scope) using any appropriate congestion-control-friendly 
   transport protocol, such as TCP or SCTP.  At a minimum, Netlink2 
   requires that UDP is available for the local scope, and TCP 
   (congestion control and reliability) and/or SCTP-PR (congestion 
   control and timeliness) 
   (Note: decision should be taken by the working group) for the global 
   scope. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.5     Protocol Requirement: Message Priority 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST provide a means to express the protocol 
   message priorities. 
    
  5.5.1 FACT 
    
   FACT supports up to 8 levels of priority using the 3 priority bits in 
   the common header. Please see section 4.1.6 in [2] for more details 
   on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.5.2 GRMP 
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 18] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   GRMP defines a priority field at GRMP message header [3 Section 3.2] 
   to express the protocol message priority.  
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.5.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 supports a priority bit in the Netlink2 message header 
   flags, as well as a 16-bit priority field using the Netlink2 header-
   extension TLV. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.6     Protocol Requirement: Reliability 
    
   a) The ForCES protocol will be used to transport information that 
      requires varying levels of reliability. By strict or robust 
      reliability in this requirement we mean, no losses, no corruption, 
      no re-ordering of information being transported and delivery in a 
      timely fashion.  
   b) Some information or payloads, such as redirected packets or packet 
      sampling, may not require robust reliability (can tolerate some 
      degree of losses). For information of this sort, ForCES MUST NOT 
      be restricted to strict reliability.  
   c) Payloads such as configuration information, e.g. ACLs, FIB 
      entries, or FE capability information (described in section 7, 
      (1)) are mission critical and must be delivered in a robust 
      reliable fashion. Thus, for information of this sort, ForCES MUST 
      either provide built-in protocol mechanisms or use a reliable 
      transport protocol for achieving robust/strict reliability.  
   d) Some information or payloads, such as heartbeat packets that may 
      be used to detect loss of association between CE and FEs (see 
      section 7, (8)), may prefer timeliness over reliable delivery. For 
      information of this sort, ForCES MUST NOT be restricted to strict 
      reliability.  
   e) When ForCES is carried over multi-hop IP networks, it is a 
      requirement that ForCES MUST use a RFC 2914 [12]-compliant 
      transport protocol.  
   f) In cases where ForCES is not running over an IP network such as an 
      Ethernet or cell fabric between CE and FE, then reliability still 
      MUST be provided when carrying critical information of the types 
      specified in (c) above, either by the underlying 
      link/network/transport layers or by built-in protocol mechanisms. 
    
  5.6.1 FACT 
    
   FACT uses a reliable transport protocol to meet all the reliability 
   requirements. For IP-interconnection between the protocol elements, 
   FACT uses TCP as the transport protocol for the control channel. 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 19] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   Please see section 3.2 in [2] for more details on this. FACT also 
   provides protocol level responses or acknowledgements (and sequence 
   numbers) for control messages. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.6.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP supplies two levels of built-in error control mechanisms and 
   several other mechanisms to improve the protocol reliability:  
    
   1) Normal level error control 
   In this level, GRMP protocol uses a specific GRMP ACK message [3 
   Section 3.4.1] associated with "Result" and "Code" fields in the 
   message headers to protect against errors that may result from 
   message transmission, message processing, or message generating. 
    
   2) Strengthened level error control 
   If higher level of reliability is required for some protocol 
   messages, a built-in error control based on CRC-32 checksums can 
   furthermore be applied [3 Section 3.2]. This makes GRMP able to be 
   transported over some mediums that themselves cannot supply error 
   controls, like Ethernet, UDP, etc. 
    
   3) Transaction identifier to control the order of messages 
   GRMP has defined different transaction identifiers for CE generated 
   messages and for FE generated messages [3 Section 3.2]. This makes it 
   possible to use protocol built-in method to order back protocol 
   messages if in occasional cases messages are reordered.  
    
   4) GRMP recommends to use an RFC2914 compliant L4 protocol for 
   message transmission to improve the protocol reliability when CEs and 
   FEs are multihops away [3 Section 3.3]. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.6.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 defines application-level ACKs to acknowedge that 
   transactions have completed successfully.  Reliability can be built 
   using such ACKs only, or can be enhanced using reliable transport 
   protocols (expected to be necessary in the global scope), if 
   available.  Each Netlink2 message carries a sequence number as well 
   as a flag that indicates whether an ACK is expected. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.7     Protocol Requirement: Interconnect Independence 
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 20] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   The ForCES protocol MUST support a variety of interconnect 
   technologies. (refer to section 5, requirement# 1) 
    
  5.7.1 FACT 
    
   FACT uses interconnect independent addressing (FE Identifier, CE tag) 
   in its common header to provide interconnect independence. For non-IP 
   interconnects, such as ATM, an interconnect specific encapsulation 
   will have to be defined to carry the FACT messages. For IP 
   interconnects, FACT uses TCP as the transport protocol. For non-IP 
   interconnects, which do not provide reliability, the interconnect 
   specific encapsulation might consist of an optional checksum and any 
   other fields to help build reliability, although reuse of existing 
   transport mechanisms is recommended. Please see section 3.1 in [2] 
   for more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.7.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP packets can be transported via any suitable mediums, such as 
   TCP/IP, Ethernet, ATM fabrics, and bus backplanes [3 Section 3.3]. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.7.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 defines its own addressing.  Encapsulations for various non-
   IP media remain to be defined. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.8     Protocol Requirement: CE Redundancy or CE Failover 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST support mechanisms for CE redundancy or CE 
   failover. This includes the ability for CEs and FEs to determine when 
   there is a loss of association between them, ability to restore 
   association and efficient state (re)synchronization mechanisms. This 
   also includes the ability to preset the actions an FE will take in 
   reaction to loss of association to its CE e.g., whether the FE will 
   continue to forward packets or whether it will halt operations. 
   (refer to section 5, requirement# 7) 
    
  5.8.1 FACT 
    
   FACT exchanges CE and FE element states using the PE State 
   Maintenance messages. FACT also uses Heart-Beat messages (section 5.3 
   in [2]) to detect protocol element (CE or FE) failure or loss of 
   association between elements and to trigger a switch-over to a 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 21] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   functioning redundant element (CE or FE). Please see section 7.3 in 
   [2] for more details on the different mechanisms (Strong consistency, 
   weak consistency) used for CE failover. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.8.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP meets ForCES CE redundancy or CE failover requirement by means 
   of following mechanisms: 
    
   1) CE failover or leave policy [3 Section 4.6.4] 
   This policy is defined as a FE attribute. In this attribute, 
   selectable FE policies for CE failover such as FE graceful restart 
   and CE re-association policies are defined.  
    
   2) FE heartbeat policy [3 Section 4.6.6] 
   The ability to determine the loss of association between a CE and a 
   FE is obtained by use of this FE heartbeat policy and the associated 
   CE heartbeat event. 
   3) CE status event report [3 Section 4.4.2] 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.8.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 accommodates transparent CE (and FE) redundancy and failover 
   using Netlink2 multicast wires that include both the active and 
   backup CE (and FE).  Using the ECHO flag in the Netlink2 header, a 
   hearbeat mechanism can be created to detect when failover must take 
   place.  Actions that take place after a loss of association remains 
   to be defined. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( P+ ) 
    
5.9     Protocol Requirement: Packet Redirection/Mirroring 
    
   a) The ForCES protocol MUST define a way to redirect packets from the 
   FE to the CE and vice-versa. Packet redirection terminates any 
   further processing of the redirected packet at the FE.  
   b) The ForCES protocol MUST define a way to mirror packets from the 
   FE to the CE. Mirroring allows the packet duplicated by the FE at the 
   mirroring point to be sent to the CE while the original packet 
   continues to be processed by the FE.  
    
   Examples of packets that may be redirected or mirrored include 
   control packets (such as RIP, OSPF messages) addressed to the 
   interfaces or any other relevant packets (such as those with Router 
   Alert Option set). The ForCES protocol MUST also define a way for the 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 22] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   CE to configure the behavior of a) and b) (above), to specify which 
   packets are affected by each. 
    
  5.9.1 FACT 
    
   FACT's Traffic Maintenance Message class includes Control Packet 
   Redirect and Control Packet Forward messages to achieve packet 
   redirection/mirroring. These messages are sent over the separate data 
   channel. Please see section 5.4 in [2] for more details on this. 
   Also, the Event Register/Deregister messages (section 5.5 in [2]) can 
   be used to specify which packets should be redirected/mirrored. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.9.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP supports packet redirection by packet redirection messages [3 
   Section 4.7]. A LFB within LFB topology in a FE should be used to 
   pick out packets that are to be redirected. Packets to be redirected 
   are first put in GRMP slave [3 Section 4.6.1] and then are directed 
   to a CE via the packet redirection message. The attribute of this 
   filter LFB are set by CEs, therefore the CE has the ability to 
   control which packets can be redirected.  
    
   To redirect packets from CE to FE, CE just needs to encapsulate the 
   packet to the packet redirection message and send it to the FE. On 
   the FE side, GRMP salve resolves the redirected packet and put it 
   into a datapath in a FE LFB topology so that they can further be 
   delivered by the FE.  
    
   By properly configuring LFBs in FE, a packet can be mirrored to CE 
   instead of purely redirected to CE, i.e., the packet is duplicated 
   and one is redirected to CE and the other continues its way in the 
   LFB topology. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.9.3 Netlink2 
    
   It is expected that the necessary LFB for packet redirection and 
   mirroring is defined by the model itself.  The message format to 
   carry redirected packets between the FE and CE remains to be defined. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( P+ ) 
    
5.10     Protocol Requirement: Topology Exchange 
    


 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 23] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   The ForCES protocol MUST allow the FEs to provide their topology 
   information (topology by which the FEs in the NE are connected) to 
   the CE(s). (refer to section 5, requirement# 10) 
    
  5.10.1 FACT 
    
   FACT's Capabilities and Control Message class includes Query request 
   and response messages to achieve topology information exchange 
   between the CE and FEs. Please see sections 5.2.5, 5.2.6 in [2] for 
   more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.10.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP FE topology query and response messages [3 Section 4.1.3] are 
   used for CEs to query FE topology information in the NE.  
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.10.3 Netlink2 
    
   This is expected to be defined by the FE model, therefore it opaque 
   to Netlink2. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( P+ ) 
    
5.11     Protocol Requirement: Dynamic Association 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST allow CEs and FEs to join and leave a NE 
   dynamically. (refer to section 5, requirement# 12) 
    
  5.11.1 FACT 
    
   FACT's Connection and Association message class includes Join 
   request, Join response, Leave request and Leave response messages to 
   enable dynamic joining and leaving of protocol elements (CEs, FEs) in 
   the NE. Please see sections 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3, 5.1.4 in [2] for 
   more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.11.2 GRMP 
    
   In GRMP, specific FE join request message [3 Section 4.1.1] and FE 
   leave request message [3 Section 4.1.2] make FEs able to dynamically 
   join or leave a ForCES NE. While CE failover or leave policy [3 
   Section 4.6.4] defines the way for CEs to dynamically join or leave 

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 24] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   the NE. GRMP also defines FE failover and rejoin policy [3 Section 
   4.6.5] for FEs to dynamically rejoin the NE.  
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.11.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 uses SYN and FIN messages similarly to TCP to set up and 
   tear down associations.  Such messages are sent by default on a 
   broadcast wire, or on pre-configured wires. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.12      Protocol Requirement: Command Bundling 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST be able to group an ordered set of commands 
   to a FE. Each such group of commands SHOULD be sent to the FE in as 
   few messages as possible. Furthermore, the protocol MUST support the 
   ability to specify if a command group MUST have all-or-nothing 
   semantics.  
      
  5.12.1 FACT 
    
   FACT supports command bundling by using multiple TLVs in its message 
   payload. For example, each TLV used in the Configure Request message 
   could represent a different command such as Add, Delete, etc. In 
   addition, FACT also supports 2-phase commit operations. Please see 
   sections 5.2.3, 4.2 in [2] for more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.12.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP supports ForCES protocol command bundling by use of GRMP batch 
   messages [3 Section 4.8]. The messages allow GRMP application layers 
   to pack several different sub message bodies into one single GRMP 
   message. The sub messages are defined to be executed in an all-or-
   nothing mode. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.12.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 supports the concatenation of multiple commands of an 
   identical type in the same Netlink2 message (such as multiple route 
   additions), as well as the bundling of different commands sent in 
   separate Netlink2 messages (using the MULTI flag).  All-or-nothing  
   (2-phase commit) is supported using the ATOMIC flag. 
    
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 25] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.13      Protocol Requirement: Asynchronous Event Notification 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST be able to asynchronously notify the CE of 
   events on the FE such as failures or change in available resources or 
   capabilities. (refer to section 5, requirement# 6)  
      
  5.13.1 FACT 
    
   FACT's Event Notification message class includes the Asynchronous FE 
   Event notification message used to report asynchronous FE events to 
   the CE. Please see section 5.5 in [2] for more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.13.2 GRMP 
    
   In GRMP, a FE asynchronously informs CEs of a failure, resources and 
   capabilities changes, and other asynchronous events via GRMP FE event 
   report message [3 Section 4.1.8].  
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.13.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 is peer-to-peer, so any addressable entity can send a 
   message to any other.  FE and LFB-level events will have to be 
   defined in the FE model, so that Netlink2 can transmit them. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.14      Protocol Requirement: Query Statistics 
    
   The ForCES protocol MUST provide a means for the CE to be able to 
   query statistics (monitor performance) from the FE.  
      
  5.14.1 FACT 
    
   FACT's Capabilities and Control message class includes the Query 
   request and response messages which can be used by the CE for 
   querying the FE's properties and statistics. Please see sections 
   5.2.5, 5.2.6 in [2] for more details on this. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.14.2 GRMP 
    

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 26] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   GRMP defines statistics regarding FE performance as FE or LFB 
   attributes. GRMP uses FE attribute query and response messages [3 
   Section 4.1.7] and LFB attribute query and response messages [3 
   Section 4.2.4] to query the statistics.  
    
   GRMP can also support query of statistics defined by network 
   management tools like SNMP by using MO get message [3 Section 4.5.1] 
   and MO response message [3 Section 4.5.3]. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.14.3 Netlink2 
    
   Statistics are specific to LFBs and therefore remain opaque to the 
   Netlink2 protocol. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.15      Protocol Requirement: Protection Against Denial of Service Attacks 
    
   Systems utilizing the ForCES protocol can be attacked using denial of 
   service attacks based on CPU overload or queue overflow.  The ForCES 
   protocol could be exploited by such attacks to cause the CE to become 
   unable to control the FE or appropriately communicate with other 
   routers and systems.  The ForCES protocol MUST therefore provide 
   mechanisms for controlling FE capabilities that can be used to 
   protect against such attacks. FE capabilities that MUST be 
   manipulated via ForCES include the ability to install classifiers and 
   filters to detect and drop attack packets, as well as to be able to 
   install rate limiters that limit the rate of packets which appear to 
   be valid but may be part of an attack (e.g. bogus BGP packets). 
    
  5.15.1 FACT 
    
   FACT uses separate control and data channels to provide robustness in 
   the protocol against Denial of Service (DoS) attacks. Please see 
   section 3.3 in [2] for more details on this. Also, the Configure 
   Request and Response messages in FACT could be used to install 
   filters on FEs which can be used for rate-limiting the malicious 
   traffic. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.15.2 GRMP 
    
   GRMP supports protection against DoS attacks by means of following 
   mechanisms: 
    
   1) A model for GRMP slave module [3 Section 4.6.1] 
 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 27] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   In this model, all GRMP messages sending to CE are put into two 
   different channels: the data channel, which is only for packet 
   redirection messages, and the control channel, which is for other 
   GRMP messages. Messages on the two channels pass through a packet 
   scheduler for the link connecting to CE. The scheduler is managed by 
   CE by setting some scheduling policies (disciplines) to it. In this 
   way, the CE can control the traffic over the two channels dynamically 
   according to the monitored traffic status, to defend against DoS 
   attacks and to protect control channel transmission. 
    
   2) GRMP DoS protection policy [3 Section 4.6.2] 
   In this policy, scheduling priorities, channel bandwidths, and 
   congestion control policies for the individual data channel and 
   control channel can be set.  
    
   3) GRMP DoS attack alert policy [3 Section 4.6.3] 
    
   4) A DoS attack alert event report [3 Section 4.1.8] 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
  5.15.3 Netlink2 
    
   Netlink2 defines Netlink2 SYN Cookies as a mechanism to prevent DoS 
   attacks originating in a environment where security cannot be 
   physically ensured.  Netlink2 relies on appropriate policers to rate 
   limit data traffic redirected to CEs. As different wires may be used 
   for data and control traffic, prioritization and 
   reliability/unreliability can be chosen appropriately for each wire 
   with a suitable transport protocol. 
    
   Protocol requirement compliance level: ( T ) 
    
5.16      Protocol Requirement Summary Table 
    
   This section is a summary of the compliance levels claimed for each 
   protocol above and is included as a convenience. 
    











 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 28] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   Protocol Requirement                            FACT  GRMP  Netlink2 
   ==================================================================== 
   1.  Configuration of Modeled Elements              T     T     T 
   2.  Support for Secure Communication               T     T     P+ 
   3.  Scalability                                    T     T     T 
   4.  Multihop                                       T     T     T 
   5.  Message Priority                               T     T     T 
   6.  Reliability                                    T     T     T 
   7.  Interconnect Independence                      T     T     T 
   8.  CE Redundancy or CE Failover                   T     T     P+ 
   9.  Packet Redirection/Mirroring                   T     T     P+ 
   10. Topology Exchange                              T     T     P+ 
   11. Dynamic Association                            T     T     T 
   12. Command Bundling                               T     T     T 
   13. Asynchronous Event Notification                T     T     T 
   14. Query Statistics                               T     T     T 
   15. Protection Against Denial of Service Attacks   T     T     T 
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   This document is a comparison between three protocols in order to 
   help in the selection of the best approach to use as the ForCES 
   protocol.  Security considerations are addressed in each of the 
   protocol proposals and MUST be included as part of the fitness 
   evaluation for each proposal. 
    
    
References 
    
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Audu, A. et al., "ForwArding and Control ElemenT protocol (FACT)", 
      work in progress, November 2003, <draft-gopal-forces-fact-06.txt> 
    
   3  Wang, W. et al., "General Router Management Protocol (GRMP) 
      Version 1", November 2003, <draft-wang-forces-grmp-01.txt> 
    
   4  Salim, J. H. et al., "Netlink2 as ForCES Protocol", work in 
      progress, October 2003, <draft-jhsrha-forces-netlink2-02.txt> 
    
   5  Khosravi, H. et al., "Requirements for Separation of IP Control 
      and Forwarding", RFC 3654, July 2003. 
    



 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 29] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
   6  Yang, L. et al., "Forwarding and Control Element Separation 
      (ForCES) Framework", work in progress, October 2003,  
      <draft-ietf-forces-framework-10.txt> 
    
   7  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   8  Barnes, M., "Middlebox Communications (MIDCOM) Protocol 
      Evaluation", work in progress, Nov 2002, 
      <draft-ietf-midcom-protocol-eval-06.txt> 
    
   9  Yang, L. et al., "ForCES Forwarding Element Functional Model", 
      work in progress, October 2003, <draft-ietf-forces-model-01.txt> 
    
   10 Hadi Salim, et. al., "Linux Netlink as an IP Services Protocol", 
      RFC 3549, July 2003. 
    
   11 M. Bakke, et. al., "iSCSI Naming and Discover", work in Progress, 
      June 20, 2003, <draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-name-disc-10.txt> 
    
   12 S. Floyd, "Congestion Control Principles", RFC2914, September 
      2000. 
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Alex Audu  
   Alcatel R&I  
   1000 Coit Road  
   Plano, TX 75075    
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: 1-972-477-7809  
   Email: alex.audu@alcatel.com   
    
   Steven Blake 
   Ericsson 
   920 Main Campus Drive, Suite 500 
   Raleigh, NC  27606 
   U.S.A. 
   Email: steven.blake@ericsson.com 
    
   Ligang Dong 
   Hangzhou University of Commerce 
   149 Jiaogong Road 
   Hangzhou, 310035, P.R.China  
   Phone: +86-571-88071024 
   Email: donglg@mail.hzic.edu.cn 
    

 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 30] 











                     ForCES Protocol Evaluation Draft    December 2003 
 
 
   Robert Haas 
   IBM Research 
   Zurich Research Laboratory 
   Saeumerstrasse 4 
   CH-8803 Rueschlikon, 
   Switzerland 
   Email: rha@zurich.ibm.com 
    
   Hormuzd Khosravi  
   Intel  
   2111 NE 25th Avenue  
   Hillsboro, OR 97124  
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: 1-503-264-0334  
   Email: hormuzd.m.khosravi@intel.com 
    
   David Putzolu 
   Intel 
   Mailstop JF3-206-H10 
   2111 NE 25th Avenue 
   Hillsboro, OR 97124 
   U.S.A. 
   Phone: 1-503-264-4510 
   Email: david.putzolu@intel.com 
    
   Jamal Hadi Salim 
   Znyx Networks 
   195 Stafford Rd. West 
   Ottawa, Ontario 
   Canada 
   Email: hadi@znyx.com 
    
   Weiming Wang  
   Department of Information and Electronic Engineering   
   Hangzhou University of Commerce  
   149 Jiaogong Road  
   Hangzhou, 310035, P.R.China   
   Phone: +86-571-88057712  
   Email: wangwm@hzcnc.com 
    









 
 
Putzolu et al.           Expires - June 2004                [Page 31] 

