

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                            Luyuan Fang 
                                                               (editor) 
                                                                   AT&T 
                                                                        
                                                      Michael Behringer 
                                                                  Cisco 
                                                                        
                                                          Fabio Chiussi 
                                                    Lucent Technologies 
                                                                        
                                                             Mark Duffy 
                                                    Quarry Technologies 
                                                                        
   Provider Provisioned VPN WG                             Paul Hitchen 
                                                                     BT 
                                                                        
   Internet Draft                                           Paul Knight 
                                                        Nortel Networks 
   Document:                                                            
   draft-fang-ppvpn-security-framework-00.txt 
   Expires: August 2003                                   February 2003 
    
                                      
   Security Framework for Provider Provisioned Virtual Private Networks 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    

     
                   Informational - Expires May 2002                  1 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
Abstract 
    
   This draft addresses security aspects pertaining to Provider 
   Provisioned Virtual Private Networks (PPVPNs). We first describe the 
   security threats that are relevant in the context of PPVPNs, and the 
   defensive techniques that can be used to combat those threats. We 
   consider security issues deriving both from malicious behavior of 
   anyone and from negligent or incorrect behavior of the providers. We 
   also describe how these security attacks should be detected and 
   reported. We then discuss the possible user requirements in terms of 
   security in a PPVPN service. These user requirements translate into 
   corresponding requirements for the providers. In addition, the 
   provider may have additional requirements to make its network 
   infrastructure secure and meet the VPN customerÆs expectations. 
   Finally, we define how these user requirements apply to specific 
   PPVPN technologies, namely RFC2547 PPVPNs, Virtual Router PPVPNs, 
   IPSec VPNs, and Layer 2 PPVPNs. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................2 
   Conventions used in this document..................................3 
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Security Reference Model.......................................4 
   3. Security Threats...............................................5 
   3.1.  Attacks on the Data Plane...................................6 
   3.2.  Attacks on the Control Plane................................7 
   4. Defensive Techniques...........................................9 
   4.1.  Cryptographic techniques...................................10 
   4.2.  Sender Authentication......................................12 
   4.3.  Access Control techniques..................................12 
   4.4.  Use of Isolated Infrastructure.............................13 
   4.5.  Use of Aggregated Infrastructure...........................13 
   4.6.  Service Provider Quality Control Processes.................13 
   4.7.  Deployment of Testable PPVPN Service.......................13 
   5. Monitoring, Detection, and Reporting of Security Attacks......13 
   6. User Security Requirements....................................14 
   6.1.  Isolation..................................................15 
   6.2.  Protection.................................................15 
   6.3.  Confidentiality............................................16 
   6.4.  Authentication.............................................16 
   6.5.  Integrity..................................................16 
   6.6.  Anti-Replay................................................16 
   6.7.  Non-repudiation............................................16 
   7. Provider Security Requirements................................17 
   7.1.  Protection within the Core Network.........................17 
     
                         Expires August 2003                        2 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   7.2.  Protection on the User Access Link.........................19 
   7.3.  General Requirements for PPVPN Providers...................19 
   8. Security Aspects of PPVPN Technologies........................19 
   8.1.  Security Aspects of RFC2547 PPVPNs.........................20 
   8.2.  Security Aspects of Virtual Router PPVPNs..................20 
   8.3.  Security Aspects of IPSec VPNs.............................20 
   8.4.  Security Aspects of Layer 2 PPVPNs.........................20 
   9. Security Considerations.......................................20 
   References........................................................20 
   Author's Addresses................................................21 
   Full Copyright Statement..........................................21 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Security is clearly an integral aspect of Provider Provisioned 
   Virtual Private Network (PPVPN) services.  
    
   In this document, we first describe the security threats that are 
   relevant in the context of PPVPNs, and the defensive techniques that 
   can be used to combat those threats. We consider security issues 
   deriving both from malicious behavior of users and other parties and 
   from negligent or incorrect behavior of the providers. An important 
   part of security defense is the detection and report of a security 
   attack, which is also addressed in this document.  
    
   We then discuss the possible user and provider security requirements 
   in a PPVPN service. The users have expectations that need to be met 
   on the security characteristics of a VPN service. These user 
   requirements translate into corresponding requirements for the 
   providers in order to offer the service. In addition, providers have 
   security requirements to protect their network infrastructure, and 
   make it secure so it can provide the PPVPN services.  
    
   Finally, we define how these user and provider requirements apply to 
   specific PPVPN technologies, namely RFC2547 PPVPNs, Virtual Router 
   PPVPNs, IPSec VPNs, and Layer 2 PPVPNs. 
    
   It is important to clarify that, in this document, we limit 
   ourselves to describing the users and providersÆ security 
   requirements that pertain to PPVPN services. It is not our 
   intention, however, to formulate precise ôrequirementsö on each 
   specific technology in terms of defining the mechanisms and 
     
                         Expires August 2003                        3 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   techniques that must be implemented to satisfy such users and 
   providersÆ requirements. 
    
   In its current form, the body of many sections in this document is 
   in a preliminary stage, and will be completed in future versions of 
   this draft. Our main purpose for this first release is to solicit 
   input and reach consensus within the working group on which security 
   aspects should be within the scope of this draft, and which should 
   be part of other documents. In fact, there is a clear need from 
   providers and vendors alike to define a general framework to address 
   the security aspects of PPVPN services, but there is also 
   considerable debate on the most appropriate way to accomplish this.  
    
   Specifically, in terms of the contents of this draft, one pressing 
   issue is whether the mapping of the security requirements to each 
   specific PPVPN technology should be within the scope of this 
   document, or the specific security aspects should be treated 
   separately in the drafts describing each technology. 
    
   This document is organized as follows. In Section 2, we define the 
   security reference model for security in PPVPN networks, which we 
   use in the rest of the document. In Section 3, we describe the 
   security threats that are specific of PPVPNs. In Section 4, we 
   review defense techniques that may be used against those threats. In 
   Section 5, we describe how attacks may be detected and reported. In 
   Section 6, we discuss the user security requirements that apply to 
   PPVPN services. In Section 7, we describe additional security 
   requirements that the provider may have in order to guarantee the 
   security of the network infrastructure to provide PPVPN services. 
   Finally, in Section 8, we map all these users and providersÆ 
   requirement on specific PPVPN technologies. 
 
2. Security Reference Model 
    
   This section defines the terminology used in this document, and a 
   reference model for security in PPVPN networks.  
    
   A PPVPN core network is defined here as the central network 
   infrastructure over which PPVPN services are delivered. All network 
   elements in the core are under the operational control of one or 
   more PPVPN service providers.  
    
   A PPVPN user is a company, institution or residential client of the 
   PPVPN service provider.  
    
   A PPVPN network is a virtual private network provided over the PPVPN 
   core, under administrative control of the PPVPN user. Edge network 
   elements of a PPVPN may be maintained by the service provider.  
    
   This document defines each PPVPN as a trusted zone, and the PPVPN 
   core as another trusted zone. A primary concern is about security 
     
                         Expires August 2003                        4 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   aspects that relate to infrictions of security from the "outside" of 
   a trusted zone to the "inside" of this zone. Figure 1 depicts the 
   concept of trusted zones within the PPVPN framework.  
   
    
   +------------+                             +------------+ 
   | PPVPN      +-----------------------------+      PPVPN | 
   | user           PPVPN                             user | 
   | site       +---------------------XXX-----+       site | 
   +------------+  +------------------XXX--+  +------------+ 
                   |   PPVPN core     | |  | 
                   +------------------| |--+ 
                                      | | 
                                      | +------\ 
                                      +--------/  Internet 
    
   Figure 1: The PPVPN trusted zone model 
    
   In principle the trusted zones should be separate, however, often 
   PPVPN core networks also offer Internet access, in which case a 
   transit point (marked with "XXX" in the figure) is defined.  
    
   The key requirement of a "virtual private" network (VPN) is that the 
   security of the trusted zone of the VPN is not compromised by 
   sharing the core infrastructure with other VPNs.  
    
   In addition, we consider security aspects that are exclusively 
   within a trusted zone, for example within a given PPVPN, or within 
   the core network.  
    
   However, all aspects of network security which are independent of 
   the way the network is provisioned are outside the scope of this 
   document. For example attacks from the Internet to a server of a 
   given PPVPN user will not be considered here, unless the way to 
   provision the PPVPN network could make a difference to the security 
   of this server.  
    
3. Security Threats 
    
   This section discusses the various network security threats that may 
   endanger PPVPNs.  The discussion is limited to those threats that 
   are unique to PPVPNs, that affect PPVPNs in unique ways, or that are 
   perceived obstacles to PPVPN deployment. 
    
   A successful attack on a particular PPVPN or on a service provider's 
   PPVPN infrastructure would be expected to have effects of the 
   following unhappy sorts: 
   o Observation, modification, or deletion of PPVPN customer data. 
   o Replay of PPVPN customer data. 
   o Injection of non-authentic data into a PPVPN. 
   o Traffic pattern analysis on PPVPN traffic. 
     
                         Expires August 2003                        5 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   o Disruption of PPVPN connectivity. 
    
   It is useful to consider that threats, whether malicious or 
   accidental, to a PPVPN may come from different categories of 
   sources.  For example they may come from: 
   o The PPVPN service provider or persons working for it. 
   o Persons within the organization which is the customer with respect 
   to a particular PPVPN. 
   o Persons within an organization that is a separate PPVPN customer 
   of the same service provider. 
   o Others i.e. attackers from the Internet at large. 
    
   In the case of PPVPNs, some parties may be in more advantaged 
   positions that enable them to launch types of attacks not available 
   to others.  For example other PPVPN customers of the same service 
   provider may be able to launch attacks that those completely outside 
   the network cannot. 
    
   It is also useful to consider the likelihood of different sorts of 
   threats occurring.  There is at least a perceived difference in the 
   likelihood of most types of attacks being successfully mounted in 
   different environments, such as: 
   o In a layer 1 or layer 2 access network between a PPVPN customer 
   and the service provider 
   o Within one service provider's network 
   o On the public Internet  
    
   The following sections discuss specific types of exploits that 
   threaten PPVPNs. 
    
3.1.    Attacks on the Data Plane 
    
   This category encompasses attacks on the PPVPN customer data, as 
   viewed by the service provider.  Note that from the PPVPN customer's 
   point of view, some of this might be control plane traffic, e.g. 
   routing protocols running from customer site to customer site via an 
   L2 PPVPN. 
    
3.1.1.  Insertion of non-authentic data traffic, spoofing, 
 falsification 
    
   This refers to the insertion (or ôspoofingö) into the VPN of packets 
   that do not belong there, with the objective of having them accepted 
   as legitimate.  Included in this category is the insertion of copies 
   of once-legitimate packets that have been recorded and replayed. 
    
3.1.2.  Denial of Service attacks on the VPN 
    
   DOS attacks on the data plane could be mounted by inserting an 
   overwhelming quantity of non-authentic data into a specific PPVPN, 
   or by overwhelming the service providerÆs general (VPN-independent) 
     
                         Expires August 2003                        6 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   infrastructure.  This latter case is not necessarily a PPVPN-
   specific issue, unless the attack is mounted by another VPN with the 
   intention of monopolizing network resources in order to prevent 
   other VPNs from accessing those resources. 
    
3.1.3.  Unauthorized observation/modification/deletion of data traffic 
    
   This refers to ôsniffingö VPN packets and examining their contents.  
   It also includes modifying the contents of packets in flight, or 
   causing packets in flight to be discarded.  Such attacks would 
   typically occur on links in the network but might also occur in a 
   compromised node of the network. 
    
3.1.4.  Traffic Pattern Analysis 
    
   This refers to ôsniffingö VPN packets and examining aspects or meta-
   aspects of them that may be visible even when the packets themselves 
   are encrypted.  An attacker might gain useful information based on 
   the amount and timing of traffic, packet sizes, source and 
   destination addresses, etc. 
 
3.1.5.  Interference 
    
   This refer to attacks aiming at disrupting communication exchanges 
   between PEs or routers in the network. This includes any actions 
   such as discarding and delaying packets and acknowledgments, 
   flapping routing sessions, etc. 
    
   Interference can also refer to actions, external to a VPN, with the 
   purpose of disrupting the correct behavior of the VPN, such as 
   increasing packet loss, increasing delay, and reducing throughput. 
    
3.1.6.  Impersonation 
    
   This refers to a broad category of attacks where the attacker 
   disguises itself to appear as a legitimate entity.  
    
3.2.    Attacks on the Control Plane 
    
   This category encompasses attacks on the control structures operated 
   by the PPVPN service provider. 
    
3.2.1.  Denial of Service Attacks on the Network Infrastructure 
    
   DOS attacks could be mounted specifically against the mechanisms the 
   service provider uses to provide PPVPNs e.g. IPsec, MPLS, etc., or 
   against the general infrastructure of the service provider e.g. core 
   routers.  (The latter case is within the scope of this document only 
   if the attack happens in relation with the VPN service, otherwise is 
   not a PPVPN-specific issue.) 
    
     
                         Expires August 2003                        7 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   Of special concern for PPVPNs is denial of service to one PPVPN 
   customer caused by the otherwise-legitimate activities of another 
   PPVPN customer.  This can occur for example if one customer's 
   activities are allowed to consume network resources of any sort that 
   are also needed to serve other customers. 
    
3.2.2.  Attacks on the Service Provider Equipment Via Management 
 Interfaces 
    
   This includes unauthorized access to service provider infrastructure 
   equipment, which access could be used to reconfigure the equipment, 
   or to extract information (statistics, topology, etc.) about one or 
   more PPVPNs. 
    
   This could be accomplished through malicious entering of the 
   systems, or inadvertently as a consequence of inadequate inter-VPN 
   isolation in a customer self-management interface.  (The former is 
   not necessarily a PPVPN-specific issue.) 
    
3.2.3.  Cross-connection of Traffic between PPVPNs 
 
   This refers to the event where expected isolation between separate 
   PPVPNs is breached.  This includes cases such as: 
   o A site being connected into the ôwrongö VPN 
   o Two or more VPNs being merged together 
   o A point-to-point VPN connecting the wrong two points 
    
   Cross-connection of VPNs has a high likelihood of being the result 
   of service provider or equipment vendor error rather than malicious 
   action. 
    
   Anecdotal evidence suggests that the cross-connection threat is one 
   of the largest security concerns of PPVPN customers (or would-be 
   customers). 
    
   A related aspect specific of Layer 2 VPNs pertains to flooding, for 
   example as a result of an ARP request, which needs to be limited to 
   the VPN generating the ARP. 
 
3.2.4.  Attacks against PPVPN Routing Protocols 
    
   This encompasses attacks against routing protocols that are run by 
   the service provider.  In layer 3 VPNs with dynamic routing this 
   would typically relate to the distribution of per-VPN routes as well 
   as backbone routes.  In layer 2 VPNs this would typically relate 
   only to the distribution of backbone routes.  Specific attacks 
   against popular routing protocols have been widely studied and 
   described in [Beard]. 
    
3.2.5.  Attacks on Route separation 
    
     
                         Expires August 2003                        8 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   ôRoute separationö refers here to keeping the per-VPN topology and 
   reachability information for each PPVPN separate from, and 
   unavailable to, any other PPVPN (except as specifically intended by 
   the service provider).  This concept is only a distinct security 
   concern for those layer 3 VPN types where the service provider is 
   involved with the routing within the VPN (i.e. VR, BGP-MPLS, routed 
   version of IPsec).  A breach in the route separation could reveal 
   topology and addressing information about a PPVPN.  It could also 
   cause black hole routing or unintended cross-connection between 
   PPVPNs. 
    
3.2.6.  Attacks on MAC address and VLAN separation 
    
   In Layer 2 VPNs, the MAC address and VLAN space of different VPNs 
   need to be kept separate. A breach in MAC and VLAN separation may 
   result in cross-connection between VPNs. In fact, MAC address and 
   VLAN spaces for different VPNs may in general overlap. MAC addresses 
   and VLAN tags of specific VPNs need to be kept separate in the 
   learning tables, to guarantee that a given VPNs is not prevented 
   access to its fair share of the learning resources, and excessive 
   flooding does not occur. 
    
3.2.7.  Spoofing 
    
   (This section will be added in future version of this document.) 
    
3.2.8.  Attacks on PPVPN connectivity 
    
   Loss of connectivity may be the result of several of the threats 
   described above, rather than a threat in itself. This subsection may 
   be removed in future version of this document. 
    
3.2.9.  Other attacks on control traffic 
    
   Routing and management protocols are covered separately in the 
   previous sections. In this section, we will address other control 
   protocols such as MPLS signaling (LDP, RSVP TE) and IPsec (IKE). 
   Possible attacks include the possibility of impersonation or DOS 
   attacks on these protocols. 
    
4. Defensive Techniques 
    
   Nothing is ever 100% secure.  Defense therefore involves protecting 
   against those attacks that are most likely to occur and/or that have 
   the most dire consequences if successful.  For those attacks that 
   are protected against, absolute protection is seldom achievable; 
   more often it is sufficient just to make the cost of a successful 
   attack greater than what the adversary will be willing to expend. 
    
   Successfully defending against an attack does not necessarily mean 
   the attack must be prevented from happening or from reaching its 
     
                         Expires August 2003                        9 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   target.  In many cases the network can instead be designed to 
   withstand the attack.  For example the introduction of non-authentic 
   packets could be defended against by preventing their introduction 
   in the first place, or by making it possible to identify and 
   eliminate them before delivery to the customer system.  The latter 
   is a much easier task. 
    
4.1.    Cryptographic techniques 
    
   The cryptographic techniques discussed in this document are intended 
   to describe methods by which some security threats can be addressed.  
   They are not intended as requirements for all PPVPN networks.  The 
   PPVPN operator should determine the applicability of these 
   techniques to the operator's specific service offerings, and the 
   PPVPN user should assess the value which these techniques add to the 
   user's VPN requirements. 
    
   There are a few reasons why encryption may not be a standard 
   offering within every VPN.  Encryption adds an additional 
   computational burden to the devices performing encryption and 
   decryption.  This may reduce the number of user VPN connections 
   which can be handled on a device, or otherwise reduce the capacity 
   of the device, potentially driving up the provider's costs.  
   Typically, configuring encryption services on devices adds to the 
   complexity of the device configuration and adds incremental labor 
   cost.  Packet lengths are typically increased by encryption, 
   increasing the network traffic load and adding to the likelihood of 
   packet fragmentation with its increased overhead.  (This packet 
   length increase can often be mitigated to some extent by data 
   compression techniques, but at the expense of additional 
   computational burden.)  Finally, some PPVPN providers may employ 
   enough other defensive techniques, such as physical isolation or 
   filtering/firewall techniques, that they may not perceive additional 
   benefit from encryption techniques.  However, the ability of 
   currently available encryption techniques to reliably reduce the 
   damage from a variety of attacks is likely to make encryption a 
   common service offerings in PPVPNs. 
    
   PPVPN defenses against a wide variety of attacks can be enhanced by 
   the proper application of cryptographic techniques.  These are the 
   same cryptographic techniques which are applicable to general 
   network communications.  In general, these techniques can provide 
   privacy (encryption) of communication between devices, 
   authentication of the identities of the devices, and can ensure that 
   the data being communicated is not changed during transit. 
    
   IPsec [RFC2401] [RFC2402] [RFC2406] [RFC2407] [RFC2411] is the 
   security protocol of choice for VPN operations at the IP layer 
   (Layer 3), as discussed in [SECMECH].  IPsec provides robust 
   security for IP traffic between pairs of devices.  In addition, 
   group-oriented security protocols based on the Group Domain of 
     
                         Expires August 2003                       10 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   Interpretation [GDOI] are being developed to allow the extension of 
   IPsec services to groups of devices.  These group protocols are 
   likely to be applicable to the development of encryption services 
   which will offer enhanced value to multi-site VPNs. 
    
   In the PPVPN model, IPsec can be employed to protect IP traffic 
   between PEs, between a PE and a CE, or from CE to CE.  The trust 
   model between the PPVPN provider and the PPVPN user is a key element 
   in determining the points where encryption techniques are employed.  
   Since the entity which manages a device where encryption is applied 
   can potentially modify the device configuration to obtain access to 
   the unencrypted data, some PPVPN users will insist on maintaining 
   control of the end-to-end encryption of their VPN traffic.  Other 
   PPVPN users may not trust the security of the links between their 
   site's CE and the PPVPN provider's PE, and opt for encryption on the 
   PE-CE link. 
    
   IPsec does not itself specify an encryption algorithm.  It can use a 
   variety of encryption algorithms, with various key lengths.  There 
   are trade-offs between key length, computational burden, and the 
   level of security of the encryption, which are beyond the scope of 
   this document.  PPVPN users should be aware of the specific 
   encryption algorithm and effective key length used by the PPVPN 
   provider, in order to assess the level of security offered by any 
   particular IPsec-based PPVPN service.  However, in practice, almost 
   any IPsec encryption offers enough security that it will not be 
   directly targeted by an attacker; other weaker links in the chain of 
   security will be attacked first. 
    
   For many of the PPVPN provider's network control messages and some 
   PPVPN user requirements, cryptographic authentication of messages 
   without encryption of the contents of the message may provide 
   acceptable security.  Techniques using hashed message authentication 
   codes (HMAC) [RFC2104] implemented with a secure hash algorithm such 
   as Secure Hash Algorithm 1 (SHA-1) [RFC3174] are preferred in this 
   case. 
    
   For configuration of PPVPN devices, some other encryption techniques 
   offer security and privacy comparable to IPsec.  Secure Shell (SSH) 
   offers protection for terminal-like connections to allow device 
   configuration.  SNMP v3 [STD62] also provides protection for device 
   management. 
    
   Layer 2 PPVPNs will generally not be able to use IPsec to provide 
   encryption throughout the entire network.  They may be able to use 
   IPsec for PE-PE traffic where it is encapsulated in IP packets, but 
   IPsec will generally not be applicable for CE-PE traffic in Layer 2 
   PPVPNs.  Encryption techniques for Layer 2 links are widely 
   available, but are not within the scope of this document, nor of 
   IETF documents in general.  Layer 2 encryption could be applied to 
   the links from CE to PE, or could be applied from CE to CE, as long 
     
                         Expires August 2003                       11 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   as the encrypted Layer 2 packets can be properly handled by the 
   intervening PE devices.  In addition, if the upper layer traffic 
   transported by the Layer 2 VPN is encrypted, privacy will be 
   maintained; however, this is outside the scope of this document. 
    
4.2.    Sender Authentication 
    
   This category includes the techniques that have been proposed for 
   the CEs in a 2547 network to verify they are connected to the 
   expected VPN. 
    
   Also in this category are peer authentication for control protocols 
   (e.g. MPLS, BGP, etc.), peer authentication in the ôdata planeö 
   (i.e. authentication of one IPsec security gateway by another), and 
   authentication of remote access users connecting to a VPN. 
    
4.3.    Access Control techniques 
    
   This includes packet-by-packet or packet-flow-by-packet-flow access 
   control by means of filters and firewalls, as well as means of  
   admitting a ôsessionö for a control/signalling/management protocol 
   that is being used to implement PPVPNs. 
    
4.3.1.  Filtering 
    
   (This section will be added in future version of this document.) 
    
4.3.2.  Firewalls 
    
   Firewalls provide a mechanism for control over traffic passing 
   between different trusted zones in the PPVPN model, or between a 
   trusted zone and an untrusted zone.  Firewalls typically provide 
   much more functionality than filters, since they may be able to 
   apply detailed analysis and logical functions to flows, and not just 
   to individual packets.  They may offer a variety of complex 
   services, such as threshold-driven denial-of-service attack 
   protection, virus scanning, acting as a TCP connection proxy, etc. 
    
   As with other access control techniques, the value of firewalls 
   depends on a clear understanding of the topologies of the PPVPN core 
   network, the user networks, and the threat model.  Their 
   effectiveness depends on a topology with a clearly defined inside 
   (secure) and outside (not secure). 
    
   Within the PPVPN framework, traffic typically is not allowed to pass 
   between the various user VPNs.  This inter-VPN isolation is usually 
   not performed by a firewall, but is a part of the basic VPN 
   mechanism.  Thus, in a PPVPN, firewalls will most often be applied 
   between the public Internet and user VPNs, in cases where Internet 
   access services are offered by the provider to the VPN user sites.  
   In addition, firewalls may be applied between VPN user sites and any 
     
                         Expires August 2003                       12 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   shared network-based services offered by the PPVPN provider.  
   Finally, firewalls may be applied to protect PPVPN core network 
   functions from attacks originating from the Internet or from PPVPN 
   user sites. 
    
   Where firewalls are employed as a service to protect user VPN sites 
   from the Internet, different VPN users, and even different sites of 
   a single VPN user, may have varying firewall requirements.  The 
   overall PPVPN logical and physical topology, along with the 
   capabilities of the devices implementing the firewall services, will 
   have a significant effect on the feasibility and manageability of 
   such varied firewall service offerings. 
    
4.3.3.  Access Control Lists 
    
   (This section will be added in future version of this document.) 
    
4.3.4.  Access Control to management interfaces 
    
   (This section will be added in future version of this document.) 
    
4.4.    Use of Isolated Infrastructure 
    
   Examples include running PE-based L3 VPNs on a separate backbone not 
   connected to the Internet, CE-based IPsec VPNs that use dedicated 
   equipment for each customer, etc. 
    
4.5.    Use of Aggregated Infrastructure 
    
   The opposite of isolated infrastructure. Traffic pattern analysis 
   may be thwarted by combining the data of multiple VPNs. 
    
4.6.    Service Provider Quality Control Processes 
    
   This would refer to operational processes in place within the SP to 
   prevent misconfigurations such as connecting a site to the wrong 
   VPN. 
    
4.7.    Deployment of Testable PPVPN Service.   
    
   This refers to solutions that can be readily tested to make sure 
   they are configured correctly.  E.g. for a point-point VPN, checking 
   that the intended connectivity is working pretty much ensures that 
   there is not connectivity to some unintended site. 
    
5. Monitoring, Detection, and Reporting of Security Attacks 
    
   A PPVPN service may be subject to attacks from a variety of security 
   threats, a number of which are described in Section 3.  Many of the 
   defensive techniques described in this document and elsewhere 
   provide significant levels of protection from a variety of threats.  
     
                         Expires August 2003                       13 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   However, in addition to silently employing defensive techniques to 
   protect against attacks, PPVPN services can also add value for both 
   providers and customers by implementing security monitoring systems 
   which detect and report on any security attacks which occur, 
   regardless of whether the attacks are effective. 
    
   Attackers often begin by probing and analyzing defenses, so systems 
   which can detect and properly report these early stages of attacks 
   can provide significant benefits. 
    
   Information concerning attack incidents, especially if available 
   quickly, can be useful in defending against further attacks.  It can 
   be used to help identify attackers and/or their specific targets at 
   an early stage.  This knowledge can be used to further strengthen 
   defenses against specific attacks or attackers, or improve the 
   defensive services for specific targets on an as-needed basis.  
   Information collected on attacks may also be useful in identifying 
   and developing defenses against novel attack types. 
    
   Monitoring systems used to detect security attacks in PPVPNs will 
   typically operate by collecting information from the Provider Edge 
   (PE), Customer Edge (CE), and/or Provider backbone (P) devices.  
   Security monitoring systems should have the ability to actively 
   retrieve information from devices (e.g., SNMP get) or to passively 
   receive reports from devices (e.g., SNMP traps).  The specific 
   information exchanged will depend on the capabilities of the devices 
   and on the type of VPN technology.  Particular care should be given 
   to securing the communications channel between the monitoring 
   systems and the PPVPN devices. 
    
   The CE, PE, and P devices should employ efficient methods to acquire 
   and communicate the information needed by the security monitoring 
   systems.  For example, events which are associated with security 
   attacks (e.g., authentication failure, access list violations, etc.) 
   should be recorded as an integral part of the operation of a 
   defensive mechanism, rather than involving redundant operations.  As 
   another example, multiple attacks may be reported through a single 
   message using a counter, rather than allowing each attack to trigger 
   a separate message, potentially resulting in a denial-of-service 
   attack against the monitoring system. 
    
   The mechanisms for reporting security attacks should be flexible 
   enough to meet the needs of VPN service providers, VPN customers, 
   and regulatory agencies, if applicable.  The specific reports will 
   depend on the capabilities of the devices, the security monitoring 
   system, the type of VPN, and the service level agreements between 
   the provider and customer. 
    
6. User Security Requirements 
    

     
                         Expires August 2003                       14 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   This section defines a list of security related requirements that 
   the users of PPVPN services may have for their PPVPN service. 
   Typically, these user requirements translate into requirement for 
   the provider in offering the service.   
    
   The following sections detail various requirements that ensure the 
   security of a given trusted zone. Since in real life there are 
   various levels of security, a PPVPN may fulfill any number or all of 
   these security requirements. As mentioned in the Introduction, it is 
   not within the scope of this document to define the specific 
   requirements that each VPN technology must fulfill in order to be 
   secure.  
    
6.1.    Isolation 
    
   A virtual private network usually defines the "private" as being 
   isolated from other PPVPNs and the Internet. More specifically, 
   isolation has several components:  
    
6.1.1.  Address Separation 
    
   Within a PPVPN service, a given PPVPN can use the full Internet 
   address range, including private address ranges [RFC1918], without 
   interfering with other PPVPNs that use the same PPVPN service. When 
   using Internet access through the PPVPN core a NAT functionality can 
   be implemented.  
    
6.1.2.  Routing Separation 
    
   A PPVPN core must maintain routing separation between the trusted 
   zones. This means that routing information must not leak from any 
   trusted zone to any other trusted zone, unless this is specifically 
   engineered this way, for example for Internet access.  
    
6.1.3.  Traffic Separation 
    
   Traffic from a given trusted zone must never leave this zone, and 
   traffic from another zone must never enter this zone. Exceptions are 
   where this is specifically engineered that way, for example for 
   extranet purposes or Internet access. 
    
6.2.    Protection 
    
   The perception of a completely separated network is that it has 
   defined entry points, and only over those is can be attacked or 
   intruded. By sharing a common core a PPVPN appears to lose some of 
   this clear interfaces to parts outside the trusted zone. Thus one of 
   the key security requirements of PPVPN services is that they offer 
   the same level of protection as independent networks. 
    

     
                         Expires August 2003                       15 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
6.2.1.  Protection against intrusion 
    
   An intrusion is defined here as the penetration of a trusted zone 
   from outside this zone. This could be from the Internet, another 
   PPVPN, or the core network itself.  
    
   The fact that a network is "virtual" must not expose it to 
   additional threats over independent networks. Specifically, it must 
   not add new interfaces to other parts outside the trusted zone. 
   Intrusions from known interfaces such as Internet gateways are 
   outside the scope of this document.  
    
6.2.2.  Protection against Denial of Service attacks 
    
   A denial of service attack aims at making services or devices un-
   available to legitimate users. In the framework of this document 
   only those DoS attacks are considered which are a consequence of 
   providing the network in a virtual way. DoS attacks over the 
   standard interfaces into a trusted zone are not considered here.  
    
   The requirement is that a PPVPN is not more vulnerable against DoS 
   attacks than if the same network would be provided independently.  
    
6.2.3.  Protection against spoofing 
    
   It is not possible to change the sender identification (source 
   address, source label, etc) of traffic in transit from the outside 
   of a trusted zone. 
    
6.3.    Confidentiality 
    
   This requirement means that data must be cryptographically secured 
   in transit over the PPVPN core network to avoid eavesdropping. 
    
6.4.    Authentication 
    
   (To be added in future versions of this document.) 
    
6.5.    Integrity 
    
   Data in transit must be cryptographically secured such that it 
   cannot be altered. 
    
6.6.    Anti-Replay 
    
   Data in transit must be cryptographically secured such that it 
   cannot be recorded and replayed later. 
    
6.7.    Non-repudiation 
    

     
                         Expires August 2003                       16 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   The issue of non-repudiation pertains to PPVPN services, as well as 
   any other service. However, it is typically handled at the 
   application level, and is not therefore further discussed here. 
    
7. Provider Security Requirements 
    
   In this section, we discuss additional security requirements that 
   the provider may have in order to secure its network infrastructure 
   as it provides PPVPN services. 
    
   The PPVPN service provider requirements defined here are the 
   requirements for the PPVPN core in the reference model.  The core 
   network can be implemented with different types of network 
   technologies, and each core network may use different technologies 
   to provide the PPVPN services to the users with different level of 
   security. Therefore, a PPVPN service provider may fulfill any number 
   of the security requirements listed in this section. This document 
   does not state that a PPVPN must fulfill all of these requirements 
   to be secure.   
    
   These requirements are focused on: 1) how to protect the PPVPN core 
   from various attacks outside the core including from PPVPN users and 
   non-PPVPN users, both accidentally and maliciously, 2) how to 
   protect the PPVPN users. Note that a PPVPN core is not more 
   vulnerable against attacks than a core that does not provide PPVPNs. 
   However providing PPVPN services over such core may need additional 
   security requirements, for the mere fact that most users are 
   expecting higher security standards in a core used for delivering 
   the PPVPN services. 
    
7.1.    Protection within the Core Network 
    
7.1.1.  Control Plane Protection 
    
   - Protocol authentication within the core:  
    
   Protocols authentication may be used for core protocol protection. 
   For an IP core, IGP and BGP sessions may be authenticated by using 
   TCP MD5 or IPSec. If an MPLS core is used, LDP sessions may be 
   authenticated by using TCP MD5 or IPSec in addition to IGP and BGP 
   authentication. For a Layer 2 core, PE to PE authentication may be 
   used with IPSec. 
    
   With the cost of authentication coming down rapidly, the core 
   network protocol authentication may not increase the cost of 
   implementation for the providers significantly, but it certainly 
   helps to improve the security of the core. 
    
   - Elements protection 
    
   Here we discuss means to hide the providers infrastructure nodes.  
     
                         Expires August 2003                       17 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
    
   A PPVPN provider may make the infrastructure routers (P and PE 
   routers) loopbacks unreachable from the outside users and 
   unauthorized internal users. For example, separate address space may 
   be used for the infrastructure loopbacks.  
    
   Normal TTL propagation may be altered to make the backbone look like 
   one hop from the outside, but caution needs to be taken for loop 
   prevention. This prevents the backbone addresses to be exposed 
   through trace route. 
    
   An Internet backbone core may be re-engineered to make Internet 
   routing an edge function, for example, using MPLS label switching 
   for all traffic within the core. This helps to detach Internet 
   access from PPVPN services. 
    
   Separating control plane, data plane, and management plane 
   separation may be implemented on the PE devices to improve the 
   security. This may help to limit the problems when attacked in one 
   particular area, and may allow each plane to implement additional 
   security measurement separately. 
    
   PEs are often more vulnerable to attack than P routers, since PEs 
   cannot be made unreachable by the outside users, and PEs may have 
   links with lesser bandwidth than P routers, which makes them more 
   vulnerable to DOS attacks. PE may be attacked by Internet users or 
   VPN users accidentally or maliciously.  
    
   In the PE, using separate routing processes for Internet and PPVPN 
   service may help to improve the PPVPN security and better protect 
   VPN customers. Furthermore, if the resources, such as CPU and 
   Memory, may be further separately allocated based on applications, 
   or even individual VPNs, it may help to provide better security and 
   reliability to individual VPN customers. 
    
   Many of these were not particular issues when an IP core was 
   designed to support Internet services only. When providing PPVPN 
   services, new requirements may apply to satisfy the security needs 
   for VPN services. Similar consideration apply to L2 VPN services. 
       
7.1.2.  Data Plane Protection 
    
   PPVPN using IPSec technologies provide VPN users with encryption of 
   secure user data. 
    
   In todayÆs MPLS, ATM, or Frame Relay networks, encryption is not 
   provided as a basic feature. Mechanisms can be used to secure MPLS 
   data plane to secure the data carried over MPLS core. [Tissa]  
    


     
                         Expires August 2003                       18 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   IPSec / L3 PPVPN technologies inter-working, or IPSec /L2 PPVPN 
   technologies inter-working may be used to provide PPVPN users end-
   to-end PPVPN services. 
    
7.2.    Protection on the User Access Link 
 
   Peer / Neighbor protocol authentication may be used to enhance 
   security. For example, BGP MD5 authentication may be used to enhance 
   security on PE-CE links using eBGP. In the case of Inter-provider 
   connection, authentication / encryption mechanisms between ASes, 
   such as IPSec, may be used. 
    
   WAN link address space separation for VPN and non-VPN users may be 
   implemented to improve security in order to protect VPN customers if 
   multiple services are provided on the same PE platform. 
    
   Firewall / Filtering: access control mechanisms can be used to 
   filter out any packets destined for the service providerÆs 
   infrastructure prefix or eliminate routes identified as illegitimate 
   routes. 
    
   Rate limiting may be applied to the user interface/logical 
   interfaces against DDOS bandwidth attack. This is very helpful when 
   the PE device is supporting both VPN services and Internet Services, 
   especially when supporting VPN and Internet Services on the same 
   physical interfaces through different logical interfaces. 
    
7.3.    General Requirements for PPVPN Providers 
    
   The PPVPN providers must support the users security requirements as 
   listed in Section 6. Depending on the technologies used, these 
   requirements may include: 
 
   - User control plane separation û routing isolation 
   - User address space separation û supporting overlapping addresses 
     from different VPNs 
   - User data plane separation û one VPN traffic cannot be intercepted 
     by other VPNs or any other users. 
   - Protection against intrusion, DOS attacks and spoofing 
   - User Authentication 
   - Provide confidentiality, integrity, and anti-reply by using 
     cryptography techniques to secure user data 
    
   Equipment hardware/software bugs leading to breaches in security are 
   not within the scope of this document. 
 
8. Security Aspects of PPVPN Technologies 
    
   In this section, we plan to discuss how the user and provider 
   requirements described in Section  and  map to specific PPVPN 

     
                         Expires August 2003                       19 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   technology. Whether this should be within the scope of this document 
   is under debate, and input from the working group is solicited.  
    
8.1.    Security Aspects of RFC2547 PPVPNs 
    
8.2.    Security Aspects of Virtual Router PPVPNs 
    
8.3.    Security Aspects of IPSec VPNs 
    
8.4.    Security Aspects of Layer 2 PPVPNs 
    
9. Security Considerations 
    
   (To be added in future versions of this document.) 
 
References 
    
   [Beard] D. Beard and Y. Yang, ôKnown Threats to Routing Protocols,ö 
   draft-beard-rpsec-routing-threats-00.txt, Oct. 2002.  
    
   [GDOI] M. Baugher, T. Hardjono, H. Harney, B. Weis, "The Group 
   Domain of Interpretation,ö draft-ietf-msec-gdoi-07.txt, December 
   2002.   
    
   [RFC2104] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-Hashing 
   for Message Authentication,ö February 1997. 
 
   [RFC2401] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the 
   Internet Protocol,ö November 1998. 
    
   [RFC2402] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header,ö November 
   1998. 
    
   [RFC2406] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security Payload 
   (ESP),ö November 1998. 
    
   [RFC2407] D. Piper, "The Internet IP Security Domain of 
   Interpretation for ISAKMP,ö November 1998. 
    
   [RFC2411] R. Thayer, N. Doraswamy, R. Glenn,  "IP Security Document 
   Roadmap,ö November 1998. 
    
   [RFC3174] D. Eastlake, 3rd, and P. Jones, "US Secure Hash Algorithm 
   1 (SHA1),ö September 2001. 
    
   [SECMECH] S. Bellovin, C. Kaufman, J. Schiller,"Security Mechanisms 
   for the Internet,ö draft-iab-secmech-02.txt, January 2003. 
     
   [STD62] "Simple Network Management Protocol, Version 3,ö RFCs 3411-
   3418, December 2002. 
    
     
                         Expires August 2003                       20 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   [Tissa] T. Senevirathne, ôSecure MPLS û Encryption and 
   Authentication of MPLS payloads,ö draft-tsenevir-smpls-02.txt, July 
   2002. 
 
 
Author's Addresses 
    
   Luyuan Fang                           
   AT&T                                  
   200 Laurel Avenue, Room C2-3B35      Phone: 732-420-1921 
   Middletown, NJ 07748                 Email: luyuanfang@att.com 
    
   Michael Behringer 
   Cisco                                 
   Avda de la Vega 15                   Phone: 34-639-659-822 
   28100 Alcobendas, Madrid             Email: mbehring@cisco.com 
   Spain 
    
   Fabio Chiussi 
   Lucent Technologies 
   101 Crawfords Corner Rd, Room 4G502  Phone: 732-949-2407 
   Holmdel, NJ 07733                    Email: fabio@lucent.com 
    
   Mark Duffy 
   Quarry Technologies 
   8 New England Executive Park         Phone: 781-359-5052 
   Burlington, MA 01803                 Email: mduffy@quarrytech.com 
    
   Paul Hitchen 
   BT 
   BT Adastral Park 
   Martlesham Heath                     Phone: 44-1473-606-344 
   Ipswich IP53RE                       Email: paul.hitchen@bt.com 
   UK 
                                 
   Paul Knight 
   Nortel Networks 
   600 Technology Park Drive    Phone: 978-288-6414 
   Billerica, MA 01821          Email: paul.night@nortelnetworks.com 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
     
                         Expires August 2003                       21 
                       PPVPN Security framework          February 2003 
    
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This 
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
    
    
 
































     
                         Expires August 2003                       22 
