



LAMPS                                                       M. Ounsworth
Internet-Draft                                                   J. Gray
Intended status: Standards Track                               S. Mister
Expires: January 13, 2022                                        Entrust
                                                           July 12, 2021


              Composite Encryption For Use In Internet PKI
               draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-encryption-00

Abstract

   With the widespread adoption of post-quantum cryptography will come
   the need for an entity to possess multiple public keys on different
   cryptographic algorithms.  Since the trustworthiness of individual
   post-quantum algorithms is at question, a multi-key cryptographic
   operation will need to be performed in such a way that breaking it
   requires breaking each of the component algorithms individually.
   This requires defining new structures for holding composite
   encryption data.

   This document defines a content encryption process following the
   hybrid model as described in the NIST Post-Quantum Crypto FAQ.  This
   draft defines three composite encryption modes.  First, Composite Key
   Transport using Encryption primitives which encrypts a message
   (typically a content encryption key) for a recipient with a composite
   public key composed entirely of encryption keys by encrypting it with
   multiple one-time-pad keys, each encrypted under a different
   recipient public key.  Second, Composite Key Transport using
   Encryption and KEM primitives is the generalization of the previous
   mode to support a mixture of encryption and KEM algorithms.  Third,
   Composite Key Exchange is the most general and supports establishing
   a shared secret using any combination of encryption, KEM, and key
   exchange primitives where a master shared secret is generated using
   NIST SP 800-56Cr2.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 13, 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Composite Key Transport using Encryption primitives . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Algorithm Identifier  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  Public key and key usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.2.1.  Composite-OR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Algorithm parameters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.4.  Encryption process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.5.  Decryption process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Composite Key Transport using Encryption and KEM primitives .  11
     3.1.  Algorithm Identifier  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.2.  Public key and key usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       3.2.1.  Composite-OR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.3.  Algorithm parameters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.4.  Encryption process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.5.  Decryption process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   4.  Composite Key Exchange  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     4.1.  Algorithm Identifier  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     4.2.  Public key and key usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       4.2.1.  Composite-OR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.3.  Algorithm parameters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.4.  Encapsulation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.5.  Decapsulation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   5.  In Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


     7.1.  IID property of KEM primitives  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     7.2.  Composite-OR modes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     7.3.  Policy for Deprecated or Unacceptable Algorithms  . . . .  21
   8.  Appendices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     8.1.  ASN.1 Module  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     8.2.  Intellectual Property Considerations  . . . . . . . . . .  21
     8.3.  Making contributions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23

1.  Introduction

   During the transition to post-quantum cryptography, there will be
   uncertainty as to the strength of cryptographic algorithms; we will
   no longer fully trust traditional cryptography such as RSA, Diffie-
   Hellman, DSA and their elliptic curve variants, but we will also not
   fully trust their post-quantum replacements until they have had
   sufficient scrutiny.  Unlike previous cryptographic algorithm
   migrations, the choice of when to migrate and which algorithms to
   migrate to, is not so clear.  Even after the migration period, it may
   be advantageous for an entity's cryptographic identity to be composed
   of key pairs associated with different public-key algorithms.

   The deployment of composite public keys and composite encryption
   using post-quantum algorithms will face two challenges:

   o  Algorithm strength uncertainty: During the transition period, some
      post-quantum signature and encryption algorithms will not be fully
      trusted, while the trust in legacy public key algorithms will
      start to erode.  A relying party may learn some time after
      deployment that a public key algorithm has become untrustworthy,
      but in the interim, they may not know which algorithm an adversary
      has compromised.

   o  Backwards compatibility: During the transition period, post-
      quantum algorithms will not be supported by all clients.

   This document provides mechanisms to address algorithm strength
   uncertainty by building on ~~ reference draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-
   pubkeys ~~ by providing formats for both wrapping a content
   encryption key using multiple public key encryption mechanisms, or
   performing key exchange using a combination of encryption, key
   encapsulation, and key exchange primitives.  The issue of backwards
   compatibility is addressed with support for Composite Or recipient
   keys in each mode.

   This document is intended for general applicability anywhere that
   content encryption or key exchange is used.



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


1.1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   The following terms are used in this document:

   ALGORITHM: An information object class for identifying the type of
   cryptographic operation to be performed.  This document is primarily
   concerned with algorithms for producing encryption keys.

   BER: Basic Encoding Rules (BER) as defined in [X.690].

   COMPONENT ALGORITHM: A single basic algorithm which is contained
   within a composite algorithm.

   COMPOSITE ALGORITHM: An algorithm which is a sequence of one or more
   component algorithms..

   DER: Distinguished Encoding Rules as defined in [X.690].

   PUBLIC / PRIVATE KEY: The public and private portion of an asymmetric
   cryptographic key, making no assumptions about which algorithm.

   PRIMITIVE PUBLIC KEY / SIGNATURE: A public key or signature object of
   a non-composite algorithm type.

   SIGNATURE: A digital cryptographic signature, making no assumptions
   about which algorithm.

   SECRET or SHARED SECRET: Cryptographic material established between
   two parties.  May be generated by one party and send encrypted to the
   other, or may be the output of an exchange of public information
   between two or more parties that generates a unique shared value for
   all involved parties.

   KEY DERIVATION FUNCTION: A function used to derive secure secret keys
   using shared secrets, hashing and other cryptographic primitives.

   COMPOSITE ENCRYPTION KEY: A structure that contains a sequence of
   content encryption keys, or secrets used to derive a content
   encryption keys.






Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


2.  Composite Key Transport using Encryption primitives

   In this composite encryption mode, a message to be encrypted is
   provided by the calling application.  This message to be encrypted is
   assumed to have length less than the maximum message size of the
   chosen encryption algorithms, as is the case when a suitably-sized
   symmetric key is encrypted.

   This mode is compatible with protocols requiring a key transport
   primitive, such as CMS' KeyTransRecipientInfo [RFC5652].

   Composite Key Transport using Encryption primitives uses a trivial
   XOR one-time-pad scheme, as defined in Section 2.4.  It transports n
   one-time-pad secret keys of the same length as the content to be
   encryption, where n is the number of recipient component public keys,
   and each one-time-pad secret key is encrypted under a different
   recipient component public key.  The trivial XOR key-sharing scheme
   requires the recipient to use all component private keys in order to
   recover the content encryption key.  Note that it would be possible
   to use an "n of m" or "threshold" secret sharing scheme if it was
   desired for the recipient to be able to complete the key transport
   using a subset of their private keys, but that mechanism is not
   defined in this document.

   EDNOTE: we have not been able to find a reference and security
   analysis for the trivial XOR key-sharing scheme.  This may need
   review by CFRG.  We could re-frame this process as "a one-time pad
   with n-1 one-time pad keys, which we transport using the recipients
   public keys", then this could leverage one-time pad security
   analysis.

   Composite encryption uses the following structure:

   EDNOTE: Should a different composite OID be used to determine the
   type of composite encryption (Key Transport or Key Agreement?).
   Probably not because the desired key usage will be handled in the
   protocols that uses this privitive.

CompositeEncryptedKey ::= EncryptedKey{ SEQUENCE SIZE (2..Max)  OF OCTET STRING}

   EDNOTE: This ASN.1 probably does not compile.  The intent is that
   this fits into any EncryptedKey field, but defines some structure
   within the existing EncryptedKey ::= OCTET STRING, but I'm not sure
   exactly how to specify that.

   Where each OCTET STRING within the SEQUENCE contains an encrypted
   one-time-pad secret key encrypted under one of the recipient
   component public keys.  The CompositeEncryptedKey MUST list encrypted



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   values in the same order as the recipient public key's component
   keys.

2.1.  Algorithm Identifier

   The id-alg-composite-encryption object identifier MUST be used to
   identify the usage of this mode

id-alg-composite-encryption OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    id-alg-composite-encryption OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1) entrust(114027)
    Algorithm(80) Composite(4) id-alg-composite-encryption(4) }

   EDNOTE: this is a temporary OID for the purposes of prototyping.
   Permanent OIDs should be requested from IANA, see Section 6.

2.2.  Public key and key usage

   The recipient MUST have a composite public key which supports key
   transport operations.  Where the recipient public key has an
   associated keyUsage as specified in [RFC5280], it MUST have keyUsage:
   keyEncipherment.  In other words, the mechanism specified in this
   section applies only if all of the recipient's public keys are
   associated with encryption algorithms.

2.2.1.  Composite-OR

   The design intent of this mode is to support migration scenarios
   where a recipient has been provisioned with a composite key
   containing algorithms that its peers may not yet support.  This mode
   allows the sender to encrypt for a subset of the recipient's public
   keys.  Support for Composite OR subset encryption is indicated by the
   recipient at key generation time by marking its composite key with
   the id-composite-or-key algorithm identifier as defined in ~~~cite
   properly draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-keys~~~. To maximize security
   strength of the ciphertext, clients SHOULD encrypt for as many keys
   as they support and as the migration and compatibility situation
   allow.

   Policy mechanisms defining allowed subets of algorithms could be
   applied here, but are out of scope of this document.  As defined in
   this document, a recipient marking their public key as id-composite-
   or-key must accept the risk that a sender may encrypt sensitive data
   for it using any one of its component keys in isolation.  Composite
   Or is a direct tradeoff of lower security for increased migration
   flexibility.





Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


2.3.  Algorithm parameters

   The composite key transport using encryption mode does not require
   additional parameters, and therefore any associated Params are
   ABSENT.

2.4.  Encryption process

   The process for performing Composite Key Transport using Encryption
   primitives is as follows:

   The first n-1 one-time-pad keys are random bit strings of the same
   length as the content encryption key.  The final one-time-pad key is
   computed by XOR'ing the content encryption key with each of n-1
   previous keys.




































Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


Input:
     n                  The number of recipient component public keys

     P1, P2, .., Pn     Recipient component public keys

     A1, A2, .., An     Cryptographic algorithms to be used with
                          public keys P1, P2, .., Pn

     CEK                The Content Encryption Key

     SIZE               The size of the Content Encryption Key in bits

Output:
     E1, E2, .., En     EncryptedKey values corresponding to each recipient
                          component public key

Intermediate values:
     S1, S2, .., Sn-1   One-time-pad secret keys to be encapsulated by each
                          component algorithm
     C                  One-time-pad ciphertext of the CEK under S1, S2, .., Sn-1

Generation Procedure:

   1. If recipient public key is of type id-composite-or-key, determine the
      index of the last recipient public key to be encrypted for
        i_last := index of last Pi to be encrypted for
      Else,
        i_last = n


   2. To generate secret keys Sn, compute the following

      C = CEK
      for i := 1 to n

        a. If id-composite-or-key and Pi is to be skipped
          Ei := emptyOctetString
          continue to next i

        b. If i == i_last
            Ei = encrypt(C, Pi, Ai)
            break
          Else,
            Si := random_bits(SIZE)
            C := C XOR Si
            Ei = encrypt(Si, Pi, Ai)

   3. Output E1, E2, .., En



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   Where "random_bits(SIZE)" is a cryptographically-secure random bit
   generator outputting SIZE bits, and where "emptyOctetString" is the
   octet string of length 0.

   EDNOTE: we currently do not define a composite algorithmID type to
   carry A1, A2, .., An.  We may need to add one analogously to the
   CompositeParams ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (2..MAX) OF AlgorithmIdentifier
   that we have in the composite signutares draft.

   If the sender does not support Composite Or encryption, this
   algorithm may be simplified by omitting step 1, 2a, and the if i ==
   i_last statement in 2b.

   The design intent is that Composite Or encryption with a single
   recipient key collapses to being equivalent to direct encryption of
   the CEK.

2.5.  Decryption process

   To obtain the content-encryption key from a CompositeEncryptedKey,
   each component algorithm MUST be used to decrypt the set of one-time-
   pad keys.  The keys are then XOR'ed together to recover the content
   encryption key.




























Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


Input:
     n                  The number of recipient component public keys

     SK1, SK2, .., SKn  Recipient component secret keys


     A1, A2, .., An     Cryptographic algorithms to be used with
                          public keys P1, P2, .., Pn

     E1, E2, .., En     EncryptedKey values corresponding to each recipient
                        component public key


Intermediate values:
     S1, S2, .., Sn     One-time-pad keys and ciphertext to be decapsulated
                        by each component algorithm

Output:
     CEK  The Content Encryption Key


Generation Procedure:
   1. Recover each one-time-pad key
        for i := 1 to n
          if Ei == emptyOctetString
            Si := emptyOctetString
          Else,
            Si := decrypt(Ei, SKi)

   2. Recover the CEK;
      For each one-time-pad key
        CEK = S1
        for i := 2 to n
           if Si != emptyOctetString
             CEK = CEK XOR Si

   3. Output CEK

   The if statement in step 1 (and ensuring its proper bit length for
   the XOR in step 2) is the only modification required to support
   Composite Or encryption.  The designers have intentionally omitted a
   check that the recipient key is of type id-composite-or-key because
   even if the sender erroneously used composite or subset encryption
   for a recipient key which is not of type id-composite-or-key, the
   damage has already been done by encrypting and transmitting the data,
   no further harm can be done by decrypting it.  However, where
   appropriate, clients SHOULD indicate a warning to users that this




Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   data was transmitted with weaker encrypting than their public key
   allows.

   EDNOTE: investigate whether this is actually a special case of the
   next mechanism, and therefore both sections can be folded together.

3.  Composite Key Transport using Encryption and KEM primitives

   This composite encryption mode is the generalization of the mode
   defined in Section 2 to support a composite recipient public key
   which may contain a mixture of one or more encryption component
   algorithms with zero or more key encapsulation mechanism (KEM)
   component algorithms.

   This mode is compatible with protocols requiring a key transport
   primitive, such as CMS' KeyTransRecipientInfo [RFC5652].

   Security consideration: for a recipient composite public key to be
   applicable to this mode, all component KEMs MUST produce a shared
   secret whose bits are independent and uniformly distributed (aka
   "uniformly IID" or "uniformly random" or "full entropy") and
   therefore the shared secret is safe to use direcly as a symmetric
   key.  If a recipient public key contains component KEMs which are not
   know to have this property, then implementors SHOULD use the more
   general mode described in Section 4 which incorporates the use of a
   key derivation function.  See Section 7.1 for a further discussion of
   this security consideration.

   EDNOTE: also put this in the Security considerations section.

3.1.  Algorithm Identifier

   The id-alg-composite-kem object identifier MUST be used to identify
   the usage of this mode

id-alg-composite-kem OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    id-alg-composite-encryption OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1) entrust(114027)
    Algorithm(80) Composite(4) id-alg-composite-kem(5)}

   EDNOTE: this is a temporary OID for the purposes of prototyping.
   Permanent OIDs should be requested from IANA, see Section 6.

3.2.  Public key and key usage

   The recipient MUST have a composite public key which supports key
   transport or key encapsulation operations.  Where the recipient
   public key has an associated keyUsage as specified in [RFC5280], it



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   MUST have keyUsage: keyEncipherment.  In other words, the mechanism
   specified in this section applies only if all of the recipient's
   public keys are encryption or KEM algorithms.

   In addition, for a recipient composite public key to be applicable to
   this mode, all component KEMs MUST be capable of producing a shared
   secret of SIZE bits, where SIZE is the length in bits of the content
   encryption key (CEK) to be transported.  This is assumed for the
   remainder of this section.

3.2.1.  Composite-OR

   The design intent of this mode is to support migration scenarios
   where a recipient has been provisioned with a composite key
   containing algorithms that its peers may not yet support.  This mode
   allows the sender to encrypt for a subset of the recipient's public
   keys.  Support for Composite OR subset encryption is indicated by the
   recipient at key generation time by marking its composite key with
   the id-composite-or-key algorithm identifier as defined in ~~~cite
   properly draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-keys~~~.

   Policy mechanisms defining allowed subets of algorithms could be
   applied here, but are out of scope of this document.  As defined in
   this document, a recipient marking their public key as id-composite-
   or-key must accept the risk that a sender may encrypt sensitive data
   for it using any one of its component keys in isolation.  Composite
   Or is a direct tradeoff of lower security for increased migration
   flexibility.

3.3.  Algorithm parameters

   The composite key transport using encryption and KEM mode does not
   require additional parameters, and therefore any associated Params
   are ABSENT.

3.4.  Encryption process

   Given these conditions are met, the encryption process defined in
   Section 2.4 is modified as follows:












Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


Input:
     n                  The number of recipient component public keys
     P1, P2, .., Pn     Recipient component public keys
     CEK                The Content Encryption Key
     SIZE               The size of the Content Encryption Key in bits

Output:
     E1, E2, .., En     EncryptedKey values corresponding to each recipient
                        component public key

Intermediate values:
     S1, S2, .., Sn     One-time-pad secret keys to be encapsulated by each
                        component algorithm

Generation Procedure:

   1. If recipient public key is of type id-composite-or-key, determine the
      index of the last recipient public key to be encrypted for
        i_last := index of last Pi to be encrypted for
      Else,
        i_last = n


   2.
      for i := 1 to n
        a. if id-composite-or-key and Pi is to be skipped
            Ei := emptyOctetString
            continue to next i

        b. If i == i_last
            continue to next i
          Else, if Pi is of type KEM:
            Si,Ei := encaps(Pi)
            CEK := CEK XOR Si
          Else:
            Si := random_bits(SIZE)
            CEK := CEK XOR Si
            Ei := encrypt(Si, Pi)


   3. Encrypt the final CEK value
            Ei_last = encrypt(CEK, Pi_last)

   4. Output E1, E2, .., En







Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   Where "random_bits(SIZE)" is a cryptographically-secure random bit
   generator outputting SIZE bits, and where "emptyOctetString" is the
   octet string of length 0.

   If the sender does not support Composite Or encryption, this
   algorithm may be simplified by omitting step 1, 2a, and the if i ==
   i_last statement in 2b.

   The design intent is that Composite Or encryption with a single
   recipient key collapses to being equivalent to direct encryption of
   the CEK.

3.5.  Decryption process

   The decryption process defined in Section 2.5 applies directly where
   "decrypt()" is substituted for "decaps()" when the underlying
   primitive is a KEM.

4.  Composite Key Exchange

   This mode is the most general in that it supports a composite
   recipient public key which MAY contain an arbitrary mixture of
   encryption, key encapsulation mechanism (KEM), and key agreement
   component algorithms.  Due to the nature of key agreement algorithms,
   this mode cannot take a content encryption key as input, but instead
   generates a master shared secret as an output.  As such, the
   nomenclature in this mode differs from the modes above.

   This mode is compatible with protocols requiring a key agreement
   primitive, such as CMS' KeyAgreeRecipientInfo [RFC5652].

   Composite key exchange uses the underlying primitive to either
   encrypt for, encapsulate, or interactively do key agreement with each
   of the recipient's public keys, then all shared secrets are
   concatenated together and a KDF is applies as prescribed by NIST SP
   800-56Cr2 [SP80056cr2].

4.1.  Algorithm Identifier

   The id-alg-composite-keyex object identifier MUST be used to identify
   the usage of this mode

id-alg-composite-keyex OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    id-alg-composite-encryption OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1) entrust(114027)
    Algorithm(80) Composite(4) id-alg-composite-encryption(6) }





Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   EDNOTE: this is a temporary OID for the purposes of prototyping.
   Permanent OIDs should be requested from IANA, see Section 6.

4.2.  Public key and key usage

   The recipient MUST have a composite public key which supports key
   transport, key encapsulation, or key exchange operations.  Where the
   recipient public key has an associated keyUsage as specified in
   [RFC5280], it MUST have keyUsage: keyEncipherment, keyAgreement.
   This mode is the most general and places the fewest restrictions on
   the recipient public key.

   EDNOTE: I think this violates our public key draft where we say that
   the public key's KU MUST apply to all components. ... we did not want
   mixing of signatures and encryption keys, but I think in this case we
   do want to allow mixing of keyEncipherment and keyExchange keys.  Not
   sure how to fix that.

4.2.1.  Composite-OR

   The design intent of this mode is to support migration scenarios
   where a recipient has been provisioned with a composite key
   containing algorithms that its peers may not yet support.  This mode
   allows the sender to encrypt for a subset of the recipient's public
   keys.  Support for Composite OR subset encryption is indicated by the
   recipient at key generation time by marking its composite key with
   the id-composite-or-key algorithm identifier as defined in ~~~cite
   properly draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-keys~~~.

   Policy mechanisms defining allowed subets of algorithms could be
   applied here, but are out of scope of this document.  As defined in
   this document, a recipient marking their public key as id-composite-
   or-key must accept the risk that a sender may encrypt sensitive data
   for it using any one of its component keys in isolation.  Composite
   Or is a direct tradeoff of lower security for increased migration
   flexibility.

4.3.  Algorithm parameters

   The composite key exchange mode requires additional parameters to
   specify the KDF used to combine shared secrets into a master shared
   secret.

   Params ::= KeyDerivationAlgorithmIdentifier

   The KeyDerivationAlgorithmIdentifier type is specified in [RFC5652].
   The KeyDerivationAlgorithmIdentifier definition is repeated here for
   completeness.



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   KeyDerivationAlgorithmIdentifier ::= AlgorithmIdentifier

4.4.  Encapsulation Process

   Composite key exchange uses the underlying primitive to either
   encrypt for, encapsulate, or interactively do key agreement with each
   of the recipient's public keys, then all shared secrets are
   concatenated together and a KDF is applies as prescribed by NIST SP
   800-56Cr2 [SP80056cr2].










































Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


Input:
     P1, P2, .., Pn     Public keys for the n component encryption
                        algorithms, a CompositePublicKey

    SIZE                The size, in bits, for shared secrets to be combined by both
                        parties into a content encryption key. This value SHOULD correspond
                        to the size of the content encryption key.

    KDF                 A key derivation function

Output:
     E1, E2, .., En     EncryptedKey values corresponding to each recipient
                        component public key

     M                  Master shared secret


Ciphertext and master secret Generation Procedure:
     1. Generate a set of one-time-pad secret keys of
      the same length as the content encryption key
        for i := 1 to n

      a. if id-composite-or-key and Pi is to be skipped
            Si = emptyOctetString
            Ei := emptyOctetString
            continue to next i

      b. if P1 is of type KEM or keyExchange:
            Si,Ei := encaps(Pi)
        else:
            Si := random_bits(SIZE)
            Ei := encrypt(Si, Pi)

   2. Generate Z via concatenation
        Z = S1 || S2 || .. || Sn

   3. Generate the master shared secret via a KDF
        M = KDF(Z)

   4. Output M
        Output E1, E2, .., En


   Where "emptyOctetString" is the octet string of length 0 that serves
   as a no-op or identity element for the concatenation in step 2.






Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   In cases where KDF is extensible output function, the length of M
   must be carried in the KeyDerivationAlgorithmIdentifier defined in
   Section 4.3.

   EDNOTE: It isn't clear to us how one uses the defined HKDF
   algorithmid (RFC 8619) here.  Those OIDs specify a hash, but no
   output length or seed or info parameter either implicitely or
   explicitely.  But we also don't see how it would be used with CMS
   either, for the same reason. ..?

   If the sender does not support Composite Or encryption, this
   algorithm may be simplified by omitting step 2a.

   EDNOTE: investigate whether step 3 really belongs here, or whether
   the surrounding protocol (ex.  CMS EnvelopedData) will perform a
   final KDF anyways.  We believe that outputting an IID master secret
   is consistent with modern KEM behaviour.

4.5.  Decapsulation Process
































Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


Input:
     n                  The number of recipient component public keys

     SK1, SK2, .., SKn  Recipient component secret keys

     E1, E2, .., En     EncryptedKey values corresponding to each recipient
                          component public key

     KDF                A key derivation function


Intermediate values:
     S1, S2, .., Sn     Shared secrets to be encapsulated by
                          each component algorithm

Output:
     M                  Master shared secret


 Master Secret Recovery Procedure:
   1. Recover each shared secret
        for i := 1 to n
          if Ei == null
            Si = EMPTY_STRING
          Si := decrypt_or_decaps(Ei, SKi)

   2. Generate Z via concatenation
        Z = S1 || S2 || .. || Sn

   3. Generate the master shared secret via a KDF
        M = KDF(Z)

  4. Output M

   "EMPTY_STRING" indicates a string or byte array of length zero so
   that that value as essentially omitted from the concatenation in step
   2.

   The if statement in step 1 is the only modification required to
   support Composite Or encryption.  The designers have intentionally
   omitted a check that the recipient key is of type id-composite-or-key
   because even if the sender erroneously used composite or subset for a
   recipient key which is not of type id-composite-or-key, the damage
   has already been done by generating a master secret and potentially
   transmitting data encrypted with it, no further harm can be done by
   decrypting it.  However, where appropriate, clients SHOULD indicate a
   warning to users that this data was transmitted with weaker
   encrypting than their public key allows.



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


5.  In Practice

   This section addresses practical issues of how this draft affects
   other protocols and standards.

6.  IANA Considerations

   The following OIDs are to be assigned by IANA.  The authors suggest
   that IANA assign OIDs for composite encryption on the id-pkix arc:

id-alg-composite OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) security(5)
    mechanisms(5) pkix(7) algorithms(6) composite(??) id-alg-composite-encryption(??)}

id-alg-composite-kem OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) security(5)
    mechanisms(5) pkix(7) algorithms(6) composite(??) id-alg-composite-kem(??)}


id-alg-composite-keyex OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    iOBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
    iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) security(5)
    mechanisms(5) pkix(7) algorithms(6) composite(??) id-alg-composite-encryption(??)}

7.  Security Considerations

7.1.  IID property of KEM primitives

   Composite Key Transport using Encryption and KEM primitives defined
   in Section 3 directly uses the shared secret output from the
   underlying KEM primitevas as a one-time-pad key to encrypt the CEK.
   Therefore the output of the KEM primitive of needs to meet the
   security properties of a one-time-pad key, namely that its bits are
   independent and identically distributed (IID).  In particular, key
   agreement schemes such as ECDH or SIKE do not produce shared secrets
   that meet this requirement and therefore MUST use the fully general
   mechanism Composite Key Exchange defined in Section 4.

   EDNOTE: Should this be brough to CFRG to decide which KEMs are
   appropriate to use with this mechanism?  It may be possible that we
   need to run the KEM output through a KDF; but we're trying to avoid
   needing to carry a KDF AlgID here.

7.2.  Composite-OR modes

   Composite-OR eases migration at the expense of security.  For
   composite encryption and key encapsulation, the weakening of security
   is entirely at the discretion of the sender, since once data has been



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   encrypted and transmitted with weak ciphers, there is nothing the
   recipient can do to protect the data against record & decrypt
   attacks.  Clients performing Composite Or encryption operations MUST
   ensure that the recipient's public key is of type id-composite-or-key
   before producing a ciphertext with a subset of the recipient's public
   keys.

   For some cases of composite key exchange, notably when the underlying
   key exchange primitive is used in a fully interactive (aka
   "ephemeral-ephemeral") mode, the sender cannot begin encrypting data
   until the recipient has completed the key exchange.  The recipient
   SHOULD reject the connection if one or more null ciphertexts are
   encountered when the recipient's public key is not of type id-
   composite-or-key.

7.3.  Policy for Deprecated or Unacceptable Algorithms

   Within the context of composite encryption, the sender holds the
   responsibility to ensure that chosen algorithms are of sufficient
   strength prior to encrypting and transmitting sensitive data under
   them.  Composite is designed to provide security redundancy and to
   remain strong as long as at least one of the component algorithms
   remains strong.

   When encrypting for a Composite-OR public key and using a subset of
   the recipient's public key, then these redundancy guarantees no
   longer apply.  The sender SHOULD employ a policy mechanism to ensure
   that they are using a combination of algorithms of sufficient
   strength.  Even though this document does not define such a policy
   mechanism, but implementors making use of Composite-OR encryption are
   strongly encouraged to implement a policy mechanism.

8.  Appendices

8.1.  ASN.1 Module

   ~~ TODO ~~

8.2.  Intellectual Property Considerations

   The following IPR Disclosure relates to this draft:

   https://datatracker.ietf.org/ipr/3588/

   We are grateful to all, including any contributors who may have been
   inadvertently omitted from this list.





Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   This document borrows text from similar documents, including those
   referenced below.  Thanks go to the authors of those documents.
   "Copying always makes things easier and less error prone" -
   [RFC8411].

8.3.  Making contributions

   Additional contributions to this draft are weclome.  Please see the
   working copy of this draft at, as well as open issues at:

   https://github.com/EntrustCorporation/draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-
   encryption

9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2986]  Nystrom, M. and B. Kaliski, "PKCS #10: Certification
              Request Syntax Specification Version 1.7", RFC 2986,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2986, November 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2986>.

   [RFC3211]  Gutmann, P., "Password-based Encryption for CMS",
              RFC 3211, DOI 10.17487/RFC3211, December 2001,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3211>.

   [RFC4210]  Adams, C., Farrell, S., Kause, T., and T. Mononen,
              "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
              Management Protocol (CMP)", RFC 4210,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4210, September 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4210>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280>.

   [RFC5652]  Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)", STD 70,
              RFC 5652, DOI 10.17487/RFC5652, September 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5652>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.



Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft             PQ Composite Certs                  July 2021


   [RFC8411]  Schaad, J. and R. Andrews, "IANA Registration for the
              Cryptographic Algorithm Object Identifier Range",
              RFC 8411, DOI 10.17487/RFC8411, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8411>.

   [SP80056cr2]
              NIST, "SP 800-56c Rev. 2: Recommendation for Key-
              Derivation Methods in Key-Establishment Schemes", August
              2020.

   [X.690]    ITU-T, "Information technology - ASN.1 encoding Rules:
              Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical
              Encoding Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules
              (DER)", ISO/IEC 8825-1:2015, November 2015.

Authors' Addresses

   Mike Ounsworth
   Entrust Limited
   2500 Solandt Road -- Suite 100
   Ottawa, Ontario  K2K 3G5
   Canada

   Email: mike.ounsworth@entrust.com


   John Gray
   Entrust Limited

   Email: john.gray@entrust.com


   Serge Mister
   Entrust Limited

   Email: serge.mister@entrust.com















Ounsworth, et al.       Expires January 13, 2022               [Page 23]
