Network Working Group                                          C. Huang
Internet Draft                                      Carleton University
Intended status: Informational                              Jiafeng Zhu
Expires: January 3, 2015                                         Huawei
                                                                 Peng He
                                                                   Ciena
                                                     Shucheng (Will) Liu
                                                                  Huawei
                                                          Baek-Yong Choi
                                      University of Missouri-Kansas City

                                                            July 3, 2014


      Use Cases on Application-centric Network Management and Service
                                 Provision
                    draft-huang-aponf-use-cases-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.





Huang                  Expires January 3, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Use Cases on . . .                  July 2014


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   New services such as virtual networks, service function chaining,
   and application-centric traffic steering bring new opportunities for
   network providers and service providers. With these new services,
   the interactions between applications and networks are becoming more
   critical in order to achieve satisfactory QoS, reliability, and
   security, which are tailored to each specific application.
   Application-based Policy for Network Function (APONF) is designed to
   facilitate these interactions. This internet draft describes some
   use cases that show how APONF may be deployed to support these
   services.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
   3. Use Cases......................................................4
      3.1. Network Virtualization....................................4
      3.2. Virtualized Enterprise Applications.......................4
      3.3. Application Centric QoS and Reliability...................5
   4. IANA Considerations............................................6

1. Introduction

   The wide deployment of optical networks and large-scale datacenters
   has enabled many new services such as network virtualization,
   service chaining, and application-centric traffic steering which
   bring new opportunities to network and service providers.

   One of the primary new services that have been envisioned is the
   network virtualization service, which allows physical network
   provider to sell different virtual networks to different service
   network providers.  Each service network provider can use its
   virtual network just like the way it uses its own private network
   while sharing underlying physical network resources with other


Huang                  Expires January 3, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Use Cases on . . .                  July 2014


   service network providers. The physical network provider, on the
   other hand, can enjoy new revenue growth through selling virtual
   networks with different granularities.

   Traditionally a service chain consists of a set of dedicated network
   service boxes such as firewall, load balancers, and application
   delivery controllers that are concatenated together to support a
   specific application. With a new service request, new devices must
   be installed and interconnected in certain order. This can be a very
   complex, time-consuming, and error-prone process, requiring careful
   planning of topology changes and network outages and incurring high
   OPEX. This situation is exacerbated when a tenant requires different
   service sequences for different traffic flows or when multiple
   tenants share the same datacenter network.

   Network Function Virtualization (NFV) is a concept built upon
   network virtualization. It involves the implementation of network
   functions such as load balancing, intrusion detection, firewall,
   monitoring, and accelerations in software that can run on a range of
   industry standard high volume servers, switches, and storage.
   Through NFV, service providers can dynamically create a virtual
   environment for a specific service chain and eliminate the dedicated
   hardware and complex labor work for supporting a new service chain
   request.

   Both network virtualization and NFV require network management and
   service provisioning.  Experiences from the services provided by
   modern datacenters (e.g. Amazon EC2) have shown that fast response
   time and easy-to-use are critical for the success of these new
   services. There is no existing management and service provisioning
   infrastructure to support network virtualization and NFV. However,
   these new services typically require complex interactions and
   orchestration between service subscribers and network
   infrastructure, which are missing in the existing Internet
   architecture.

   There are many other use cases that can be better served with
   application-centric network management and service provisioning.
   Application service providers have tried various ways to
   differentiate their customers so that they can maximize their
   revenues and minimize their costs. For example, cookies have been
   used to track HTTP users. Unfortunately they are designed for
   specific applications. Because cookies only appear in HTTP headers,
   they will not be carried by all packets except the first one.
   Therefore they cannot be used by operators to provision switches. On
   the other hand, VLAN and DiffServ are hard to be maintained at the
   level of end-to-end, since they operate on Layers 2 and 3. In this


Huang                  Expires January 3, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Use Cases on . . .                  July 2014


   regard, application-centric network management and service
   provisioning, although widely desired, are still hard to achieve.

   In this document, we describe some typical use cases that may be
   supported using APONF architecture.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

3. Use Cases

   There are numerous use cases that APONF can be applied to. Some
   common use cases are described in this section.

3.1. Network Virtualization Service

   The first use case is a network virtualization service. Here a
   physical network provider will serve as the service provider and
   virtual network providers will serve as clients. Virtual network
   providers request virtual networks by contacting Application Based
   Policy Decision (ABPD) module. ABPD module will check against its
   policy to see whether the request is acceptable. If not, it will
   reject the request. If acceptable, it will assign an ID to identify
   the request and map the virtual topology to physical networks with
   required performance. ABPD will then contact related physical
   network providers to provision the required resources. After all the
   required networks resources are reserved and setup, the
   infrastructure  network providers will inform ABPD, which will then
   update its database about those physical networks and inform the
   virtual network provider about its requested virtual network and
   associated ID to identify the required virtual network.

   When the users of the virtual network provider send traffic, they
   need to encapsulate the ID in their packets so that network
   providers can identify the traffic belonging to the same user group
   and treat them with required resources and policies. In the case
   that the users of the virtual network provider cannot encapsulate
   the ID into packets due to their software version, the ABDP, after
   learning this information from its interactions with the virtual
   network provider, will inform the border routers to classify traffic


Huang                  Expires January 3, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Use Cases on . . .                  July 2014


   and encapsulate and de-capsulate packets with the ID. Without ABDP,
   this kind of negotiation and configuration will not be possible.

3.2. Virtualized Enterprise Applications

   Virtualized enterprise applications make the Virtualized Network
   Function (VNF) functionality available to enterprise users as a
   service, comparable to the cloud computing concept denoted as the
   Software as a Service (SaaS), see [NIST SP 800-146]. Virtualized
   enterprise application policies include dynamic orchestration of
   virtualized network functions, dynamic increase/decrease of network
   bandwidth, pay-as-you-go billing, etc.

   GiLAN is another important application of a virtualized network
   function, as it is a boundary between mobile and data networks which
   operate on very different strategies. In mobile core networks, it is
   preferable that QoS provisioning and network function requirements
   are different for subscribers with different profiles. In such
   scenarios, specialized applications such as BSS/OSS can send service
   policies to a policy decision point, which further map these service
   policies to GiLAN specific VNF policies, and realize the required
   QoS and with appropriate network functions, for example, video
   transcoding parameters, traffic steering points, etc.

   Consider a scenario where an enterprise requests such a service. The
   enterprise will contact ABDP for the required resources. After
   receiving the request, the ABDP will check its policy and database
   to see whether the required service can be supported or not. If yes,
   the ABDP will assign an ID for each of the requested service, map
   the request to network policies and related service functions in the
   infrastructure environment, and send a request to the infrastructure
   provider with related network policies and service functions. The
   infrastructure provider will install the requested policies and
   service functions and confirm the request. The ABDP will confirm to
   the enterprise with the associated IDs and update its database. When
   the users of the enterprise need to send traffic, they will
   encapsulate their packets with corresponding IDs. The infrastructure
   network can then apply appropriate service functions and policies to
   the corresponding packets. If the application users cannot add the
   IDs, the ABPD will inform edge service function nodes to classify
   traffic and encapsulate and de-capsulate packets.

3.3. Application-centric QoS and Reliability

   Service providers are increasingly interested in providing different
   treatments to different types of customers, e.g. subscribers vs.
   casual users. User traffic flows need to be steered to different


Huang                  Expires January 3, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Use Cases on . . .                  July 2014


   environments with different networking and computing resources
   provisioned. Under this context, ABPD provides a simple and
   effective handle that connects applications to physical layer
   devices and enables application-centric network management and
   service provisioning.

   There are many existing Quality of Service (QoS) schemes such as
   VLAN and DiffServ. However, they are Layer 2 or 3 mechanisms which
   are hard to scale to end-to-end applications without a network
   management and configuration agent like ABPD.

   There are many application scenarios that can demonstrate the usage
   of ABPD. For example, a service provider may want some of its user
   traffic be protected from server or link failures while other
   traffic not. When a server or link failure happens, the traffic that
   needs protection is steered to a protection path. The ABDP provides
   an excellent option to achieve this function. Specifically,
   application users may send a request to ABPD for traffic that
   requires protection. The ABPD can check its policy and database to
   decide whether it can accept the request. If yes, the ABPD will
   decide the working and protection routes, assign an ID, and inform
   underlying physical networks to install the required mechanism and
   resources. After receiving confirmation from all the network
   elements, the ABPD will respond to the users with the ID. When the
   application users send traffic that requires protection, it will
   encapsulate the ID into their packets. When a network failure
   happens, network elements can route the traffic through backup path
   by identifying the traffic through the ID.

4. IANA Considerations

   It is recommended that IANA assign a port in UDP and another port
   number in TCP to identify the existing of SFLs in Layer 5. The top
   level SFL of a SFL stack can use all existing port number
   assignments to identify various applications.














Huang                  Expires January 3, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Use Cases on . . .                  July 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Changcheng Huang
   Department of Systems and Computer Engineering
   Carleton University
   1125 Colonel By Drive
   Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
   Canada
   Email: huang@sce.carleton.ca

   Jiafeng Zhu
   Huawei Technologies Inc
   Santa Clara, CA
   US
   Email: Jiafeng.zhu@huawei.com

   Peng He
   Ciena Corp
   Email: phe@ciena.com

   Will(Shucheng) Liu
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian, Longgang District
   Shenzhen  518129
   P.R. China
   Email: liushucheng@huawei.com

   Baek-Young Choi
   Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
   University of Missouri-Kansas City
   550D FH, 5110 Rockhill Road
   Kansas City, MO64110
   Email: choiby@umkc.edu
















Huang                  Expires January 3, 2015                 [Page 7]

