

Proto Team                                                      D. Meyer
Internet-Draft                                Cisco/University of Oregon
Expires: September 16, 2005                               March 15, 2005


                           The PROTO Adviser
                   draft-ietf-proto-proto-adviser-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of Section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 16, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The PROTO Adviser is a designated IETF community member who will
   provide support to PROTO document shepherds during the first year or
   so after the IETF working groups begin using PROTO.  He or she
   primarily serves as a source of institutional knowledge for the
   shepherds and Chairs (and any community member with an interest in
   PROTO).  This document describes roles of the PROTO Adviser.




Meyer                  Expires September 16, 2005               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              The PROTO Adviser                 March 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   PROTO Adviser Roles and Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.   Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.   Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   7.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 6








































Meyer                  Expires September 16, 2005               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              The PROTO Adviser                 March 2005


1.  Introduction

   Early in 2004 the IESG undertook several experiments aimed at
   evaluating whether any of the several candidate changes to the IETF
   document approval process could yield qualitative improvements in
   document throughput and quality.  One such experiment, referred to as
   PROTO [PROTO] (PROcess and TOols), is a set of methodologies designed
   to involve the Working Group chairs more directly in their documents'
   approval life cycle.  In particular, the PROTO team focused on that
   part of the document's life cycle which occurs after the document
   editor and working group typically view the document as "tossed over
   the wall" to the IESG for publication.  In the PROTO methodology,
   instead of tossing the document over the wall, the WG Chair takes
   over the Area Director's shepherding tasks (as detailed in [PROTO]).
   There are no changes in the document approval requirements, the IESG
   still must carry out its approval steps, but the Working Group Chair
   document shepherd is able to team with use his or her energy to
   greatly enhance the work done during the approval process for the
   document.

   The PROTO process represents a shift in responsibilities from AD to
   working group chair.  This is a significant change which should
   improve the timeliness and quality of IETF documents.  Since this
   change is being applied to working groups and important IETF
   documents, the PROTO team felt that it would helpful to have a member
   of the group which devised this new process available to the folks
   using it to ensure that transition went smoothly.  Note that the
   Proto Adviser's responsibilities are generally to answer questions
   about the process and remind folks to use it.  Finally, the Proto
   Adviser isn't intended to be directly involved in document
   shepherding other than as an adviser on the PROTO process.

2.  PROTO Adviser Roles and Responsibilities

   The PROTO Adviser (PA) will provide support to the Working Group
   document shepherds using PROTO in the first year or so after working
   groups begin to use the PROTO approach to document publication.  The
   includes serving as a source of institutional knowledge available to
   the Working Group Chairs during the PROTO process, both through
   involvement in the PROTO team and through continuing manager
   experience, and the following specific responsibilities:

   1.  Maintaining a list or website for the community of PROTO working
       groups.  See [PROTO] for the set of cases which are excluded.
       The PA also reminds the ADs and Working Group Chairs that PROTO
       write ups are required (thus starting the PROTO process) when
       working group documents transition into AD Evaluation state.
       Note that this requires that the PA receive notifications of the



Meyer                  Expires September 16, 2005               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              The PROTO Adviser                 March 2005


       state transitions for the PROTO documents.  This reminder should
       point the shepherds to [PROTO] to ensure that the structure and
       content of the write up is full and complete.

   2.  Keeping track of WG progress status and activity level to ensure
       that the methodology is being used (and works smoothly),

   3.  Acting as a general resource for WGCs involved in PROTO.  In
       particular, the PA serves as a resource for the WGC who can
       triage PROTO related issues and vector them appropriate
       resolution point,

   4.  The PA will periodically report to the community on the progress
       of PROTO, including successes and problems encountered, and
       incremental changes to the methodology.


3.  Conclusions

   This document introduces the roles and responsibilities of the PROTO
   manager.  It is important to note that the PROTO manager is an
   informal position and is not intended to be institutionalized.
   Rather, it is envisioned that the PROTO manager position will be
   retained as long as it proves useful, i.e., until the PROTO ways of
   working become very familiar, probably for a year or so.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies a change to IETF document flow procedures.
   As such, it neither raises nor considers protocol-specific security
   issues.

5.  Acknowledgments

   Allison Mankin, Bill Fenner, Barbara Fuller, Margaret Wasserman,
   Aaron Falk and Henrik Levkowetz all made important contributions to
   this document.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document creates no new requirements on IANA namespaces or other
   IANA requirements.

7.  Normative References

   [PROTO]  Falk, A., Levkowetz, H. and D. Meyer, "The PROTO Process:
            Working Group Chair Document Shepherding",
            Internet-Draft draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding,



Meyer                  Expires September 16, 2005               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              The PROTO Adviser                 March 2005


            March 2005.


Author's Address

   David Meyer
   1225 Kincaid St
   Eugene, OR  97403
   USA

   Phone: +1.541.346.1747
   Email: dmm@1-4-5.net







































Meyer                  Expires September 16, 2005               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              The PROTO Adviser                 March 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Meyer                  Expires September 16, 2005               [Page 6]

