
Network Working Group                                           S. Seno 
Internet Draft                                      Mitsubishi Electric 
Intended status: Informational                                 
Expires: April 19, 2010                                October 19, 2009 
 
 
        Requirement of Impairment Compensation Control in WSON
      draft-seno-ccamp-wson-impairment-compensate-cntl-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 
   
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2010.



Abstract 
 
   This memo describes requirements of compensation control of optical 
   impairments such as chromatic dispersion for dynamic optical paths, 
   as well as automatic discovery of fiber-related impairments over 
   links by collaboration of a pair of adjacent nodes upon installation. 
   It is intended as a supplement to the wavelength switched optical 
   networks (WSON) framework with impairments, because GMPLS-based 
   automatic adjustment of impairment compensation and automatic 
   discovery of link impairments will improve usability of WSON.





S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 1] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009
 

Table of Contents 

 
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
   1.1. Problem Statements............................................3 
   1.2. Organization of This Memo.....................................3 
   2. GMPLS-based Impairment Compensation Control.....................4 
   2.1. Impairment Compensation Control by the Control Plane..........4
   2.2. Impairment Compensation Procedure.............................7
   2.3. Impairment Compensation Control Requirements..................8
   3. GMPLS-based Impairment Discovery................................9
   3.1. Link Impairment Discovery Procedure...........................9
   3.2. IA-RWA and Link Impairment Discovery.........................10
   3.3. Link Impairment Discovery Requirements.......................11
   4. Conclusion.....................................................11
   5. Security Considerations........................................12
   6. IANA Considerations............................................12
   7. Acknowledgments................................................12
   8. References.....................................................12
   8.1. Normative References.........................................12
   8.2. Informative References.......................................13
   Authors' and Contributors' Addresses..............................14 
   Intellectual Property Statement...................................15 
   Copyright Notice..................................................15 
 


1. Introduction 
 
   The Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON) framework with 
   impairments [WSON-Imp-Frame] discusses how Impairment Aware Routing 
   and Wavelength Assignment (IA-RWA) in optical networks is supported 
   by the Control Plane with considerations on various impairments 
   encountered by an optical path. It identifies major issues with IA-
   RWA, such as impairment estimation, impairment information sharing, 
   IA-RWA architectures, and protocol implications of IA-RWA to the 
   GMPLS (Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching) [RFC3471] 
   [RFC3473] [RFC4328] and PCE (Path Computation Element) protocols.  

   To deal with various impairments encountered by optical paths, 
   various impairment compensation technologies have been developed. For
   example, chromatic dispersion may be compensated by dispersion 
   compensation fiber (DCF) or an electronic or optical compensation 
   device at the transmitter or the receiver of the signal. Insertion of
   3R repeaters or an optical amplifier at an optical path's transient 
   node may also be regarded as a compensation effort. 



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 2] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   Although some compensation technologies offer fixed or limited 
   compensation ranges against impairments, compensation technologies 
   with wide and dynamically tunable compensation ranges have been 
   developing. Such compensation technologies are especially suited for
   a dynamically established optical path because impairment 
   compensation by them can be automatically adjusted as adequate 
   corresponding to a requested path's impairments. 

1.1 Problem Statements

   The emerging tunable compensation technologies against optical 
   impairments will be able to support dynamically established optical
   paths which may traverse different routes and different optical 
   fiber types, because their compensation parameters can be adjusted 
   to meet different impairments corresponding to optical paths. 

   However, there are is a problem that no Control Plane mechanisms 
   have been defined to automatically adjust compensation parameters 
   according to dynamic optical paths. Because benefit of automatic 
   establishment of optical paths is well recognized, it is obvious 
   that associated control of automatic impairment compensation 
   adjustment is also beneficial. 

   According to the IA-RWA architectures, Impairment Validation (IV) 
   process collects and evaluates impairments of a requested optical 
   path. Such impairment information is essential for impairment 
   compensation adjustment described above, and can be used in its 
   process. 

   Another problem is that there are no means to automatically discover
   impairment information, although it is required by the IA-RWA 
   process. 

1.2 Organization of This Memo

   Based upon the above observation, this memo discusses how 
   compensation control for tunable compensation technologies is handled
   within the WSON framework in Section 2. Section 2 also includes 
   requirements of impairment compensation control to the Control Plane.

   This memo also discusses automatic discovery of fiber-related 
   impairments over links for use by IA-RWA in Section 3. Link 
   impairments are basic components of end-to-end impairments of an 
   optical path, and their automatic discovery by collaboration of a 
   pair of adjacent nodes upon installation will be beneficial to the 
   WSON framework with impairments. Section 3 also includes requirements



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 3] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   of link impairment discovery to the Control Plane. 

   It is the intension of this memo to explain impairment compensation 
   control and link impairment discovery with regard to the WSON 
   framework with impairments so that they will be properly placed 
   within it. 



2. GMPLS-based Impairment Compensation Control
 
2.1. Impairment Compensation Control by the Control Plane

   Optical Impairments such as fiber chromatic dispersion are discussed 
   in [WSON-Imp-Info]. Such impairments on the optical signal over a 
   dynamic optical path may be compensated at the signal's transmitter 
   node, receiver node, or transient nodes by means of some compensation
   technologies applicable to one or more impairment types to be dealt 
   with. 

   For example, chromatic dispersion may be compensated at the 
   transmitter node by electronic pre-distortion device, by dispersion 
   compensation fiber (DCF) at the transient nodes, and by electronic 
   dispersion compensator at the receiver node. Please note that the 
   transmitter node will be the ingress node of the path and the 
   receiver node will be the egress node of the path, respectively, for 
   the downstream signal. The transmitter node will be the egress node

   of the path and the receiver node will be the ingress node of the 
   path, respectively, for the upstream signal. 

   Note that more than one compensation technologies may be applied at 
   more than one nodes traversed by a single optical path. In the case 
   of chromatic dispersion, DCF may be used repeatedly at transient 
   nodes as well as at the receiver node. 

   Different compensation technologies offer different administrative 
   characteristics for optical paths. Whereas DCF is statically inserted
   into an optical path and its compensation value is fixed, other 
   compensation technologies offer wider tuning ranges which enable 
   their compensation capabilities promptly adjusted to a dynamic 
   optical path. This means prompt adjustment control is required. 

   Various impairments may be encountered in the course of IA-RWA 
   process [WSON-Imp-Frame] when an optical path is newly requested. To 
   evaluate implications of impairments on transmitted signal quality by



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 4] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   Impairment Validation, the IA-RWA entity may accumulate impairments 
   over candidate route and wavelength pairs for a requested path, based
   on information gathered at the IA-RWA entity in advance or signaling-
   based impairment collection [Optical-Evidence] [Optical-Signaling]. 
   Such accumulated impairments are useful for selection of appropriate 
   compensation devices, when more than one compensation devices are 
   available, and for adjustment of compensation devices which will be 
   used against the impairments.  

   To effectively and rapidly select and adjust compensation devices for
   a dynamic optical path upon its request, GMPLS signaling-based 
   distributed compensation control over the Control Plane will be 
   beneficial. As compensation devices may be applied not only at an 
   optical path's terminating nodes but also at its transient nodes, 
   conveyance of compensation control objects by signaling messages has 
   an advantage that they naturally reach each node of an optical path. 

   In the following, how distributed compensation control is used for 
   selection and adjustment of compensation devices is described:

   (i) Selection of compensation devices

   As shown above, more than one compensation technologies may be 
   applied at more than one nodes traversed by a single optical path. 
   Because compensation technologies will evolve while an optical 
   network is built and expanded, and compensation devices' cost will
   differ corresponding to different compensation capabilities, it is 
   reasonably assumed that compensation devices with different 
   capabilities will co-exist in a single network and even in a single 
   node. 

   For example, a terminating node of a newly requested path's will have
   a pool of compensation devices with different capabilities. It is 
   obvious that optimized selection of compensation devices, where each 
   path is assigned a compensation device with just sufficient 
   capability to compensate for it, will provide better utilization of 
   compensation devices. On the other hand, if compensation devices are 
   assigned without consideration on their compensation capabilities, a 
   device with high capability may be assigned to a path which can be 
   compensated for by a device with less capability, and it will not be 
   available when a path with large impairment is requested. 

   To achieve optimized selection of compensation devices, each node 
   where compensation is applied should know how much compensation is 
   required at it, and this information can effectively distributed by 
   signaling conveying accumulated impairments of a requested path. As 



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 5] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   an example, consider a case where chromatic dispersion is collected 
   along a path's route by signaling and delivered to its egress nodes. 
   If the egress node has a pool of dispersion compensation devices for 
   downstream signal received by it, the egress node can select an 
   appropriate device from the pool based on accumulated chromatic 
   dispersion. As for the upstream signal transmitted to the opposite 
   direction, its accumulated dispersion should be conveyed from the 
   egress node to the ingress node by signaling so that it will be used 
   for selection of an appropriate device from the ingress node's device
   pool.

   (ii) Initial setting of compensation parameters

   The IA-RWA entity may accumulate impairments over a candidate route 
   and wavelength pair for a requested path, based on information 
   gathered at the IA-RWA entity in advance or signaling-based 
   impairment collection [Optical-Evidence] [Optical-Signaling]. Such 
   accumulated impairments can be translated to compensation parameters 
   of tunable compensation devices and used for initial setting of them 
   upon path establishment. This will reduce time necessary to adjust 
   compensation parameters of the compensation devices, because 
   compensation parameters are already near their optimal values. 

   However, without such a priori knowledge, adjustment may take a long 
   time because compensation parameters may be set far from their 
   optimal values. Adjustment process of compensation parameters is 
   further discussed in (iii) below. 

   Reduction of compensation adjustment time based on estimated 
   impairments of a path by IA-RWA will shorten overall path 
   establishment time from a path's request to its release, and will 
   contribute to effective use of network resources. 

   (iii) Optimization of compensation parameters

   Initial setting of compensation parameters based on estimated 
   impairments by IA-RWA may not be the best one because of residual 
   impairments, errors due to accumulation, and so on. Thus further 
   adjustment of compensation parameters may be performed before a 
   path's Data Plane is ready for release to its users. 

   An adjustment process of compensation parameters often involves 
   measurement of sample signal transmitted over the Data Plane with 
   feed-back control over the Control Plane, as shown in Figure 1. In 
   the first step (A), measurement is agreed by sample signal's 
   transmitter and receiver by exchange of messages in the Control 



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 6] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   Plane. In the next step (B), the transmitter sends sample signal to 
   the receiver in the Data Plane and its performance is measured by 
   the receiver. In the last step (C), the measured performance results
   or more desirable setting parameters for compensation devices are 
   fed back to the transmitter by the receiver in the Control Plane. 
   Such a feed-back loop may take considerable time, especially when the
   sample signal has to traverse a long distance or measurement time is 
   long. The more optimized the initial setting of the compensation 
   devices, the less feed-back loops may be needed, and adjustment time 
   will be shortened. 



      +-------------+                          +-------------+
      | Transmitter |                          |  Receiver   |
      +-------------+                          +-------------+
             |        (A) measurement agreement       |
             | <------------------------------------> |
             |                                        |
             |        (B) sample signal               |
             | =====================================> |
             |                                        |
             |        (C) measurement result          |
             | <------------------------------------- |
             |                                        |

   -----> : Control Plane messages
   =====> : Data Plane sample signal

               Figure 1 A Typical Measurement Process.



   As shown above, the Control Plane helps compensation adjustment 
   process by providing the means for controlling measurement process as
   well as exchange of the measured performance results or desirable 
   compensation parameters. Measurement of optical performance 
   parameters controlled by RSVP-TE extensions was proposed by [Optical-
   Evidence] as optical impairment collection. 




2.2. Impairment Compensation Procedure

   A general procedure of impairment compensation control is as follows:



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 7] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   (1) Request of an optical path which may encounter impairments.

   (2) Selection of the path's route and wavelength with an estimate of 
   accumulated impairments. 

   Here some type of the IA-RWA procedures is used for route and 
   wavelength selection, and it is assumed that it can estimate how much
   impairments will be accumulated over each pair of route and 
   wavelength selected. 

   (3) Assignment of compensation devices with initial setting of 
   compensation parameters. 

   Estimated accumulated impairments, or desirable compensation device 
   parameters derived from them, may be notified from the IA-RWA entity 
   to the path's ingress node and egress node by PCE-based or GMPLS-
   based protocols. If the path's terminating nodes include compensation
   devices with different compensation capabilities and the IA-RWA 
   entity has knowledge of up-to-date assignment of the compensation 
   devices, the entity may be able to select compensation devices just 
   sufficient for compensation of the path, so that such assignment is 
   optimized. How the entity derives compensation device parameters or 
   how it selects compensation devices according to estimated 
   accumulated impairments are outside the scope of this memo. 

   (4) Optimization of compensation parameters through measurement of 
   residual impairments and adjustment of the compensation devices. 

   Here adjustment feed-back loops between signal's transmitter and 
   receiver may be controlled by GMPLS-based signaling. 



2.3. Impairment Compensation Control Requirements

   From the above argument, the following requirements for GMPLS-based 
   impairment compensation control over the Control Plane are obtained:

   (a) Transmission of an estimate of accumulated impairments of a path 
   from the IA-RWA entity to nodes where the IA-RWA entity is capable of 
   such estimate. 

   (b) Transmission of an estimate of accumulated impairments between 
   nodes.

   (c) Transmission of compensation device selection information, and 



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 8] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   optionally, compensation device setting parameters, from the IA-RWA 
   entity to nodes. 

   (d) Transmission of compensation device selection information, and 
   optionally, compensation device setting parameters, between nodes. 

   (e) Transmission of measurement control information between sample 
   signal's transmitter and receiver. 

   In (e), the control information may include measurement initiation 
   and measurement synchronization, and, optionally, conflict resolution
   of optical resources suggested by [Optical-Evidence]. It may also 
   include measurement results from the receiver to the transmitter. 



3. GMPLS-based Impairment Discovery

3.1. Link Impairment Discovery Procedure

   Automatic configuration of optical Network Elements (NEs) has 
   attracted considerable attentions and standardization efforts in 
   recent years have produced neighbor discovery and service discovery 
   protocols such as LMP [RFC4204] and OIF-UNI [OIF-UNI-1.0]. 

   Automatic discovery of fiber-related link impairments will be 
   achieved if each node has impairment measurement functions and a pair 
   of adjacent nodes collaborates to measure link impairments between 
   them and to notify the results each other. As the measurement process 
   shown in Figure 1 is generic and also applicable to link impairment 
   measurement, a link impairment discovery protocol can also be 
   designed based on it. 

   However, a GMPLS signaling-based mechanism, such as [Optical-
   Evidence] and [Optical-Signaling], can not be applied to link 
   impairment discovery upon installation of a new NE or a new link, 
   because signaling assumes node and link information is available for 
   specification of an optical path, but such information with respect 
   to a new NE or a new link becomes available only after their 
   discovery process has completed. 

   Therefore, link impairment discovery should be realized as an 
   extension to the standardized neighbor discovery protocol, such as 
   LMP, so that discovery of a new NE or a new link by neighbor 
   discovery will smoothly lead to discovery of link impairments. 




S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 9] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   Link impairment discovery can be integrated into LMP as a procedure 
   similar to link verification. This is because link verification was 
   designed to correlate Data Plane information, i.e. link connectivity, 
   with Control Plane identifiers, and link impairments are also Data 
   Plane information to be correlated with such identifiers. 

   Link impairment discovery protocol may use the same encoding for link 
   impairment information as encoding of impairment information by 
   signaling-based impairment collection. 



3.2. IA-RWA and Link Impairment Discovery

   Collection of link impairments by the IA-RWA entity, in case if it 
   does not reside in NEs, may be achieved by advertisement of link 
   impairments by the routing protocol or other means. 

   Link impairment discovery may be incorporated into the IA-RWA 
   architectures as in the following models:

   (i) Centralized IA-RWA

   When the IA-RWA entity is centralized as a PCE, each node performing 
   link impairment discovery should notify discovered link impairments 
   to the PCE. The PCE may be able to validate a requested path's route 
   and wavelength selection, evaluating link impairments accumulated 
   along each candidate route of the path. 

   (ii) Distributed IA-RWA

   When the IA-RWA entity is distributed among nodes, a requested path's 
   terminating nodes validate the path's route and wavelength selection. 
   This model is further divided to the two cases below according to how 
   link impairments are collected for validation. 
 
   (ii-1) Routing-based collection

   Each node advertises discovered link impairments by a routing 
   protocol such as an extended OSPF-TE. Because link impairments are 
   link-specific property, they may be encoded as TE-link information. 

   Advertised link impairments will be stored in routing information 
   base of all nodes. When an optical path is requested, its ingress 
   node will validate the path's route and wavelength selection with 
   evaluation of link impairments accumulated along each candidate route



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 10] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   of the path. 

   (ii-2) Signaling-based collection

   When an optical path is requested, GMPLS-based signaling from its 
   ingress node to its egress node along a candidate route also 
   accumulates discovered link impairments along the route. The egress 
   node evaluates the accumulated impairments to decide whether the 
   candidate route is acceptable or not, as described in [WSON-Imp-
   Frame] 2.2. 



3.3. Link Impairment Discovery Requirements

   From the above argument, the following requirements for GMPLS-based 
   link impairment discovery are obtained:

   (a) Transmission of link impairment measurement control information 
   between a link's terminating nodes. Such control may include 
   measurement initiation and measurement synchronization. Link 
   impairment measurement is typically performed for each direction of a 
   link individually, because different directions usually use different 
   fibers. Thus link impairment discovery is defined as a uni-
   directional procedure, where sample signal is transmitted by the 
   transmitter and its measurement result is obtained by the receiver. 

   (b) Transmission of measurement results from the receiver to the 
   transmitter. Sharing of measurement results between a link's 
   terminating nodes will facilitates impairment validation. 



4. Conclusion

   Although the current WSON framework with impairments [WSON-Imp-Frame]
   includes reference to dispersion compensation in A.2.2, it does not 
   address how impairment compensation is controlled within the WSON 
   framework. Because impairment compensation control described in 
   Section 2 is useful for effective and rapid establishment of optical 
   paths with impairment compensation, it is recommended that the WSON 
   framework should include it. 

   Because automatic discovery of link impairments described in Section 
   3 will contribute to automatic processing of IA-RWA, its inclusion to
   the WSON framework with impairments is also recommended. 



S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 11] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


5. Security Considerations

   This document has no requirement for a change to the security models 
   within GMPLS and associated protocols. However, the additional 
   information exchanged for impairment compensation control and 
   automatic discovery of impairments represents a disclosure of network 
   capabilities that an operator may wish to keep private. Consideration 
   should be given to securing such information. 



6. IANA Considerations

   TBD. 



7. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Young Lee and Daniel King for their 
   supoprt. 



8. References

8.1. Normative References

   [RFC3471] L. Berger, Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
             (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471, 
             January 2003.

   [RFC3473] L. Berger, Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
             (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic 
             Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4204] J. Lang, Ed., "Link Management Protocol (LMP)", RFC 4204, 
             October 2005.

   [RFC4328] D. Papadimitriou, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
             Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Extensions for G.709 Optical 
             Transport Networks Control", RFC 4328, January 2006.







S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 12] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


   [WSON-Imp-Frame] G. Bernstein, Y. Lee, and D. Li, "A Framework for 
             the Control of Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON) 
             with Impairments", work in progress: draft-ietf-ccamp-wson-
             impairments-00.txt, June 2009.

   [WSON-Imp-Info] G. Bernstein, and Y. Lee, "Information Model for 
             Impaired Optical Path Validation", work in progress: draft-
             bernstein-wson-impairment-info-02.txt, July 2009.

   [OIF-UNI-1.0] Optical Internetworking Forum, "User Network Interface 
             (UNI) 1.0 Signaling Specification", OIF-UNI-01.0, October 
             2001.



8.2. Informative References

   [Optical-Signaling] G. Martinelli and A. Zanardi, Ed., "GMPLS 
             Signaling Extensions for Optical Impairment Aware Lightpath
             Setup", work in progress: draft-martinelli-ccamp-optical-
             imp-signaling-02.txt, July 2009.

   [PCEP-Imp] Y. Lee, G. Bernstein, J. Martensson, T. Takeda and T. Otani, 
             "PCEP Requirements for WSON Impairments", work in progress: 
             draft-lee-pce-wson-impairments-00.txt, June 2009.


   [Winzer06] P. J. Winzer and R-J Essiambre, "Advanced Optical
             Modulation Formats", Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 
             5, pp. 952-985, May 2006.

   [Seno06]  S. Seno, Y. Baba, T. Mizuochi, T. Sugihara, K. Motoshima 
             and T. Ideguchi, "Dynamic Compensation Control by GMPLS-
             Plus," Technology Digest, OECC 2006, 5E4-4, Kaohsiung, 
             Taiwan, July 2006.














S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 13] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Shoichiro Seno
   Information Technology R&D Center
   Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
   5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura, Japan
   Email: Senoo.Shoichiro@dc.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp
   Phone: +81 (467) 41-2881



Contributors' Addresses

   Yoshimasa Baba
   Information Technology R&D Center
   Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
   5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura, Japan
   Email: Baba.Yoshimasa@dp.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp
   Phone: +81 (467) 41-2430


   Eiichi Horiuchi
   Information Technology R&D Center
   Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
   5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura, Japan
   Email: Horiuchi.Eiichi@cw.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp
   Phone: +81 (467) 41-2430


   Kazuo Kubo
   Information Technology R&D Center
   Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
   5-1-1 Ofuna, Kamakura, Japan
   Email: Kubo.Kazuo@cj.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp
   Phone: +81 (467) 41-2443














S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 14] 
Internet Drafts        WSON Compensation Control               Oct 2009


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF 
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or 
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or 
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please 
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 



Copyright Notice


   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights 
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




S. Seno                 Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 15] 
