
Network Working Group                                        Lyndon Ong 
Internet Draft                                                    Ciena 
Intended Status: Informational                          Jonathan Sadler 
Expiration Date: April 2009                                     Tellabs 
                                                           Stephen Shew 
                                                                 Nortel 

                                                           October 2008 


   Requirements for Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
       Routing for the Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON) 

                  draft-many-ccamp-4258bis-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 13, 2008.  
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
Abstract 
    
   The Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) suite of 
   protocols has been defined to control different switching 
   technologies as well as different applications.  These include 
   support for requesting Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) connections 
   including Synchronous Optical Network (SONET)/Synchronous Digital 
   Hierarchy (SDH) and Optical Transport Networks (OTNs). 

  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
    
   This document concentrates on the routing requirements placed on the 
   GMPLS suite of protocols in order to support the capabilities and 
   functionalities of an Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON) 
   as defined by the ITU-T. 
    
   Table of Contents 
     1.   Introduction.........................................2 
     2.   Conventions Used in This Document.......................4 
     3.   ASON Routing Architecture and Requirements...............4 
     3.1. Multiple Hierarchical Levels of ASON Routing Areas (RAs)...5 
     3.2. Hierarchical Routing Information Dissemination............6 
     3.3. Configuration.........................................7 
     3.3.1. Configuring the Multi-Level Hierarchy.................7 
     3.3.2. Configuring RC Adjacencies...........................8 
     3.4. Evolution............................................8 
     3.5. Routing Attributes....................................8 
     3.5.1. Taxonomy of Routing Attributes .......................8 
     3.5.2. Commonly Advertised Information.......................9 
     3.5.3. Node Attributes ....................................9 
     3.6. Path Computation Requirements.......................... 11 
     4.   Security Considerations.............................. 12 
     5.   Review of Requirements............................... 12 
     6.   Contributors........................................ 14 
     7.   Acknowledgements.................................... 15 
     8.   References.......................................... 15 
     8.1. Normative References ................................. 15 
     8.2. Informative References................................ 15 
      
1. Introduction 
    
   The Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) suite of 
   protocols provides, among other capabilities, support for 
   controlling different switching technologies.  These include support 
   for requesting TDM connections utilizing SONET/SDH (see [T1.105] and 
   [G.707], respectively) as well as Optical Transport Networks (OTNs, 
   see [G.709]).  However, there are certain capabilities that are 
   needed to support the ITU-T G.8080 control plane architecture for an 
   Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON).  Therefore, it is 
   desirable to understand the corresponding requirements for the GMPLS 
   protocol suite.  The ASON control plane architecture is defined in 
   [G.8080]; ASON routing requirements are identified in [G.7715] and 
   in [G.7715.1] for ASON link state protocols.  These Recommendations 
   apply to all [G.805] layer networks (e.g., SDH and OTN), and provide 
   protocol-neutral functional requirements and architecture. 
    
   This document focuses on the routing requirements for the GMPLS 
   suite of protocols to support the capabilities and functionality of 
   ASON control planes.  This document summarizes the ASON requirements 
   using ASON terminology.  This document does not address GMPLS 
   applicability or GMPLS capabilities.  Any protocol (in particular, 

  

Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
   routing) applicability, design, or suggested extensions are strictly 
   outside the scope of this document.  ASON (Routing) terminology 
   sections are provided in Appendixes 1 and 2. 
    
   The ASON routing architecture is based on the following assumptions: 
    
     -  A network is subdivided based on operator decision and criteria 
      (e.g., geography, administration, and/or technology); the network 
      subdivisions are defined in ASON as Routing Areas (RAs). 
      
     -  The routing architecture and protocols applied after the 
      network is subdivided are an operator's choice.  A multi-level 
      hierarchy of RAs, as defined in ITU-T [G.7715] and [G.7715.1], 
      provides for a hierarchical relationship of RAs based on 
      containment; i.e., child RAs are always contained within a parent 
      RA.  The hierarchical containment relationship of RAs provides 
      for routing information abstraction, thereby enabling scalable 
      routing information representation.  The maximum number of 
      hierarchical RA levels to be supported is not specified (outside 
      the scope of this document). 
      
     -  Within an ASON RA and for each level of the routing hierarchy, 
      multiple routing paradigms (hierarchical, step-by-step, source- 
      based), centralized or distributed path computation, and multiple 
      different routing protocols MAY be supported.  The architecture 
      distinguishes between the Routing Controller (which is 
      responsible for coordination and dissemination of routing 
      information) and the Protocol Controller (which supports a 
      specific protocol), and does not assume a one-to-one 
      correspondence between the two.   For example, a single RC may be 
      supported by multiple PCs such that the same routing information 
      is disseminated by different routing protocols.  The architecture 
      allows the routing protocol(s) used within different RAs 
      (including child and parent RAs) to be different.  The 
      realization of the routing paradigm(s) to support the 
      hierarchical levels of RAs is not specified. 
    
     -  The routing adjacency topology (i.e., the associated Protocol 
      Controller (PC) connectivity) and transport topology are NOT 
      assumed to be congruent. 
      
     -  The requirements support architectural evolution, e.g., a 
      change in the number of RA levels, as well as aggregation and 
      segmentation of RAs. 
    
   The description of the ASON routing architecture provides for a 
   conceptual reference architecture, with definition of functional 
   components and common information elements to enable end-to-end 
   routing in the case of protocol heterogeneity and facilitate 
   management of ASON networks.  This description is only conceptual: 
   no physical partitioning of these functions is implied. 
    

  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
2. Conventions Used in This Document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. 
    
   Although [RFC2119] describes interpretations of these key words in 
   terms of protocol specifications and implementations, they are used 
   in this document to describe design requirements for protocol 
   extensions. 
    
3. ASON Routing Architecture and Requirements 
 
   The fundamental architectural concept is the RA and its related 
   functional components (see Appendix 2 on terminology).  The routing 
   services offered by an RA are provided by a Routing Performer (RP). 
   An RP is responsible for a single RA, and it MAY be functionally 
   realized using distributed Routing Controllers (RCs).  The RC, 
   itself, MAY be implemented as a cluster of distributed entities ASON 
   refers to the cluster as a Routing Control Domain (RCD)).  The RC 
   components for an RA receive routing topology information from their 
   associated Link Resource Manager(s) (LRMs) and store this 
   information in the Routing Information Database (RDB).  The RDB is 
   replicated at each RC bounded to the same RA, and MAY contain 
   information about multiple transport plane network layers.  Whenever 
   the routing topology changes, the LRM informs the corresponding RC, 
   which in turn updates its associated RDB.  In order to ensure RDB 
   synchronization, the RCs cooperate and exchange routing information.  
   Path computation functions MAY exist in each RC, MAY exist on 
   selected RCs within the same RA, or MAY be centralized for the RA. 
    
   In this context, communication between RCs within the same RA is 
   realized using a particular routing protocol (or multiple 
   protocols). In ASON, the communication component is represented by 
   the protocol controller (PC) component(s) and the protocol messages 
   are conveyed over the ASON control plane's Signaling Control Network 
   (SCN).  The PC MAY convey information for one or more transport 
   network layers (refer to the note in Section 3.2).  The RC is 
   protocol independent, and RC communications MAY be realized by 
   multiple, different PCs within an RA. 
    
   The ASON routing architecture defines a multi-level routing 
   hierarchy of RAs based on a containment model to support routing 
   information abstraction.  [G.7715.1] defines the ASON hierarchical 
   link state routing protocol requirements for communication of 
   routing information within an RA (one level) to support hierarchical 
   routing information dissemination (including summarized routing 
   information for other levels).  Summarized routing information is in 
   the form of the link and node information elements defined in 
   [G.7715] and [G.7715.1], and may be an abstract representation of a 
   subnetwork or it may simply be the real links and/or nodes).  The 
   communication between any of the other functional component(s) 
   (e.g., SCN, LRM, and between RCDs (RC-RC communication between RAs)) 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
   is outside the scope of [G.7715.1] protocol requirements and, thus, 
   is also outside the scope of this document. 
    
   ASON routing components are identified by identifiers that are drawn 
   from different name spaces (see [G.7715.1]).  These are control 
   plane identifiers for transport resources, components, and SCN 
   addresses. These spaces are independent of each other and MAY share 
   common formats. The formats of those identifiers in a routing 
   protocol realization SHALL be implementation specific and outside 
   the scope of this document. 
    
   The failure of an RC, or the failure of communications between RCs, 
   and the subsequent recovery from the failure condition MUST NOT 
   disrupt calls in progress (i.e., already established) and their 
   associated connections.  Calls being set up MAY fail to complete, 
   and the call setup service MAY be unavailable during recovery 
   actions. 
    
   When an RC has failed, the protocols used by RCs SHOULD provide a 
   mechanism to identify the failure as well as procedures to recover 
   from the failure or to aid in fault diagnosis (for example, the 
   overload bit in IS-IS).  
    
3.1.     Multiple Hierarchical Levels of ASON Routing Areas (RAs) 
    
   [G.8080] introduces the concept of a Routing Area (RA) in reference 
   to a network subdivision.  RAs provide for routing information 
   abstraction.  Except for the single RA case, RAs are hierarchically 
   contained: a higher-level (parent) RA contains lower-level (child) 
   RAs that in turn MAY also contain RAs, etc.  Thus, RAs contain RAs 
   that recursively define successive hierarchical RA levels. 
    
   However, the RA containment relationship describes only an 
   architectural hierarchical organization of RAs.  It does not 
   restrict a specific routing protocol's realization (e.g., OSPF 
   multi-areas, path computation, etc.).  Moreover, the realization of 
   the routing paradigm to support a hierarchical organization of RAs 
   and the number of hierarchical RA levels to be supported is routing 
   protocol specific and outside the scope of this document. 
    
   In a multi-level hierarchy of RAs, it is necessary to distinguish 
   among RCs for the different levels of the RA hierarchy.  Before any 
   pair of RCs establishes communication, they MUST verify that they 
   are bound to the same parent RA (see Section 3.2).  An RA identifier 
   (RA ID) is required to provide the scope within which the RCs can 
   communicate.  To distinguish between RCs bound to the same RA, an RC 
   identifier (RC ID) is required; the RC ID MUST be unique within its 
   containing RA. 
    
   An RA represents a partition of the data plane, and its identifier 
   (i.e., RA ID) is used within the control plane as a reference to the 
   data plane partition.  Each RA within a carrier's network SHALL be 
   uniquely identifiable.  RA IDs MAY be associated with a transport 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
   plane name space, whereas RC IDs are associated with a control plane 
   name space. 
    
3.2.     Hierarchical Routing Information Dissemination 
    
   Routing information can be exchanged between RCs bound to adjacent 
   levels of the RA hierarchy, i.e., Level N+1 and N, where Level N 
   represents the RAs contained by Level N+1.  The links connecting RAs 
   may be viewed as external links (inter-RA links), and the links 
   representing connectivity within an RA may be viewed as internal 
   links (intra-RA links).  The external links to an RA at one level of 
   the hierarchy may be internal links in the parent RA.  Intra-RA 
   links of a child RA MAY be hidden from the parent RA's view. 
    
   The physical location of RCs for adjacent RA levels, their 
   relationship, and their communication protocol(s) are outside the 
   scope of this document.  No assumption is made regarding how RCs 
   communicate between adjacent RA levels.  If routing information is 
   exchanged between an RC, its parent, and its child RCs, it SHOULD 
   include reachability (see Section 3.5.3) and MAY include, upon 
   policy decision, node and link topology.  Communication between RAs 
   only takes place between RCs with a parent/child relationship.  RCs 
   of one RA never communicate with RCs of another RA at the same 
   level.  There SHOULD not be any dependencies on the different 
   routing protocols used within an RA or in different RAs. 
    
   Multiple RCs bound to the same RA MAY transform (filter, summarize, 
   etc.) and then forward information to RCs at different levels. 
   However, in this case, the resulting information at the receiving 
   level must be self-consistent (i.e., ensure consistency between 
   transform operations performed on routing information at different 
   levels to ensure proper information processing).  This MAY be 
   achieved using a number of mechanisms. 
    
   Note: There is no implied relationship between multi-layer transport 
   networks and multi-level routing.  Implementations MAY support a 
   hierarchical routing topology (multi-level) with a single routing 
   protocol instance for multiple transport switching layers or a 
   hierarchical routing topology for one transport switching layer. 
    
     1. Type of Information Exchanged 
      
      The type of information flowing upward (i.e., Level N to Level 
      N+1) and the information flowing downward (i.e., Level N+1 to 
      Level N) are used for similar purposes, namely, the exchange of 
      reachability information and summarized topology information to 
      allow routing across multiple RAs.  The summarization of topology 
      information may impact the accuracy of routing and may require 
      additional path calculation. 
      
      The following information exchanges are expected: 


  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
      - Level N+1 visibility to Level N reachability and topology (or 
        upward information communication) allowing RC(s) at Level N+1 
        to determine the reachable endpoints from Level N. 
       
      - Level N visibility to Level N+1 reachability and topology (or 
        downward information communication) allowing RC(s) bounded to 
        an RA at Level N to develop paths to reachable endpoints 
        outside of the RA. 
      
     2. Interactions between Upward and Downward Communication 
      
      When both upward and downward information exchanges contain 
      topology and reachability information, a feedback loop could 
      potentially be created.  Consequently, the routing protocol MUST 
      include a method to: 
       
      - prevent information propagated from a Level N+1 RA's RC into 
        the Level N RA's RC from being re-introduced into the Level N+1 
        RA's RC, and 
       
      - prevent information propagated from a Level N-1 RA's RC into 
        the Level N RA's RC from being re-introduced into the Level N-1 
        RA's RC. 
       
      The routing protocol SHALL differentiate the routing information 
      originated at a given-level RA from derived routing information 
      (received from external RAs), even when this information is 
      forwarded by another RC at the same level.  This is a necessary 
      condition to be fulfilled by routing protocols to be loop free. 
       
     3. Method of Communication 
      
      Two approaches exist for communication between Level N and N+1: 
      
      - The first approach places an instance of a Level N routing 
        function and an instance of a Level N+1 routing function in the 
        same system.  The communications interface is within a single 
        system and is thus not an open interface subject to 
        standardization.  However, information re-advertisement or 
        leaking MUST be performed in a consistent manner to ensure 
        interoperability and basic routing protocol correctness (e.g., 
        cost/metric value). 
       
      - The second approach places the Level N routing function on a 
        separate system from the Level N+1 routing function.  In this 
        case, a communication interface must be used between the 
        systems containing the routing functions for different levels. 
        This communication interface and mechanisms are outside the 
        scope of this document. 
    
3.3.     Configuration 
    
3.3.1.  Configuring the Multi-Level Hierarchy 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
    
   The RC MUST support static (i.e., operator assisted) and MAY support 
   automated configuration of the information describing its 
   relationship to its parent and its child within the hierarchical 
   structure (including RA ID and RC ID).  When applied recursively, 
   the whole hierarchy is thus configured. 
3.3.2.  Configuring RC Adjacencies 
    
   The RC MUST support static (i.e., operator assisted) and MAY support 
   automated configuration of the information describing its associated 
   adjacencies to other RCs within an RA.  The routing protocol SHOULD 
   support all the types of RC adjacencies described in Section 9 of 
   [G.7715].  The latter includes congruent topology (with distributed 
   RC) and hubbed topology (e.g., note that the latter does not 
   automatically imply a designated RC). 
    
3.4.     Evolution 
    
   The containment relationships of RAs may change, motivated by events 
   such as mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures. 
    
   The routing protocol SHOULD be capable of supporting architectural 
   evolution in terms of the number of hierarchical levels of RAs, as 
   well as the aggregation and segmentation of RAs.  RA ID uniqueness 
   within an administrative domain may facilitate these operations.  
   The routing protocol is not expected to automatically initiate 
   and/or execute these operations.  Reconfiguration of the RA 
   hierarchy may not disrupt calls in progress, though calls being set 
   up may fail to complete, and the call setup service may be 
   unavailable during reconfiguration actions. 
    
3.5.     Routing Attributes 
    
   Routing for transport networks is performed on a per-layer basis, 
   where the routing paradigms MAY differ among layers and within a 
   layer.  Not all equipment supports the same set of transport layers 
   or the same degree of connection flexibility at any given layer.  A 
   server layer trail may support various clients, involving different 
   adaptation functions.  In addition, equipment may support variable 
   adaptation functionality, whereby a single server layer trail 
   dynamically supports different multiplexing structures.  As a 
   result, routing information MAY include layer-specific, layer-
   independent, and client/server adaptation information.  Given 
   information appropriate to a layer, the routing protocol MUST be 
   applicable to that layer.  This includes future layers. 
    
3.5.1.  Taxonomy of Routing Attributes 
    
   Attributes can be organized according to the following categories: 
    
     -  Node related or link related 
      
     -  Provisioned, negotiated, or automatically configured 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
      
     -  Inherited or layer specific (client layers can inherit some 
      attributes from the server layer, while other attributes such as 
      Link Capacity are specified by layer) 
    
   (Component) link attributes MAY be statically or automatically 
   configured for each transport network layer.  This may lead to 
   unnecessary repetition.  Hence, the inheritance property of 
   attributes MAY also be used to optimize the configuration process. 
    
   ASON uses the term SubNetwork Point (SNP) for the control plane 
   representation of a transport plane resource.  The control plane 
   representation and transport plane topology are NOT assumed to be 
   congruent; the control plane representation SHALL not be restricted 
   by the physical topology.  The relational grouping of SNPs for 
   routing is termed an SNP Pool (SNPP).  The routing function 
   understands topology in terms of SNPP links.  Grouping MAY be based 
   on different link attributes (e.g., SRLG information, link weight, 
   etc). 
    
   Two RAs may be linked by one or more SNPP links.  Multiple SNPP 
   links may be required when component links are not equivalent for 
   routing purposes with respect to the RAs to which they are attached, 
   to the containing RA, or when smaller groupings are required. 
    
3.5.2.  Commonly Advertised Information 
    
   Advertisements MAY contain the following common set of information 
   regardless of whether they are link or node related: 
    
     -  RA ID of the RA to which the advertisement is bounded 
      
     -  RC ID of the entity generating the advertisement 
      
     -  Information to uniquely identify advertisements 
      
     -  Information to determine whether an advertisement has been 
      updated 
      
     -  Information to indicate when an advertisement has been derived 
      from a different level RA 
      
3.5.3.  Node Attributes 
      
   All nodes belong to an RA; hence, the RA ID can be considered an 
   attribute of all nodes.  Given that no distinction is made between 
   abstract nodes and those that cannot be decomposed any further, the 
   same attributes MAY be used for their advertisement.  In the 
   following tables, Capability refers to the level of support required 
   in the realization of a link state routing protocol, whereas Usage 
   refers to the degree of operational control that SHOULD be available 
   to the operator. 
      
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                   [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
     The following Node Attributes are defined: 
      
      Attribute        Capability      Usage 
      -----------      -----------     --------- 
      Node ID          REQUIRED        REQUIRED 
      Reachability     REQUIRED        OPTIONAL 
      
                  Table 1. Node Attributes 
    
   Reachability information describes the set of endpoints that are 
   reachable by the associated node.  It MAY be advertised as a set of 
   associated external (e.g., User Network Interface (UNI)) 
   address/address prefixes or a set of associated SNPP link IDs/SNPP 
   ID prefixes, the selection of which MUST be consistent within the 
   applicable scope.  These are control plane identifiers; the formats 
   of these identifiers in a protocol realization are implementation 
   specific and outside the scope of this document. 
    
   Note: No distinction is made between nodes that may have further 
   internal details (i.e., abstract nodes) and those that cannot be 
   decomposed any further.  Hence, the attributes of a node are not 
   considered as only single-switch attributes but MAY apply to a node 
   at a higher level of the hierarchy that represents a subnetwork. 
    
   3.5.4.  Link Attributes 
    
   The following Link Attributes are defined: 
    
      Link Attribute                   Capability      Usage 
      ---------------                  -----------     --------- 
      Local SNPP link ID               REQUIRED        REQUIRED 
      Remote SNPP link ID              REQUIRED        REQUIRED 
      Layer Specific Characteristics   see Table 3 
    
                     Table 2. Link Attributes 
    
   The SNPP link ID MUST be sufficient to uniquely identify (within the 
   Node ID scope) the corresponding transport plane resource, taking 
   into account the separation of data and control planes (see Section 
   3.5.1; the control plane representation and transport plane topology 
   are not assumed to be congruent).  The SNPP link ID format is 
   routing protocol specific. 
    
   Note: When the remote end of an SNPP link is located outside of the 
   RA, the remote SNPP link ID is OPTIONAL. 
    
   The following link characteristic attributes are defined: 
    
     - Signal Type: This identifies the characteristic information of 
      the layer network. 
      


  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
     - Link Weight: This is the metric indicating the relative    
      desirability of a particular link over another, e.g., during path    
      computation. 
      
     - Resource Class: This corresponds to the set of administrative    
      groups assigned by the operator to this link.  A link MAY belong    
      to zero, one, or more administrative groups. 
      
     - Local Connection Types: This attribute identifies whether the 
      local SNP represents a Termination Connection Point (CP), a 
      Connection Point (CP), or can be flexibly configured as a TCP. 
      
     - Link Capacity: This provides the sum of the available and  
      potential bandwidth capacity for a particular network transport 
      layer.  Other capacity measures MAY be further considered. 
      
     - Link Availability: This represents the survivability capability 
      such as the protection type associated with the link. 
      
     - Diversity Support: This represents diversity information such as 
      the SRLG information associated with the link. 
      
     - Local Adaptation Support: This indicates the set of client layer 
      adaptations supported by the TCP associated with the local SNPP. 
      This is applicable only when the local SNP represents a TCP or 
      can be flexibly configured as a TCP. 
    
      Link Characteristics            Capability      Usage 
      -----------------------         ----------      --------- 
      Signal Type                     REQUIRED        OPTIONAL 
      Link Weight                     REQUIRED        OPTIONAL 
      Resource Class                  REQUIRED        OPTIONAL 
      Local Connection Types          REQUIRED        OPTIONAL 
      Link Capacity                   REQUIRED        OPTIONAL 
      Link Availability               OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL 
      Diversity Support               OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL 
      Local Adaptation Support        OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL 
    
                        Table 3. Link Characteristics 
    
   Note: Separate advertisements of layer-specific attributes MAY be 
   chosen.  However, this may lead to unnecessary duplication.  This 
   can be avoided using the inheritance property, so that the 
   attributes derivable from the local adaptation information do not 
   need to be advertised.  Thus, an optimization MAY be used when 
   several layers are present by indicating when an attribute is 
   inheritable from a server layer. 
    
3.6.     Path Computation Requirements 
    
   Path computation functions operate on topology information 
   maintained by RCs.  They shall provide loop-free paths and shall 

  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 11] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
   support routing constraints.  Path computation functions must be one 
   of following styles: hierarchical, source routed, or step-by-step. 
    
   A path computation function may have insufficient topology 
   information in its scope to determine a path.  It MAY use a remote 
   query capability [G.7715.2] to another RC to obtain necessary 
   elements of the path being sought.  The query can be to a peer RC at 
   the same level or an RC in a higher level of a routing hierarchy.  
   An RC may receive and initiate remote path queries. 
    
4. Security Considerations 
    
   The ASON routing protocol MUST deliver the operational security 
   objectives where required.  The overall security objectives (defined 
   in ITU-T Recommendation [M.3016]) of confidentiality, integrity, and 
   accountability may take on varying levels of importance.  These 
   objectives do not necessarily imply requirements on the routing 
   protocol itself, and MAY be met by other established means. 
    
   Note: A threat analysis of a proposed routing protocol SHOULD 
   address masquerade, eavesdropping, unauthorized access, loss or 
   corruption of information (including replay attacks), repudiation, 
   forgery, and denial of service attacks. 
    
5. Review of Requirements 
    
   The ASON routing architecture describes routing functionality at a 
   conceptual level.  While no physical partitioning of these functions 
   is mandated, an implementation of ASON routing MUST support a degree 
   of functionality and flexibility as documented in [G.7715] and 
   [G.7715.1] and in the preceding sections. 
    
   Some of the main characteristics of the ASON routing architecture 
   are the following:  
    
     - A network is subdivided into ASON RAs, which MAY support 
      multiple routing protocols; no one-to-one relationship SHALL be 
      assumed. 
      
     -  Routing Controllers (RCs) provide for the exchange of routing 
      information (primitives) for the RA.  The RC is protocol 
      independent and MAY be realized by multiple, different protocol 
      controllers within an RA.  The routing information exchanged  
      between RCs SHALL be subject to policy constraints imposed at  
      reference points (External- and Internal-NNI). 
      
     - In a multi-level RA hierarchy based on containment, 
      communication between RCs of different RAs happens only when 
      there is a parent/child relationship between the RAs.  RCs of 
      child RAs never communicate with the RCs of other child RAs.  
      There SHOULD not be any dependencies on the different routing 
      protocols used within a child RA and that of its parent.  The 
      routing information exchanged within the parent RA SHALL be 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 12] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
      independent of both the routing protocol operating within a child 
      RA and any control distribution choice(s), e.g., centralized, 
      fully distributed. 
      
     - For an RA, the set of RCs is referred to as an ASON routing 
      (control) domain.  The routing information exchanged between 
      routing domains (inter-RA, i.e., inter-domain) SHALL be 
      independent of both the intra-domain routing protocol(s) and the 
      intra-domain control distribution choice(s), e.g., centralized, 
      fully distributed.  RCs bounded to different RA levels MAY be 
      collocated within the same physical element or physically 
      distributed. 
      
     - The routing adjacency topology (i.e., the associated PC 
      connectivity topology) and the transport network topology SHALL 
      NOT be assumed to be congruent. 
      
     - The routing topology SHALL support multiple links between nodes 
      and RAs. 
      
   In summary, the following functionality is expected from GMPLS 
   routing to instantiate the ASON hierarchical routing architecture 
   realization (see [G.7715] and [G.7715.1]): 
    
     - RAs SHALL be uniquely identifiable within a carrier's network, 
      each having a unique RA ID within the carrier's network. 
      
     - Within an RA (one level), the routing protocol SHALL support 
      dissemination of hierarchical routing information (including 
      summarized routing information for other levels) in support of an 
      architecture of multiple hierarchical levels of RAs; the number 
      of hierarchical RA levels to be supported by a routing protocol 
      is implementation specific. 
      
     - The routing protocol SHALL support routing information based on 
      a common set of information elements as defined in [G.7715] and 
      [G.7715.1], divided between attributes pertaining to links and 
      nodes (where a set of links and/or nodes may be an abstract 
      representation of a subnetwork or it may simply be the real links 
      and/or nodes).  [G.7715] recognizes that the manner in which the 
      routing information is represented and exchanged will vary with 
      the routing protocol used. 
      
     - The routing protocol SHALL converge such that the distributed 
      RDBs become synchronized after a period of time. 
    
   To support hierarchical routing information dissemination within an 
   RA, the routing protocol MUST deliver: 
    
     -  Processing of routing information exchanged between adjacent 
      levels of the hierarchy (i.e., Level N+1 and N) including 
      reachability and, upon policy, decision summarized topology 
      information. 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 13] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
      
     -  Self-consistent information at the receiving level resulting 
      from any transformation (filter, summarize, etc.) and forwarding 
      of information from one RC to RC(s) at different levels when 
      multiple RCs are bound to a single RA. 
      
     -  A mechanism to prevent the re-introduction of information 
      propagated into the Level N RA's RC back to the adjacent level 
      RA's RC from which this information has been initially received. 
    
   In order to support operator-assisted changes in the containment 
   relationships of RAs, the routing protocol SHALL support evolution 
   in terms of the number of hierarchical levels of RAs.  For example: 
   support of non-disruptive operations such as adding and removing RAs 
   at the top/bottom of the hierarchy, adding or removing a 
   hierarchical level of RAs in or from the middle of the hierarchy, as 
   well as aggregation and segmentation of RAs.  The number of 
   hierarchical levels to be supported is routing protocol specific and 
   reflects a containment relationship; e.g., an RA insertion involves 
   supporting a different routing protocol domain in a portion of the 
   network. 
    
   Reachability information (see Section 3.5.3) of the set of endpoints 
   reachable by a node may be advertised either as a set of UNI 
   Transport Resource addresses/address prefixes or a set of associated 
   SNPP link IDs/SNPP link ID prefixes, assigned and selected 
   consistently in their applicability scope.  The formats of the 
   control plane identifiers in a protocol realization are 
   implementation specific.  Use of a routing protocol within an RA 
   should not restrict the choice of routing protocols for use in other 
   RAs (child or parent). 
    
   As ASON does not restrict the control plane architecture choice 
   used, either a collocated architecture or a physically separated 
   architecture may be used.  A collection of links and nodes such as a 
   subnetwork or RA MUST be able to represent itself to the wider 
   network as a single logical entity with only its external links 
   visible to the topology database. 
    
6. Contributors 
    
   This document is the result of the CCAMP Working Group ASON Routing 
   Requirements design team joint effort.  The following are the design 
   team member authors who contributed to the present document: 
    
         Wesam Alanqar (Sprint) 
         Deborah Brungard (ATT) 
         David Meyer (Cisco Systems) 
         Lyndon Ong (Ciena) 
         Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel) 
         Jonathan Sadler (Tellabs) 
         Stephen Shew (Nortel) 
    
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 14] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
7. Acknowledgements  
    
   The authors would like to thank Kireeti Kompella for having 
   initiated the proposal of an ASON Routing Requirement Design Team 
   and the ITU-T SG15/Q14 for their careful review and input. 
    
8.  References
    
8.1.     Normative References 
    
   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
8.2.     Informative References 
    
   For information on the availability of the following documents, 
   please see http://www.itu.int: 
    
   [G.707]    ITU-T Rec. G.707/Y.1322, "Network Node Interface for the 
              Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH)", December 2003. 
    
   [G.709]    ITU-T Rec. G.709/Y.1331, "Interfaces for the Optical 
              Transport Network (OTN)", March 2003. 
    
   [G.7715]   ITU-T Rec. G.7715/Y.1306, "Architecture and Requirements 
              for the Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)", 
              June 2002. 
    
   [G.7715.1] ITU-T Rec. G.7715.1/Y.1706.1, "ASON Routing 
              Architecture and Requirements for Link State Protocols", 
              February 2004. 
    
   [G.7715.2] ITU-T Rec. G.7715.2/Y.1706.2, "ASON Routing 
              Architecture and Requirements for Remote Route Query", 
              February 2007. 
    
   [G.805]    ITU-T Rec. G.805, "Generic Functional Architecture of 
              Transport Networks", March 2000. 
    
   [G.8080]   ITU-T Rec. G.8080/Y.1304, "Architecture for the 
              Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)", November 
              2001 (and Revision, January 2003). 
    
   [M.3016]   ITU-T Rec. M.3016.0, "Security for the Management Plane: 
              Overview", May 2005. 
    
   [T1.105]   ANSI T1.105, "Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) - Basic 
              Description including Multiplex Structure, Rates, and 
              Formats", 2001. 
    



  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 15] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
Appendix 1: ASON Terminology 
    
   This document makes use of the following terms: 
    
   Administrative domain (see Recommendation [G.805]): For the purposes 
   of [G.7715.1], an administrative domain represents the extent of 
   resources that belong to a single player such as a network operator, 
   a service provider, or an end-user.  Administrative domains of 
   different players do not overlap amongst themselves. 
    
   Adaptation function (see Recommendation [G.805]): A "transport 
   processing function" that processes the client layer information for 
   transfer over a server layer trail. 
    
   Client/Server relationship: The association between layer networks 
   that is performed by an "adaptation" function to allow the link 
   connection in the client layer network to be supported by a trail in 
   the server layer network. 
    
   Control plane: Performs the call control and connection control 
   functions.  Through signaling, the control plane sets up and 
   releases connections and may restore a connection in case of a 
   failure. 
    
   (Control) Domain: Represents a collection of (control) entities that 
   are grouped for a particular purpose.  The control plane is 
   subdivided into domains matching administrative domains.  Within an 
   administrative domain, further subdivisions of the control plane are 
   recursively applied.  A routing control domain is an abstract entity 
   that hides the details of the RC distribution. 
    
   External NNI (E-NNI): Interfaces are located between protocol 
   controllers between control domains. 
    
   Internal NNI (I-NNI): Interfaces are located between protocol 
   controllers within control domains. 
    
   Link (see Recommendation [G.805]): A "topological component" that 
   describes a fixed relationship between a "subnetwork" or "access 
   group" and another "subnetwork" or "access group".  Links are not 
   limited to being provided by a single server trail. 
    
   Management plane: Performs management functions for the transport 
   plane, the control plane, and the system as a whole.  It also 
   provides coordination between all the planes.  The following 
   management functional areas are performed in the management plane: 
   performance, fault, configuration, accounting, and security 
   management. 
    
   Management domain (see Recommendation [G.805]): A management domain 
   defines a collection of managed objects that are grouped to meet 
   organizational requirements according to geography, technology, 
   policy, or other structure, and for a number of functional areas 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 16] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
   such as configuration, security, (FCAPS), for the purpose of 
   providing control in a consistent manner.  Management domains can be 
   disjoint, contained, or overlapping.  As such, the resources within 
   an administrative domain can be distributed into several possible 
   overlapping management domains.  The same resource can therefore 
   belong to several management domains simultaneously, but a 
   management domain shall not cross the border of an administrative 
   domain. 
    
   Multiplexing (see Recommendation [G.805]): Multiplexing techniques 
   are used to combine client layer signals.  The many-to-one 
   relationship represents the case of several link connections of 
   client layer networks supported by one server layer trail at the 
   same time. 
    
   Subnetwork Point (SNP): The SNP is a control plane abstraction that 
   represents an actual or potential transport plane resource.  SNPs 
   (in different subnetwork partitions) may represent the same 
   transport resource.  A one-to-one correspondence should not be 
   assumed. 
    
   Subnetwork Point Pool (SNPP): A set of SNPs that are grouped 
   together for the purposes of routing. 
    
   Termination Connection Point (TCP): A TCP represents the output of a 
   Trail Termination function or the input to a Trail Termination Sink 
   function. 
    
   Trail (see Recommendation [G.805]): A "transport entity" that 
   consists of an associated pair of "unidirectional trails" capable of 
   simultaneously transferring information in opposite directions 
   between their respective inputs and outputs. 
    
   Transport plane: Provides bi-directional or unidirectional transfer 
   of user information, from one location to another.  It can also 
   provide transfer of some control and network management information. 
   The transport plane is layered; it is equivalent to the Transport 
   Network defined in the [G.805] Recommendation. 
    
   User Network Interface (UNI): Interfaces are located between 
   protocol controllers between a user and a control domain.  Note: 
   there is no routing function associated with a UNI reference point. 
    
   Variable adaptation function: A single server layer trail may 
   dynamically support different multiplexing structures, i.e., link 
   connections for multiple client layer networks. 
    
Appendix 2: ASON Routing Terminology 
    
   This document makes use of the following terms: 
    
   Routing Area (RA): An RA represents a partition of the data plane, 
   and its identifier is used within the control plane as the 
  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 17] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
   representation of this partition.  Per [G.8080], an RA is defined by 
   a set of subnetworks, the links that interconnect them, and the 
   interfaces representing the ends of the links exiting that RA.  An 
   RA may contain smaller RAs inter-connected by links.  The limit of 
   subdivision results in an RA that contains two subnetworks 
   interconnected by a single link. 
    
   Routing Database (RDB): Repository for the local topology, network 
   topology, reachability, and other routing information that is 
   updated as part of the routing information exchange and may 
   additionally contain information that is configured.  The RDB may 
   contain routing information for more than one Routing Area (RA). 
    
   Routing Components: ASON routing architecture functions.  These 
   functions can be classified as protocol independent (Link Resource 
   Manager or LRM, Routing Controller or RC) and protocol specific 
   (Protocol Controller or PC). 
    
   Routing Controller (RC): Handles (abstract) information needed for 
   routing and the routing information exchange with peering RCs by 
   operating on the RDB.  The RC has access to a view of the RDB.  The 
   RC is protocol independent. 
    
   Note: Since the RDB may contain routing information pertaining to 
   multiple RAs (and possibly to multiple layer networks), the RCs 
   accessing the RDB may share the routing information. 
    
   Link Resource Manager (LRM): Supplies all the relevant component and 
   Traffic Engineering (TE) link information to the RC.  It informs the 
   RC about any state changes of the link resources it controls. 
    
   Protocol Controller (PC): Handles protocol-specific message 
   exchanges according to the reference point over which the 
   information is exchanged (e.g., E-NNI, I-NNI), and internal 
   exchanges with the RC.  The PC function is protocol dependent. 
    
Author's Address 
    
   Lyndon Ong 
   Ciena Corporation 
   5965 Silver Creek Valley Rd, 
   San Jose, CA 95128, USA 
   Phone: +1 408 8347894 
   EMail: lyong@ciena.com 
    
   Jonathan Sadler 
   Tellabs Operations, Inc. 
   1415 West Diehl Road 
   Naperville, IL 60563 
   Phone: +1 630-798-6182 
   Email: Jonathan.Sadler@tellabs.com 


  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 18] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
    
   Stephen Shew 
   Nortel Networks 
   PO Box 3511 Station C 
   Ottawa, Ontario, CANADA K1Y 4H7 
   Phone: +1 613 7632462 
   EMail: sdshew@nortel.com 
    
Intellectual Property Statement  
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any  
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in  this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights  might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has  made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an  
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any  
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary  
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement  
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.  
    
Disclaimer of Validity  
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
    
Copyright Statement  
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).  
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    


  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 19] 
Internet-Draft                RFC4258bis                   October 2008 
 
 
Acknowledgment  
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society.  
 
















































  
Ong, Sadler & Shew       Expires April, 2009                  [Page 20] 
