


   Individual Submission                                                
   Internet Draft                                               E. Lear 
   Document: draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt              Cisco Systems 
   Expires: March 2003                                   September 2002 
    
    
                 On Transport of Configuration Information 
                      draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   How are network elements configured?  What are the different ways in 
   which a device receives configuration, and why do they use those 
   particular mechanisms?  How do these mechanisms perform for their 
   given use?  This document discusses the problem of device 
   configuration and state exchange.  As we do so we will point out some 
   protocol considerations, such as the objects being transported, how 
   transfers are initiated, and what the security requirements are. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Our Target Audience and What They Do...........................3 
      2.1 The Individual Small Office or Home (SOHO).................3 
      2.2 The Small to Medium Sized Businesses.......................4 
      2.3 Enterprises................................................4 
      2.4 Service Providers..........................................5 
      2.5 Common Needs...............................................5 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March2003                 [Page 1] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   3. How tools work to meet user needs..............................7 
      3.1 Limitations................................................7 
   4. Moving to the solution space: schema(s) and protocols..........8 
      4.1 Schema! Schema!  WhoÆs Got The Schema?.....................9 
   5. Protocol Design Considerations................................10 
      5.1 Protocol Operations.......................................12 
      5.2 Protocol Choices: Use an existing one or grow a new one?..13 
   Security Considerations..........................................14 
   References.......................................................15 
   Acknowledgments..................................................17 
   Author's Addresses...............................................17 
   Copyright Statement..............................................17 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Many implementations provide their users with ways to send and 
   retrieve both configuration and state information that is wrapped in 
   XML.[2]  There is no standard for configuration of devices through 
   XML, and there is no standard transport for this purpose. 
    
   This document considers the problem of device configuration and state 
   exchange and offers suggestions for a standard network protocol.  
   This work builds on that of others, and the reader is expected to 
   have read [3], [4] and [5].  There are numerous management tasks that 
   can be performed on a device, including fault and performance 
   monitoring and accounting.  The task we consider today is the 
   handling of configured state. 
    
   Non-volatile configuration provides all necessary information for a 
   device to perform its designated function, from the time the power is 
   turned on.  Operational state includes configuration state, as 
   modified by alterations made during operation and statistics and 
   information accumulated while in operation.  There are two forms of 
   configuration- volatile and non-volatile. 
    
   A configuration operation that enables or disables service for 
   individuals on a frequent basis is known as provisioning.  An example 
   of provisioning is the set of those configuration operations needed 
   to create a dial-in account and/or create an electronic mailbox.  As 
   a matter of course, provisioning operations are driven by events, 
   such as a customer calling up and requesting an account, or the 
   billing system turning off a customerÆs account due to lack of 
   payment. 
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 2] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
    
    
    
    
                          configuration protocol         __________ 
                    ...................................>|          | 
                    .                                   |Enterprise| 
                    .        _________     _________    |   VPN    | 
           |        v       |         |   |         |   |  Server B| 
           |  _______       | EDGE    |   | ISP core|   |__________| 
           |-|_______|<---->| ROUTER  |-->|         |              
       __  | home           | A       |   |         |              
      |PC|-| router ^       |_________|   |         |              
      |A_|   D      .                     |_________|    __________ 
                    .                                   |          | 
                    .                                   | Enhanced | 
                    ...................................>| Service  | 
                          configuration protocol        | Manager C| 
                                                        |__________| 
                                                                    
                    Figure 1: SOHO / ISP Problem Space                   
              
    
2. Our Target Audience and What They Do 
    
   There are different types of individuals who need their devices 
   considered.  Figure 1 illustrates a simple SOHO/ISP diagram.  
   Operators can largely be grouped in the following way. 
    
2.1 The Individual Small Office or Home (SOHO) 
    
   This group usually has a very simple configuration, in our example 
   owning PC A and having home router D.  They largely want a device to 
   work from the moment it is plugged in.  They would prefer the device 
   operate securely.  In some cases, where configuration is required, it 
   must be straight forward, and it must require as little interaction 
   with the existing environment.  In todayÆs world, configuration web 
   pages are common for everything from small firewalls to power 
   distribution systems. 
    
   In some cases, a customer may delegate the task of configuration to a 
   service provider, as the service provider is more likely to be able 
   to answer questions necessary for a deviceÆs proper configuration.  
   Indeed, some network devices may enforce a service provider policy, 
   such as packet policing.[6]  Indeed, it may be necessary to delegate 
   a portion of a configuration to different service providers.  A case 
   in point is when someone wishes to use the same device to connect to 
   the wide area network, an enterprise VPN, and a media controller of 
   some form.  Thus, the SOHO user has a need for split configuration. 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 3] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
    
   Somehow, the SOHO device must receive configuration from the VPN 
   manager and the media device, not to mention the service provider, 
   and potentially the SOHO user.  A reasonable approach would be for 
   the SOHO user to configure the device through a web page or other 
   craft interface with the IP addresses of the management systems of 
   the ISP, the VPN server, and the media controller.  Another would be 
   for the device to learn this information through some sort of  
   auto-configuration system.  This can at least be done for the ISP, as 
   it is with DOCSIS.[7]  In all cases with the exception of the 
   configuration web page, we note that the SOHO device will initiate 
   the communication with the manager, and NOT the other way around. 
    
2.2 The Small to Medium Sized Businesses 
    
   Small to medium businesses (SMBs) will have a few devices that need 
   configuring.  They will largely want to use common tools such as web 
   browsers or a simple command line or menu driven interface to 
   configure devices.  SMBs perform configuration operations initially 
   by hand.  As they grow they may automate some tasks either by 
   purchasing or downloading free software or by developing their own 
   simple tools, probably through the use of a scripting language such 
   as Perl or TCL.[8,9]  In most cases, the tools currently used contact 
   the network element, and not the other way around (i.e., the exact 
   opposite of SOHO devices). 
    
2.3 Enterprises 
    
   As they grow into larger enterprises SMBs will begin to automate 
   their provisioning operations, tying them to their hiring procedures 
   or web based request pages.  Enterprises often require that 
   accounting information be tied to a service offered to an individual 
   employee within a company.  For instance, a departmental account will 
   be billed for the use of a pager or a dial-up account.  Enterprises 
   have enough money to buy tools off the shelf and customize them as is 
   appropriate to their environment.  They also have business logic that 
   they may tie to particular services.  For instance, a taxi dispatch 
   service may have a method to dispatch calls that sends notifications 
   to available taxis of a certain group. 
    
   Enterprises may also have enough money to develop tools from scratch 
   when it is necessary to perform their core business functions.  For 
   instance, a ski lift at a resort might be configured with certain 
   limitations, such as "only allow premier members through this gate". 
    
   Often enterprises may wish to control equipment both in the office 
   and at the employee home, to enforce a security policy or to maintain 
   service quality.  Indeed enterprises may delegate some or all of this 
   function to a service provider. 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 4] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
    
   The tools enterprises use typically must navigate the differences 
   between vendors in order to retrieve and send configuration 
   information.  Those tools typically initiate contact to a device that 
   has been configured on a craft interface. 
 
2.4 Service Providers 
    
   Service providers vary widely from small local community providers to 
   gigantic national telecommunications concerns.  Although they differ 
   in scale, small and large service providers share in common the goal 
   to automate provisioning as much as possible in order to minimize 
   human interaction with the customer.  Indeed the provisioning tasks 
   are also largely similar between the two.  Examples include actions 
   like creating a VPN, provisioning a circuit, or increasing the quota 
   of a web account.  In many cases, a provisioning operation involves 
   multiple transactions, any one of which could fail, requiring 
   rollback of the others. 
    
   Small service providers will likely not be able to afford fancy 
   service provisioning tools that have well defined programmatic and 
   web interfaces.  As is the case with SMBs, they are unlikely to have 
   people dedicated to developing tools, and they will often write tools 
   in scripting languages such as Perl and TCL.  And of course they will 
   have to debug the tools they write. 
    
   In each case, they will want to interpose their business logic for 
   accounting, billing, fault, and performance management. 
    
   Large service providers are similar to enterprises in that they are 
   likely to have developers available to customize tools that they have 
   either procured or built.  Very large service providers are likely to 
   have their own proprietary provisioning systems that encompass 
   inventory control as well as some sort of work flow management. 
    
   In addition, large service providers will specialize functions.  A 
   provisioning system may modify provider edge interfaces as well as 
   control customer edge gear, such as cable or DSL modems; a first 
   level support person may need be allowed to review configurations; 
   and a second or third tier support person may have full reign of a 
   device.  In a way not unlike SOHO devices, service provider devices 
   may require some sort of authorization approach (more on this later). 
    
2.5 Common Needs 
    
   In any event, one requirement that seems to cross all borders to be 
   able to atomically roll forward or backward a configuration action.  
   In addition, as devices grow in size, service providers and 
   enterprises require the ability to retrieve only the information they 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 5] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   are interested in, and no more.  For instance, one may request 
   information on a particular network interface, in order to 
   reconfigure it.  Retrieving and processing an entire configuration of 
   hundreds or thousands of interfaces when one only needs a few lines 
   is costly, both computationally and in terms of network bandwidth. 
    
   Another requirement that crosses all boundaries is the ability to 
   minimize and automate configuration.  The history of configuration of 
   devices has been that of prearranged access and exchange.  A Radius 
   server is configured so that login and enable access can be 
   authenticated, or a password file can be copied from a master server, 
   or a device can be configured within a Kerberos realm. 
    
   Starting with the SOHO environment, and moving upwards it is strongly 
   desirable that devices be able to operate with minimal or no operator 
   intervention.  Thus such devices must be able to automatically 
   configure themselves.  In doing so they may need to be aware of other 
   devices, such as DNS & DHCP servers, as well as various network 
   management tools, such as a configuration manager or a fault 
   management tool.  Once theyÆre aware of those devices, because new 
   functionality will be incrementally added over time, both management 
   tool and device must be able to discover the otherÆs capabilities.   
    
   On the other hand, auto-configuration begs the question of whose 
   information one can trust.  Without knowing who to trust, a device 
   must either not come into service until it has been told who to 
   trust, or it must simply record who it decided to trust.  That "who" 
   is in and of itself an interesting question.  One reasonable answer 
   is a valid certificate from a well-known certificate hierarchy of the 
   management tools it is interacting with.  While this wouldnÆt prevent 
   damage, it would at least document who authorized the damage.  
   Another answer for "who", in particular for small devices, might 
   allow for an implied trust based on port.  This is the case for small 
   firewalls. 
    
   In addressing all of these concerns, one common desire is that any 
   standards in this area  -- as always -- should be as complex as 
   necessary, but no more so.  In particular, when considering any RPC 
   mechanisms, this concern must be addressed. 
    
   Finally, a basic requirement of nearly all groups of network users is 
   the ability to review changes within a network configuration.  This 
   is necessary as part of the fault resolution process, to determine 
   what's changed.  Maybe someone fat fingered an access list or 
   disabled an interface.  A concise view of each device configuration, 
   and in particular recent changes to that configuration, is strongly 
   desirable. 
    

 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 6] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
3. How tools work to meet user needs 
 
   There are three configuration models that fall out from our 
   discussion in Section 2.  First, there is the trivial case: a person 
   connects either to a serial port or via telnet or a web interface 
   (i.e., HTTP) and directly configures a device.[10]  In some cases the 
   person might use a tool that generates SNMP "gets" and "sets" to 
   configure a device.  This is the mechanism classically used by SOHO 
   customers for everything from a small network HUB to printers and 
   wireless devices. 
    
   The second model is equally classic: a network manager connects to 
   the device, having used some sort of discovery process, and 
   configures it based on a request from either an automated process or 
   a person.  The manager is said to configure the managed element.  
   Those tools might again use SNMP or they will more likely use some 
   sort of scripting mechanism to communicate with the device. 
    
   Very large deployments require something different.  They require the 
   element to register with an element manager in order to receive its 
   initial configuration, as well as any changes that may be necessary 
   over time.  Many cable and DSL systems use this method today through 
   DOCSIS and PPP, respectively.[11]  It is important to recognize that 
   even though the element is the connection initiator in the classic 
   sense, the element manager may at some point need to initiate an 
   action on the element.  There is no standard protocol to do this, 
   although dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP) has been employed 
   in some cases.[12] 
                                                                         
3.1 Limitations 
    
   The available toolset for configuration and provisioning operations 
   includes SNMP and associated MIBs, vendor specific CLI that is 
   configured through telnet or SSH.[13,14,15]  For very simple devices, 
   the web is also used.  From a network standpoint, even where it is 
   possible to use standard MIBs to monitor fault and performance of a 
   service, it is often not possible to configure those services in the 
   same way. 
    
   Indeed it is not possible to retrieve a device configuration in a 
   concise way with SNMP, as it is difficult for an automated tool to 
   determine what information is persistent, or for that matter even 
   present, without walking the MIB tree (an expensive operation).  
   Persistent and volatile information is intermixed throughout the 
   MIBs.  While it might be possible to provide a table of contents 
   within a MIB to keep track of such information, a better approach 
   would allow for the reference of the same data in different contexts 
   to indicate whether one wants to review volatile or non-volatile 
   information. 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 7] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
    
   Another complaint that is frequently heard about SNMP is the use of 
   binary encoding rules (BER) to represent information on the wire.  
   BER is used in SNMP for good reason, in as much as it provides a very 
   compact data representation.  In the case of configuration objects, 
   however, the need for such compactness is not clear.  Indeed such 
   rules require specialized tools to configure and retrieve 
   information.  One common complaint is that such specialized tools are 
   not plentiful enough, and do not receive sufficient attention that 
   they are considered robust or easy to use. 
    
   On the other hand, vendor CLI and SSH or telnet offers an equally 
   daunting set of problems.  For one, the CLI between vendors is 
   necessarily different, as each vendor or implementation expresses 
   functionality in a way intended to distinguish it from others. In 
   addition, such CLI tends to be built for humans to read and 
   understand.  Thus, if a programmer makes a spelling error she would 
   correct it, particularly if the error changes the semantic meaning of 
   the exchange.  Unfortunately, while computers can cope with spelling 
   errors, they have a very difficult time coping with change.   
    
   While this is a well-understood problem in terms of scriptwriters, 
   what is not so clear to many is just how CLI-based scripts can and 
   have impeded development.  Because changes between elements and 
   element managers are often not synchronized, the addition of a column 
   of information in a table, or the restructuring of a command may lead 
   to misinterpretation or misconfiguration. 
    
   For these reasons and others, no standard way to configure devices 
   has yet to succeed within the Internet.  However, it now seems 
   possible that at least a portion of the problem can be standardized 
   while we further consider other portions. 
 
4. Moving to the solution space: schema(s) and protocols 
    
   Experience has demonstrated a clear approach that allows for 
   successful incremental development: find a way to modularize the 
   problem and then work on the modules.  Experience also has 
   demonstrated where those modules are for network management.[16]  
   With SNMP, for example, there are basically, three: the protocol used 
   to transport information, the organization of that information (a 
   schema), and definitions of individual objects within that schema.  
   Here we propose to use that same model with one change: protocol 
   operations themselves should largely be a function of the 
   organization of information. 
    
   As has been said and written, XML has conveniently entered into the 
   fray, providing a (mostly) readable syntax with which one can use a 
   schema.  XML provides a very generic framework around which one can 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 8] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   provide oneÆs schema and data dictionary or name space to easily 
   expose configuration functionality.  This in and of itself does not 
   provide programmer interface stability between releases of software.  
   That is what standards organizations and vendor discipline are for.  
   However, the mere ability to have a more structured way to retrieve 
   and send configuration information, or to cause certain actions, is 
   an improvement over what previously existed. 
    
   An XML schema provides a natural scoping, around which authorization 
   mechanisms can be built.  Split configuration needs could thus be 
   addressed. 
    
   In addition, because XML is used for everything under the sun, 
   numerous tool sets are being built for it.  These tool sets will be 
   useful for things OTHER than network management, and that is a key 
   distinguishing factor over SNMP.  Thus, the fad may have snowballed 
   itself into a useful mechanism. 
    
   Indeed a brief survey shows that many leading vendors are supporting 
   XML on at least some of their products.  None of the information 
   transported is standardized, but it is at the most basic level 
   wrapped in angle brackets. 
    
4.1 Schema! Schema!  WhoÆs Got The Schema? 
    
   Whose responsibility is it to derive a schema?  At one level, the 
   IETF has already done a tremendous amount of work on MIBs, and many 
   vendors have implemented them.  Clearly we want to retain this work 
   as we move forward.  Numerous efforts have provided translations 
   between SMIv2 MIBs and XML Schema Definitions (XSDs).[17] 
    
   Rather than start with a battle over schemas, letÆs accept that in 
   fact multiple schemas exist, provided by both vendors and standards 
   organizations, much in the same way that enterprises MIBs exist, and 
   that this is likely to remain the case for a very long time. 
 
   While it is perhaps desirable for all devices to use standard data 
   models and schemas, as a matter of modularity, we leave it to others 
   to define them.  There is at least one additional reason to do so: it 
   remains unproven that configuration information could be sufficiently 
   divorced from implementation that complex configuration tasks can in 
   fact be standardized. 
    
   Indeed the native protocol operations themselves could be limited to 
   the transmission of XML and a response code that may also include 
   some XML.  Operations that have more meaning than that must be 
   defined within a particular schema, again, in order to preserve 
   modularity. 
    
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                 [Page 9] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   For example, there could exist a schema that maps directly to the 
   managed information base (MIB) tree.  The SNMP operations that act 
   upon that tree are "get", "getnext", "set", etc.  On the other hand, 
   there could exist a schema that looks an awfully lot like a CLI, 
   whose operations include "configure", "reboot", "debug", "reset 
   card", etc. 
    
5. Protocol Design Considerations 
    
   A protocol addressing this space will carry transactions back and 
   forth, in one direction or another.  Although transactions do not 
   require a session, experience has taught us that a session is in fact 
   required to avoid the need to re-authenticate for every transaction.  
   In addition, many configuration objects can be quite large, and there 
   is a need for congestion avoidance.  Finally, reliable communications 
   are desirable for most such operations.  For these reasons we assume 
   for the following discussion that a connection-oriented protocol such 
   as TCP or SCTP is used. 
    
   In considering a protocol we will look at the following tasks: 
    
      o Connection establishment 
      o Transport encryption and authentication 
      o Capabilities exchange 
      o Protocol operations and transmission of configuration objects 
      o Responses 
      o Disconnection 
    
   The rest of this section discusses the first three bullets and 
   disconnection.  Protocol operations and transmission of XML objects 
   and associated responses are discussed in Section 5.1. 
    
   The circumstances of a device may determine the direction of 
   connection establishment.  Typically element managers contact the 
   elements they wish to manage and send configuration.  This is 
   particularly true for SNMP and for tools that "screen scrape" (i.e., 
   connect to an element over telnet or ssh and then navigate the user 
   interface).  In some circumstances, however, it is desirable for 
   devices to connect to an element manager in order to request 
   configuration data.  This is done with COPS-PR[18].  In the former 
   case, the network manager needs to know about the device before the 
   device can be managed.  In the latter case, the device needs to know 
   about the network manager before it can be managed.  While there are 
   tradeoffs in scaling properties and complexity with either model, we 
   assume that both are valid.   
    
   Indeed another reason we concern ourselves with connection direction 
   is that firewalls and NATs may limit so-called "inbound" TCP 

 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 10] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   connections.  Thus, either the element manager or managed element may 
   initiate a transport connection. 
    
   Once a connection is established, it must be possible to secure the 
   connection and for each end to authenticate itself to the other.  
   There are several approaches that are commonly used today, including 
   transport layer security (TLS) and Kerberos.[19,20].  Others may come 
   along.  A flexible approach is desirable to enable both these and 
   future mechanisms without having to update the protocol 
   specification.  Even within these approaches there are variations.  
   For instance, it might be desirable for one end to use certificates 
   and another to use user names.  This allows, for example, existing 
   configuration authentication mechanisms such as Radius[21] to be 
   used. 
    
   Operations may require authentication on either side of a connection.  
   That authentication might even take a different form on either side 
   of a connection.  For instance, an element may attempt to request its 
   configuration from an element manager, and thus be required to 
   authenticate itself.  Or, as more typically seen, an element manager 
   may attempt to deliver some instructions and be required to 
   authenticate to the element.  In either case, because of the nature 
   of the problem, it is probably safe to assume that if there is to be 
   any authentication it should occur once, directly after a connection 
   is established. 
    
   Once each side knows who the other is, it should be possible for them 
   to learn the capabilities of the other, subject to whatever 
   authorization may be imposed.  When we say capabilities, we really 
   mean some sort of defined schema.  This is the point where an element 
   manager might learn which language it must use to configure a device, 
   and perhaps which version of that language.  It is possible that for 
   compatibility reasons, a device may understand more than one schema.  
   It is also possible that schemas may develop for very specific 
   purposes.  Again, while not precluding such scenarios, it is beyond 
   the scope of this work to specify how many schemas may be employed, 
   or their use.  What will be necessary is a namespace for schemas from 
   which to choose. 
    
   At this point we are ready to exchange XML.  Typically, the element 
   manager will initiate such a transfer, but an element might just as 
   easily request a particular object.  How those objects are identified 
   or named will vary based on the schema in use [XXX name spaces?? 
   XXX].  It is possible that multiple schemas may be used, and 
   therefore we must avoid ambiguities.  It is possible to design a 
   protocol such that each message would state which schema is used.  
   This would be analogous to starting every sentence with "IÆm speaking 
   English".  Identifying the context at the beginning of a 

 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 11] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   communication is probably good enough for the uses described in 
   earlier sections. 
    
   Connections may be very long-lived, such as in COPS-PR, or they may 
   exist for brief periods of time.  Disconnection may occur for many 
   reasons, and just as with any protocol, may be planned or unplanned.  
   The protocol should allow for either side to initiate a connection 
   close. 
    
5.1 Protocol Operations 
    
   As we previously discussed, requests may be initiated in either 
   direction.  We must now discuss the structure of a request.  For 
   illustrative purposes alone we consider a few lines of XML that 
   demonstrates a small handful of functions: 
 
   <configure> 
      <interface-section> 
         <interface name="eth1"> 
            <ip-address v4="10.1.1.1" v4mask="255.255.255.0" /> 
         </interface> 
      </interface-section> 
      <routing-section> 
      à 
      </routing-section> 
   </configure> 
    
   In this illustrative example, an interface is configured with an ipv4 
   address and mask.  <configure> can be viewed as either transaction 
   content or a protocol operation.  In this case we could conceivably 
   take the angle brackets away, were we to agree to all the mechanisms 
   to manipulate configuration.  Because we canÆt, we may place a thin 
   wrapper around <configure>, and allow the element to be defined 
   within individual schema.  Note that the problem gets more difficult 
   the further inward one goes.  For instance, not every device may 
   route, and therefore have a <routing-section>.  A key goal for the 
   protocol is to provide sufficient maximum utility while remaining 
   stable. 
    
   Thus, the actual protocol operations need to be fairly basic, 
   allowing for the semantic requests to be placed in some structured 
   way (in this case XML) and responses to be sent in a similar manner. 
    
   Still there are several common operations that we would like to 
   perform on the device, associated with the above configuration.  One 
   would be to commit it, and another would be to roll it back.  There 
   are probably others.  It is likely that such operations are within 
   the bounds of standardization. 
    
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 12] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
5.2 Protocol Choices: Use an existing one or grow a new one? 
    
   Because XML itself is just a text-based syntax, there are numerous 
   ways to transport it such that it gets to a destination intact, and a 
   response returns reasonably intact.  One could even use Email or 
   Netnews (donÆt laugh, moving control information through such 
   mechanisms is nothing new).[22]  However, realistically speaking 
   since we are talking about network control, we require an interactive 
   protocol that provides responses in real time, as opposed to a store-
   and-forward mechanism. 
    
   The protocols people use today to transport XML and other 
   configuration data are SSH, HTTP, SSL, and Blocks Extensible Exchange 
   Protocol (BEEP).[23]  Each protocol has advantages and disadvantages.  
   To start with, SSH is perhaps the most widely deployed protocol that 
   provides some amount of ad-hoc security.  Indeed, with the IETF just 
   having standardized it, it has the advantage of having gone through 
   some security review, and it requires very little infrastructure to 
   use.  Keys are exchanged out of band, and they may be aggregated 
   through whatever mechanism an administrator wishes to use.  Of 
   course, this same advantage is also a disadvantage, because there is 
   no standard way for a device to determine whether or not to trust 
   another device.  Once an authenticated connection is established, 
   however, there is no way to determine supported schemas, and there is 
   no clear way to know when a response should even be expected, never 
   mind whether the actual XML has been acted upon.  Were we to use SSH, 
   we would have to add a layer between the transport and the XML to 
   accomplish this. 
    
   HTTP and SSL are two peas in a pod.  SSL provides a layer of security 
   for HTTP that sits on top of it.  Of all the mechanisms used to move 
   XML today, HTTP is clearly the protocol of choice, through the use of 
   GETs and POSTs.[24]  HTTP has the enormous benefit of a large amount 
   of available tools to scale its delivery.  Still, architecturally, 
   the server and the client look very different.  An HTTP client 
   submits requests and a server submits responses.  This clearly does 
   not naturally fit a model where requests could come from either side.  
   A rebuttal to this limitation is that the protocol could be so 
   general as to encompass every conceivable requirement, and therefore 
   be impossible to implement.  Clearly a balanced approach is required.   
    
   SSL is useful in a way similar to SSH, in that it provides for an 
   authentication model.  SSL uses a hierarchical certificate approach 
   that is widely deployed.  However, what happens in environments where 
   either a certificate authority is temporarily unavailable, or where 
   there is never access to the certificate hierarchy?  Also, generating 
   and enrolling certificates in new devices is a hard problem.  An 
   easier approach is to verify through a certificate one side of a 
   connection, and then using a shared secret for the other side, a 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 13] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   common approach used on the web.  SSL supports such an approach, as 
   does TLS. 
    
   BEEP is a new addition to the IETF protocol suite, and is not today 
   heavily used to move device configuration information.  Although it 
   suffers from limited implementation, it was designed with the notion 
   that XML or another blocks of data.  BEEP was designed not so much 
   with one specific application involved, but as a framework 
   applications could use to exchange data with one another, in a secure 
   way, if so desired.  BEEP also matches the model that we discussed 
   above in two other respects: first, while providing framing, it 
   provides very little in the way of application protocol operations.  
   Second, it allows either side to initiate a transaction. 
    
   However, BEEP is not perfectly simple.  While the protocol provides 
   for security and framing, it also requires the use of control and 
   data channels within a single stream, thus increasing implementation 
   complexity, where it is not yet clear that the use of a channelized 
   stream is warranted.[25,26]  Here again, we see a tradeoff between 
   generalization and specific optimization. 
    
   There are numerous other protocols that could be considered.  The 
   actual choice must be made in the context of customer requirements. 
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   Configuration of devices is by its nature a sensitive activity.  
   Whatever mechanisms advance must be able to allow for a flexible 
   authentication model, as well as encryption.  Each device must be 
   able to authenticate itself. 
    
   Bootstrapping is a particularly tricky case in such an environment, 
   as it may not be possible for a newly purchased device to 
   authenticate itself to anyone.  Therefore, an initial enrollment step 
   with some sort of out of band data may be necessary. 
    
   Splitting of responsibilities for a configuration requires particular 
   attention.  A known ages-old operator requirement is that a 
   configuration be viewed discretely, as one file.  This is necessary 
   for debugging purposes, among many other reasons.  In addition, some 
   responsibilities may not be easily partitioned.  Various studies of 
   policy demonstrate the need to understand and avoid such 
   conflicts.[27] 
    
   In the context of authorization, it must be possible to audit 
   configuration changes, and that audit capability needs to scale 
   nicely.  One concern about SNMP is that provisioning would be 
   implemented through a number of sets.  In order to reduce load there 
 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 14] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   must be a way to aggregate those sets into a concise configuration 
   operation that can be traced back to the entity that initiated it.  
   If something more concise is used in the first place, the aggregation 
   may be less necessary.  A better understanding is needed in this 
   area. 
 
References 
                     
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Marsh, J. Ed., XML Base, W3C Recommendation, June 2001. 
    
   3  Woodcock, B., ôOperator Requirements of Infrastructure Management 
      Methodsö, draft-ops-operator-req-mgmt-02.txt, Work In Progress. 
    
   4  Wasserman, M., ôConcepts and Requirements for XML Network 
      Configurationö, draft-wasserman-xmlconf-req-00.txt, Work in 
      Progress. 
    
   5  Bierman, A., ôNetwork Management Observationsö, draft-bierman-nm-
      observations-00.txt, Work In Progress. 
    
   6  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z. and Weiss, 
      W., ôAn Architecture for Differentiated Servicesö, RFC 2475, 
      December 1998. 
    
   7  Cable Television Laboratories, "Data of Cable Service Interface 
      Specification: Operations Support System Interface Specification", 
      SP-OSSIv2.0-I02-020617, June 2002. 
     
   8  Wall, L., Christianson, T., Orwant, J.,  ôProgramming Perl 3rd 
      Editionö, OÆReilly & Associates, July 2000. 
    
   9  Ousterhout, J., ôTcl: An Embeddable Command Languageö, USENIX 
      Conference Proceedings, ppg. 133-146, January 1990. 
    
   10 Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L., 
      Leach, P., Berners-Lee, T., ôHypertext Transfer Protocol û 
      HTTP/1.1ö, RFC 2616, June 1999. 
    
   11 Simpson, W., ed., "The Point to Point Protocol", RFC 1661, July, 
      1994. 
    
   12 Droms, R., ôDynamic Host Configuration Protocolö, RFC 2131, March 
      1997. 
    


 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 15] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
   13 Harrington, D., Wijnen, B., ôAn Architecture for Describing SNMP 
      Management Frameworksö, RFC 2571, May 1999. 
    
   14 McKenzie, A.M., ôTelnet Protocol Specificationsö, RFC 495, May 
      1973. 
    
   15 Ylonen, T., Kivinen, T, Saarinen, M., Rinne, T., Lethinen, S., 
      ôSSH Transport Layer Protocolö, Work in Progress, draft-ietf-
      secsh-transport-14.txt, March 2002. 
    
   16 Wasserman, M., ôConcepts and Requirements for XML Network 
      Configurationö, draft-wasserman-xmlconf-req-00.txt, Work in 
      progress. 
    
   17 Thompson, H., Beech, D., Maloney, M., Mendelsohn, N., ed., ôXML 
      Schema Part 1: Structuresö, W3C Recommendation, May 2001. 
    
   18 Chan, K., et al., ôCOPS Usage for Provisioning (COPS-PR)ö, RFC 
      3084, March 2001. 
    
   19 Dierks, T., Allen, C., ôThe TLS Protocol Version 1.0ö, RFC 2246, 
      January 1999. 
    
   20 Kohl, J., Neuman, C., ôThe Kerberos Network Authentication Service 
      (V5)ö, RFC 1510, September 1993. 
    
   21 Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A, Simpson, W., ôRemote 
      Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)ö, RFC 2865, June 
      2000. 
    
   22 Smith, R., Gottesman, S., Hobbs, B., Lear, E., Kristofferson, D., 
      Benton, D., Smith, P., ôA mechanism for maintaining up-to-date 
      GenBank database via Usenetö, Computational Applied Biosciences, 
      ppg. 111-112, January 1991. 
    
   23 Rose, M., ôThe Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol Coreö, RFC 
      3080, March 2001. 
    
   24 Moore, K., ôOn the use of HTTP as a substrateö, RFC 3205, February 
      2002. 
    
   25 Postel, J., ed., ôTransmission Control Protocolö, RFC 793, 
      September 1981. 
    
   26 Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Charp, C., Schwarzbauer, H., 
      Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M., Zhang, L., Paxson, V., ôStream 
      Control Transmission Protocolö, RFC 2960, October 2000. 

 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 16] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
    
   27 Moore, B., Elleson, E., Strassner, J., Westerinan, A., "Policy 
      Core Information Model-- Version 1 Specification", RFC 3060, 
      February, 2001. 
    
    
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   This document is based on the work of Andy Bierman, Fred Baker, Bill 
   Woodcock, and Margaret Wassmerman.  Substantial input came from 
   Marshall Rose and Dave Crocker, as well as numerous operators. 
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Eliot Lear 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 W. Tasman Drive 
   San Jose, CA 95134 
   Email: lear@cisco.com 
    
Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2002. All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and 
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 

 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 17] 
                   draft-lear-config-issues-00.txt        August 2003 
 
 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    













































 
 
Lear                     Expires - March 2003                [Page 18] 