

Internet Engineering Task Force                                J. Jiang 
Internet Draft                                                D. Walker 
Document: draft-walker-ccamp-req-00.txt                         J. Wang 
Expires: August 2001                                   SS8 Networks Inc 
                                                          February 2001 
 
 
                  Common Control and Measurement Plane 
                       Framework and Requirements 
                                     
                    <draft-walker-ccamp-req-00.txt> 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes architectural and protocol requirements for 
   the Common Control and Measurement Plane. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................3 
   2. Definitions.....................................................4 
   3. Conventions used in this document...............................5 
   4. Common Control and Measurement Plane............................5 
   4.1. Functions of the Control and Measurement Plane................5 
   4.2. Centralized Architecture......................................6 
   4.3. Distributed Architecture......................................9 
   5. Architectural Requirements......................................9 
   5.1. Independence from Underlying Transport Networks...............9 
   5.2. Scalable to Very Large Networks..............................10 
   5.3. Flexibility..................................................10 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    1 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   5.4. Steady State Operation.......................................10 
   5.5. Minimized Overhead...........................................11 
   5.6. Minimized Impact on Real-Time Performance....................11 
   5.7. Simplicity...................................................11 
   5.8. Survivability................................................11 
   5.9. Interoperability.............................................11 
   6. Proposed High Level Architecture...............................12 
   6.1. Architecture Overview........................................12 
   6.2. Single Protocol or Separate Protocols........................13 
   6.3. Reference Points.............................................14 
   7. TE Functional Requirements.....................................15 
   8. CE Functional Requirements.....................................16 
   8.1. Association Establishment and Management.....................16 
   8.2. Tunnel Management............................................16 
   8.3. Resource Management..........................................17 
   8.4. QoS policy capability........................................17 
   8.5. Service provisioning and control.............................18 
   8.6. OAM&P........................................................18 
   8.7. Robustness...................................................19 
   9. General Protocol Requirements..................................19 
   9.1. Transport Network Assumptions................................19 
   9.2. Association requirements.....................................19 
   9.3. Protocol performance requirements............................20 
   9.4. Transport Requirements.......................................20 
   9.5. Security requirements........................................21 
   9.6. Other Requirements...........................................21 
   10. Control Protocol Requirements.................................22 
   10.1. Resource requirements.......................................23 
   10.2. Tunnel Requirements.........................................23 
   10.3. Event Processing and Scripting..............................24 
   10.4. Policy Requirements.........................................25 
   10.5. Media transformation Requirements...........................25 
   10.6. Operation/management Requirements...........................25 
   10.7. Error Control...............................................26 
   10.8. Management Requirements.....................................26 
   11. Measurement Protocol Requirements.............................26 
   11.1. Topology and resource information...........................26 
   11.2. TE Capability Information...................................27 
   11.3. Status Information..........................................27 
   11.4. Tunnel Information..........................................28 
   11.5. Performance Information.....................................28 
   11.6. Statistics Information......................................28 
   11.7. Accounting Requirements.....................................28 
   11.8. Event Processing and Scripting..............................29 
   11.9. Operation/Management Requirements...........................29 
   11.10. Error Control..............................................29 
   12. Inter-CE Protocol Requirements................................30 
   12.1. Common requirements.........................................30 
   12.2. Internal capability.........................................30 
   12.3. External capability.........................................31 
   13. Security Considerations.......................................31 
   14. References....................................................31 
   15. Author's Addresses............................................32 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    2 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   As networking technology continues to evolve, there is an ever-
   increasing number of transport layer protocols that one is likely to 
   encounter in developing end-to-end solutions.  Along with the 
   growing stringency of Service Level Specifications (SLS), there is 
   both a need to be able to provide a finer level of control over 
   network traffic in terms of the level of service that can be 
   delivered by the various technologies, as well as a need to ensure 
   that the network is providing the required level of service. 
    
   The various network technologies, such as MPLS label switching, ATM, 
   Diffserv, optical switching, and more, frequently come with a unique 
   set of mechanisms that offer ISPs the tools they need to control and 
   monitor technology-specific or even vendor-specific islands.  The 
   unique nature of these islands creates complex problems when larger 
   networks are created by interconnecting such islands.  
    
   This draft presents a framework and set of generic requirements that 
   are independent of the underlying technology and which can be used 
   to ensure that the network can be monitored and controlled to 
   provide specific levels of policy, security, and quality of service 
   characterics. 
    
   Networks can be functionally divided into three planes of activity: 
   a data or transport plane, a control plane, and a management plane.  
    
   The control plane consists of logical entities (Control Elements) 
   which perform network level coordination functions such as: state 
   information management (acquisition, representation, dissemination), 
   decision making (e.g. path selection), and action invocation (e.g. 
   signalling).   
    
   The transport plane provides consists of entities (such as layer 2 
   and layer 3 switches, routers, and others, collectively referred to 
   in this document as Transport Elements) which primarily switch or 
   forward data (bearer or signalling) traffic.  These entities may be 
   statically or dynamically configured in order to determine how 
   particular traffic is to be treated. 
    
   The measurement plane provides transport level resource status 
   information to interested parties in order that appropriate policies 
   may be applied (e.g. allowing routers to determine the appropriate 
   next hop destination for outgoing packets). 
    
   The framework proposed in this draft suggests that Control Elements 
   are able to control and monitor one or more Transport Elements.  
   While the document presents a discussion on the relative merits of 
   centralized and distributed control networks, it should be 
   emphasized that CEs are logical entities which may or may not be co-
   located with TEs in actual implementations. 
    

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    3 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   It must be noted that the requirements set out in this draft may be 
   partially satisfied by extending existing protocols, such as COPS 
   [7], MEGACO [2], OSPF [3], and others. 
    
    
2. Definitions 
    
   Service domain: Service domain defines a portion of the network 
   under one service provider∆s administration. All the network 
   elements within a service domain have consistent view of the network 
   and policy. 
    
   Clearing House (CH): Given the large number of access networks 
   belonging to different service domains, it is not possible to have 
   SLS between all domains on the Internet. A clearinghouse facilitates 
   the authorization and logging or accounting between service domains 
   for premium services. This does not preclude however some domains to 
   have direct bilateral agreements, so as not to use any clearinghouse 
   service when exchanging traffic. 
    
   Control and Measurement Plane: The control and measurement plane is 
   a functional layer which is built on top of transport network to 
   control the transport elements to perform service management, 
   traffic engineering, policy control, and QoS control functions. The 
   control and measurement plane is one of the three dimensions of a 
   service provider∆s network, which includes transport plane (data 
   plane), control and measurement plane and management plane. 
    
   Control Element (CE): The network components providing control 
   capability for traffic engineering, service management, 
   protection/restoration, policy control and end-to-end QoS control. 
   These components communicate with TEs to collect network status and 
   resource information, compute source route or perform path 
   provisioning for tunnel management, execute policy logic, update its 
   policy information base, and exchange this information with other 
   CEs.  
    
   Transport Element (TE): The network components providing transport 
   function to switch or forward bearer traffic. Examples of TEs 
   include MPLS LSRs, ATM switches, Lambda switches, DiffServ capable 
   routers, PSTN-IP gateways, etc. A TE communicates with CE to report 
   network resource and status information, receive and execute policy 
   decisions from CE for traffic engineering, service management, 
   protection/restoration, policy control and end-to-end QoS control. 
    
   Peer: CEs are connected to each other via a logical link, or an 
   association. The two CEs that have associations form a peer 
   relationship. This peer relationship is abbreviated to as peer in 
   this draft.  
    
   Internal peer: An internal peer is a peer relationship between two 
   CEs in the same service domain. 
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    4 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   External peer: An external peer is a peer relationship between two 
   CEs in two different service domains. 
    
   Internal CE: An internal CE is a CE that has no external peer. 
    
   Border CE: A border CE is a CE that has at least one external peer. 
    
    
3. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [4]. 
    
    
4. Common Control and Measurement Plane 
    
   A network can be functionally divided into three planes: a data or 
   transport plane, a control plane, and a management plane. The 
   control plane consists of network control elements. The network 
   control plane elements perform network level coordination functions 
   including: state information management (acquisition, 
   representation, dissemination), decision making (e.g., path 
   selection), and action invocation (e.g., signalling). In order to 
   manage state information of the network, measuring and monitoring 
   the network resource and status is the key function. To emphasize 
   this function, the control plane is referred to as control and 
   measurement plane in this draft. 
    
    
4.1. Functions of the Control and Measurement Plane 
    
   This plane is designed to perform the following functions:  
    
   - Traffic engineering 
      
     It is able to control the traffic flows in the network so that the 
     network resource is utilized in a most efficient fashion. With 
     this feature, this plane must be able to handle various types of 
     traffic in terms of their QoS requirements including delay, packet 
     loss, bandwidth requirements, etc over a mixed underlying 
     transport networks. This feature requires the CEs to collect 
     traffic and resource information in the network, to compute the 
     best path for each flow, and to issue control commands to TEs. 
     This plane must support both time-dependent and state-dependent 
     traffic engineering. 
         
   - Support end-to-end QoS 
      
     This plane needs to support end-to-end QoS for its customers. For 
     this purpose, the CE must have not only the network resource 
     knowledge of its own service domain, but also access to the 
     performance measurements of the other service domains a particular 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    5 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
     flow is to transverse. These performance measurements are 
     collected by TEs and CEs in a service domain and may be exchanged 
     with CEs in other domains. 
         
   - Support policy 
      
     Various levels of policy need to be supported by this plane. These 
     include service policy, customer policy, resource policy, network 
     functional policy, and network element policy. This plane must 
     support policy creation, modification, and deletion. It must also 
     support service policy advertisement among service domains. It 
     must support three types of policy: QoS policy, service policy and 
     traffic engineering policy. The framework must be such that is 
     easily extended to support other policies. 
         
   - Support service provisioning and management 
      
     For a service provider, the traffic engineering and QoS control is 
     based on the customer∆s service profile and its service policy. 
     The control plane must support customer service provisioning and 
     management. This include communication with Service Management 
     System (SMS) for Local Service Level Agreements (SLA) 
     specification, SLA negotiation, service creation, modification and 
     deletion. It should also be able to perform SLA advertisement 
     among the CEs within the same service domain and LSA exchange 
     among CEs in different service domains. It should also be able to 
     allocate service to specific customer flows as required by SMS. 
    
   In addition to the generic management function as described above, 
   this plane must also support management of particular services, such 
   as VPN service. 
         
         
4.2. Centralized Architecture 
    
   The control and measurement plane can be deployed in two different 
   architectures: the control function is separate from the TEs or 
   control integrated with the TEs. The former is referred to as 
   centralized control and the latter is referred to as distributed 
   control.  Neither model should necessarily rule out the other, so 
   that it is possible to have a centralized architecture with some CEs 
   just happening to be co-resident with TEs, and on the other hand it 
   is also possible to have a distributed architecture where the TE 
   function on some physical entities is null.  
    
   With centralized architecture, the control function is allocated in 
   one or a few centralized CEs that are physically separated from the 
   TEs. The interaction between the CE and the TEs is via a set of 
   protocols as defined and discussed in this draft. These protocols 
   must be independent of the underlying transport network. It is each 
   TE∆s responsibility to translate its technology sub-network specific 
   resource representation into the abstracted common representation.  
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    6 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   All the CEs form a control network. The control network may consist 
   of one or more CEs depending on the size of the network and capacity 
   of the CE. In case of multiple CEs, a mechanism must be defined for 
   these CEs to communicate and synchronize policy, resource and 
   traffic information, and provisioned service. 
    
   The centralized architecture has the following advantages:   
    
   - Easier to benefit from management information continuously 
     collected by NMS (Network Management System) 
      
     This information, such as performance alarms, failure alarms, and 
     traps can be used with other information for the control elements 
     to make control decisions.  
      
     With distributed architecture, a distributed routing protocol 
     relies mainly on timers and missing PDUs to detect a failure 
     between two adjacent switching nodes. 
         
   - Easier for policy control 
      
     Policy control consists of policy creation, installation, 
     modification, deletion advertisement, and policy decision making. 
     In reality, policy is usually service provider based (service 
     policy, customer policy, accounting policy) or network based 
     (network function specific and network element policy). To be able 
     to provide end-to-end QoS, one service domain needs to exchange 
     service level policy with its neighboring domains. With a 
     centralized architecture, it is easier to maintain policy 
     consistency because the policy control is performed at one (or a 
     few) central place(s).  
      
     With distributed approach, the policy creation needs to be done 
     repeatedly on every transport elements. The policy advertisement 
     between different domains are even more difficult with distributed 
     architecture. 
    
   - Easier for traffic engineering of mixed underlying transport 
     network 
      
     A service provider∆s network may consist of mixed types of sub-
     networks. For example, a GMPLS network may consist of two Packet 
     Switched Capable (PSC) MPLS sub-networks connected by one Lambda 
     Switched Capable (LSC) MPLS sub-network [5]. With centralized 
     architecture, a centralized decision can be easily made based on 
     its consistent and complete view of the underlying network. 
      
     On the other hand, with distributed architecture, the routing 
     protocol are used to build and maintain a logical model of the 
     network. Because not all routing entities have the same view of 
     the overall network (e.g., two ATM label switching networks 
     connected with one lambda switching network, the ATM switch in an 
     MPLS-ATM network has different view from Lambda switch in an MPLS-
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    7 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
     optical network in terms of network topology, network resource and 
     congestion status), a best decision based on entire network is 
     difficult to make.  
    
   - Easier to operate 
      
     With centralized architecture, new features or policies can be 
     introduced with a simple upgrade. 
      
     With distributed architecture, upgrading every switch with new 
     routing software is difficult. 
    
   - Better flexibility 
      
     With centralized architecture, a set of protocols between CE and 
     TE must be well defined. This provides a flexibility where the 
     control and measurement function can be allocated. It also allows 
     separate TE and CE development to optimize their functionality.  
    
   - Better information consistency 
      
     With centralized architecture, information is stored in a few 
     central places. The possibility of session setup failure due to 
     inconsistent information is lower than that in distributed 
     architecture.  
         
   - Offload LSRs 
      
     With centralized architecture, the separate control and 
     measurement plane takes care of all the control and measurement 
     tasks. LSRs can concentrate on real time traffic switching.  
      
     With distributed architecture, some non-real-time tasks (topology 
     synchronization, policy advertisement, etc.) must also be executed 
     at TEs and compete with real time tasks for CPU time.  
    
   - Easier for end-to-end QoS control 
      
     For end-to-end QoS control, a decision maker needs to have 
     knowledge not only the traffic and resource in its own network, 
     but also those in other domains. It introduces a lot of overhead 
     to make the information available to every switch rather than to 
     only a few central control elements. 
    
   - Easier to extend for control of other networks 
      
     In the future, when new types of networks are included into 
     service provider∆s network, it is easier to accommodate them into 
     a centralized control and measurement plane because the this plane 
     is an abstract and common plane and all the transport technology 
     specific function is kept by each TE. 
         
         
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    8 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
4.3. Distributed Architecture 
    
   In a distributed architecture, each TE communicates with other TEs 
   to collect network topology, resource, and traffic information and 
   performs route computation by itself. Each switch maintains the 
   policy and service profile for all its customers. The advantage of 
   distributed architecture over centralized one are as follows: 
    
   - Better survivability 
      
     With distributed architecture, if one TE fails, only the traffic 
     handled by this LSR is affected. The rest of the network will 
     continue to work. 
      
     On the other hand, with centralized architecture, if a CE fails, 
     all the services on the switches under the control of that CE will 
     be impacted. 
    
   - Easier to make use of existing routing protocols 
      
     Distributed IP routing (OSPF, IS-IS) has been deployed on TEs; 
     suggestions have been made to extend these protocols to support 
     traffic engineering and QoS [6]. These are fully distributed 
     protocols. 
    
   - Complex overall architecture 
      
     With centralized architecture, because the number of network 
     elements that can be managed by one control element is limited by 
     its capacity, multiple control elements may need to be deployed in 
     parallel. Then another centralized component on top of the control 
     elements must be deployed to take care of end-to-end on-demand 
     services. That makes the overall architecture complicated. With 
     distributed architecture, each transport element takes care of its 
     own for all the control capability. No complicated hierarchy is 
     involved. 
    
   - Better session setup latency 
      
     With a distributed approach, a tunnel setup message does not have 
     to go CE so the session setup latency is reduced. The same 
     reasoning applies for protection/restoration. 
    
    
5. Architectural Requirements 
    
   The objective is to build a common plane for various underlying 
   transport networks. This plane has a common interface to the 
   underlying transport elements. The high level architectural 
   requirements are described below. 
    
    
5.1. Independence from Underlying Transport Networks 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                    9 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
    
   The underlying transport network can be based on any type of 
   transport technology. The interface between control elements and 
   transport elements must be generic. It must be suitable for any type 
   of networks. The parameters passed at the interface must be abstract 
   and suitable for carrying topology, resource, traffic, and policy 
   decision information for any type of networks. It is up to the 
   transport element to map its technology specific presentation of 
   above to the standard interface. 
    
   The architecture must be extensible to support more functions and 
   other network transport elements. 
    
    
5.2. Scalable to Very Large Networks 
    
   Contemporary public networks are growing very fast with respect to 
   network size and traffic volume. The architecture must be designed 
   to work with small network consisting a few tens of TEs to a big 
   network consisting of a few thousands TEs.  
    
    
5.3. Flexibility 
    
   With different transport networks, and at different stages of 
   deployment of the architecture, there may be different solutions to 
   the same issue. The architecture must be flexible in adopting 
   different mechanisms.  
    
   For example, the measurement results can be obtained in different 
   ways: using the measurement protocol as discussed in this draft, 
   using OSPF-TE when it is widely deployed in the network, or using 
   MIBs uploading. The architecture must be flexible to allow different 
   mechanisms to be easily plugged in.  
    
   In another example, a particular MPLS subnet may have its own built-
   in traffic engineering mechanism. The architecture must allow the 
   transport elements to choose which mechanism (at control element or 
   of its own) to use.  
    
   In another scenario, a third party policy engine is already deployed 
   in the service provider∆s network, this architecture must allow the 
   policy engine to be plugged into the control plane.  
    
   Another example is that at the early deployment stage, some network 
   parameters (e.g., CE to TE association) may be statically 
   provisioned and at advanced stage they may be obtained by protocol 
   (e.g., auto-discovery). As for provisioning, the plane should also 
   provide sufficient configuration options so that a network 
   administrator can tailor the system to a particular environment. 
    
    
5.4. Steady State Operation 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   10 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
    
   The architecture must be such that the entire control system can 
   reach steady state fast. For example, this requires the routing 
   computation be relatively independent of dynamically changeable 
   parameters. 
    
    
5.5. Minimized Overhead 
    
   This architecture should not introduce significant transport and 
   processing overhead. For this purpose, the control protocols should 
   be as simple as possible. The amount of information should be 
   minimized and the format to represent the information should be 
   efficient. 
    
    
5.6. Minimized Impact on Real-Time Performance 
    
   With more functionality introduced into the control plane, session 
   setup latency will be degraded. The architecture must be designed so 
   that this impact is minimized. 
    
    
5.7. Simplicity   
    
   The system should be as simple as possible, consistent with the 
   intended applications. The system should be relatively easy to use 
   (i.e., clean, convenient, and intuitive user interfaces).   
    
   Simplicity in user interface does not necessarily imply that the TE 
   system will use naive algorithms. Even when complex algorithms and 
   internal structures are used, such complexities should be hidden as 
   much as possible from the network administrator through the user 
   interface. 
    
    
5.8. Survivability  
    
   It is critical for an operational network to recover promptly from 
   network failures and to maintain the required QoS for existing 
   services.  Survivability generally mandates introducing redundancy 
   into the architecture, design, and operation of networks. 
    
   Survivability can be addressed at the device level by developing 
   network elements that are more reliable; and at the network level by 
   incorporating redundancy into the architecture, design, and 
   operation of networks. This draft requires that a philosophy of 
   robustness and survivability should be adopted in the architecture, 
   design, and operation of control and measurement plane. 
    
     
5.9. Interoperability  
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   11 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   Whenever feasible, control and measurement systems and their 
   components should be developed with open standards based interfaces 
   to allow interoperation with other systems and components. 
    
    
6. Proposed High Level Architecture 
    
   Based on the functions described in Sections 4 and 5, the proposed 
   architecture for the control plane is described in this section. 
    
    
6.1. Architecture Overview 
    
   As illustrated in Figure 1, the control and measurement plane is 
   separated from and built on top of the transport network. The entire 
   controlled network is divided into service domains. One domain is 
   under management of a single service provider and the network 
   elements within one domain share consistent network view and policy 
   view. The entire controlled service domain consists of one or more 
   CEs and multiple TEs. Each TE is under the control of one CE. One CE 
   can control multiple TEs.  
    
                                      +------------------+ 
                                      |      Clearing    | 
                                      |       House      | 
                                      +------------------+ 
                                        A              A 
                                        |              | 
                                        |(R5)          |(R5) 
    +-----------------------------------|----+    +----|-------------+ 
    |                                   |    |    |    |             | 
    |                                   V    |    |    V             | 
    |  +-------------+      +-------------+  |    | +-------------+  | 
    |  |   Control   |<---->|   Control   |<------->|   Control   |  | 
    |  |   Element   | (R3) |   Element   |  |(R4)| |   Element   |  | 
    |  +-------------+      +-------------+  |    | +-------------+  | 
    |       A   A                A   A       |    |      A   A       | 
    |       |   |                |   |       |    |      |   |       | 
    |   (R1)|   |(R2)        (R1)|   |(R2)   |    |  (R1)|   |(R2)   |   
    |       |   |                |   |       |    |      |   |       | 
    |       V   V                V   V       |    |      V   V       | 
    |  +-------------+      +-------------+  |    | +-------------+  | 
    |  |  Transport  |      |  Transport  |  |    | |  Transport  |  | 
   ....|   Element   |......|   Element   |.........|   Element   |.... 
    |  +-------------+      +-------------+  |    | +-------------+  | 
    |                                        |    |                  | 
    |               (domain 1)               |    |    (domain 2)    | 
    +----------------------------------------+    +------------------+ 
    
              Figure 1: CCAMP Architecture & Reference Points 
    
    

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   12 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   If there is more than one CE in the network, the CEs are connected 
   via associations in either a partial or full mesh. The CEs and their 
   associations together form a CE network. The links between CEs are 
   logical links, or associations. These CEs and their associations are 
   provisioned so that reachability (directly or indirectly) exists 
   between any pair of CEs. 
    
   In case of multiple CEs, each CE is responsible for managing a 
   number of TEs. Any TE is controlled by only one CE at any time. One 
   TE may have associations with more than one controller for 
   protection purpose.  
    
   Each TE communicates with its CE using two protocols: a control 
   protocol and a measurement protocol. The control protocol is used 
   for the CE to send policy decisions, tunnel setup information (e.g., 
   source routing path), and traffic filters for mapping incoming 
   traffic to the tunnel to be setup. The measurement protocol is used 
   for TEs to report network status and resource information to the CE. 
    
   Because multiple CEs may be deployed in one service domain, these 
   CEs need to communicate to each other so that they have the 
   consistent view about the service profiles of customers, policies, 
   network resource and status. For this purpose, these CEs need to 
   speak another protocol with its peers: inter-CE protocol. 
    
   The inter-CE protocol consists of two parts: intra-domain part and 
   inter-domain part. For the intra-domain part, the protocol allows 
   the CEs to share all policy and network information with each other. 
   No security check or policy filtering logic is required. While for 
   the inter-domain part, only the customer level policy and service 
   capability is exchanged. Security mechanisms must be applied to 
   inter-domain communication. Only the border CE needs to support both 
   intra-domain part and inter-domain part. The internal CEs only need 
   to support inter-domain part.  
    
   In this architecture, we propose direct communication between CEs 
   for inter-domain communication. Another alternative is to exchange 
   policy information between service domains via a Clearing House. 
   This alternative, however, is not addressed in this draft. 
    
    
6.2. Single Protocol or Separate Protocols 
    
   From a functional point of view, the system requires two protocols, 
   control protocol and measurement protocol. These two protocols can 
   be kept separate or combined together. 
    
   With a single protocol, only one association needs to be established 
   and maintained between each TE and its CE. The messages exchanged 
   can be reduced because some information of two protocols can be 
   carried in a single message. This reduces the protocol overhead.  
    

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   13 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   With separate protocols, it is easy to develop each protocol 
   independently and to incorporate other protocols into the 
   architecture. For example, when TE-OSPF is widely deployed, it can 
   be used for measurement and reporting purpose, and therefore no new 
   measurement protocol is needed. 
    
   Although more investigation is required before reaching an agreement 
   on single protocol or separate protocol, in this draft, we describe 
   the requirements separately. 
    
    
6.3. Reference Points 
    
   In this architecture illustrated in Figure 1, the following 
   reference points are defined. 
    
   - Reference Point R1 
      
     Policy control information flow between CE and TE is captured in 
     R1. The information across this point communicates policy-based 
     session setup request and decision, traffic filter decision, and 
     policy installation request between CE and TE. This protocol is a 
     client-server protocol with the TE as client and the CE as the 
     server. 
 

   - Reference Point R2 
      
     Transport Elements uploading information and/or measurement 
     information flow between CE and TE is captured in this reference 
     point. The information across this reference point communicates TE 
     topology, resource, network status and measurement information. 
     The protocol used at this interface is client-server protocol with 
     TE as client and CE as server. 
    
   - Reference Point R3 
      
     Information flowing between two internal CEs is captured in this 
     point. The information across this reference point communicates 
     network topology, resource, and status information of the portion 
     of the network and TEs under its control. It also communicates 
     policy information and service capability information learned from 
     other domains. The protocol used at this point is a peer protocol. 
    
   - Reference Point R4 
      
     Information flowing between two border CEs in different domains is 
     captured in this point. The information across this reference 
     point communicates pricing, authorization, usage, policy, and 
     service capability information. The policy information flowing at 
     this point includes customer specific policy, service specific 
     policy, and resource policy. It is used for advertising, 
     negotiating and notifying policy information. The policy 
     information across this point can be either both globally 

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   14 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
     available policy information and peer domain specific policy 
     information (if clearing house is not available) or only peer 
     domain specific policy (if clearing house is used for global 
     available policy information). This protocol is a peer protocol. 
    
   - Reference Point R5 
      
     The information flowing between CE and Clearinghouse is captured 
     in this reference point. The information flowing across this 
     reference point is inter-domain pricing, authorization, and usage 
     information as well as customer, service, and resource specific 
     policy. The protocol used at this point is client-server protocol 
     with CE as client and CH as server. 
    
    
7. TE Functional Requirements 
    
   The underlying network could be MPLS network, ATM network, optical 
   switching network, etc. or any combination of the above. However, 
   the following assumptions are made about the network and the TE: 
    
   - The TEs are connected to each other in a arbitrary topology 
     (meshed, star, tree, etc) 
    
   - One TE can have different types of interfaces: different MPLS 
     capable interfaces, or non-MPLS interfaces. 
    
   - Every MPLS capable interface has IP address, implemented IP stack, 
     running IP routing, running MPLS signaling (e.g., LDP and CR-LDP) 
    
   - TEs that have both MPLS and non-MPLS interfaces are able to do 
     traffic mapping between non-MPLS traffic (packets, time slots, 
     lambdas, physical interfaces) and MPLS traffic according to a 
     traffic classifier 
    
   - TEs that have different types of MPLS interface are able to map 
     between those interfaces 
    
   - Every TE is able to perform resource reservation and release 
    
   - Every TE is able to collect network topology and status 
     information and report it to CE 
    
   - Every TE is able to perform performance measurement and report the 
     results to CE. 
    
   - Every TE is able to collect and report network resource usage 
     information and report it to CE 
    
   - Every TE supports the control protocol and measurement protocol as 
     described in this draft, including establishing and maintaining 
     association with CE, generating, receiving, and processing 

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   15 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
     protocol messages, switchover to a backup CE in case that the 
     primary CE failure is detected, etc. 
    
   - Every TE must support either provisioned CE assignment or CE auto-
     discovery.  
    
   - Every TE is able to enforce policy decision it received from CE 
    
    
8. CE Functional Requirements 
    
   The CE is the core component of this architecture. It must provide 
   the following capabilities. 
    
    
8.1. Association Establishment and Management 
    
   These requirements for a CE to establish and maintain associations 
   with TEs and its CE peers are addressed by each protocol in 
   seubsequent sections. For the purpose of completion, they are also 
   listed here. 
    
   - It is able to establish and maintain association with its intra-
     domain peers and inter-domain peers 
    
   - It is able to monitor whether its peers are alive 
    
   - It is able to delete the association with a peer when the peer 
     fails or the peer relationship is removed by operator 
    
   - It must support auto-discovery of CE by TE  
    
   - When a new TE added into the network, the CE is able to coordinate 
     with other CEs to decide which CE is to control the new TE. 
    
   - It is able to establish and maintain associations with the TEs 
     under its control 
    
   - It is able to reassign a TE under its control to another CE and 
     communicate this reassignment with TE and CE. 
    
   - It is able to detect its peer∆s failure or its TE∆s failure and 
     close the association 
    
    
8.2. Tunnel Management 
    
   - Tunnel routing involves the selection of a path from the 
     originating node to the destination node in a network. CE should 
     support time-dependent routing and state-dependent routing.  
    
   - The architecture also allows other routing engine or routing 
     mechanisms to be plugged in. In this case, the CE must also be 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   16 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
     able to decide which routing mechanism to be used for a particular 
     tunnel setup request according to its local policy.  
    
   - It is able to compute and setup a path according to the traffic 
     and QoS requirements. 
    
   - It is able to manage routing table from different route mechanisms 
     and perform route lookup based on its local policy. 
    
   - It is able to instruct TEs to establish tunnels according to the 
     path it specified 
    
   - It is able to maintain all the information related to each tunnel 
     originating from the controlled TE. The tunnel could be any type 
     of point-to-point, point-to-multipoint or multipoint-to-point.  
    
   - It is able to instruct TEs to modify an established tunnel without 
     affecting existing traffic 
    
   - It is able to delete a tunnel upon request or due to network 
     failure 
    
    
8.3. Resource Management 
    
   - It is able to store the network topology and resource formation in 
     a way that it is easy to be advertised and easy to be used for 
     route computation 
    
   - It must maintain the network resources information for any type of 
     interfaces 
    
   - It is able to perform admission control upon a request for tunnel 
     establishment based on resource availability, setup requirements 
     and its local policy 
    
   - It must be able to update the resource utilization of the 
     underlying network upon tunnel setup or release 
    
   - It must be able to update its resource utilization information 
     upon report from TE or other CEs  
    
   - It must be able to advertise any topology change reported by TEs 
     under its control to other CEs within the same domain 
    
   - It must be able to advertise any resource utilization change 
     calculated by itself or reported by TEs to other CEs within the 
     same domain 
    
    
8.4. QoS policy capability 
    

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   17 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   - It must be able to make Policy Decision upon the request from TE, 
     other network components such as SIP proxy server, or provision  
    
   - It must support QoS policy management. It is able to create and 
     maintain a policy database in a format that is easy to update and 
     easy to apply. 
    
   - It must be able to communicate with a separate policy repository 
     using a standard protocol 
    
   - It must support both policy provisioning and policy outsourcing 
     modes as defined in COPS [7]. For provisioning mode, it is able to 
     install polices to the TEs that are under its control. 
    
   - It must support policy management so that the service provider is 
     able to create, modify or delete policy via a standard user 
     interface (CLI, GUI). 
    
   - It must be able to distribute new policy items to its intra-domain 
     peers. The new policy could be created by an operator, or learned 
     from its neighbor domain peers. 
    
   - It must be able to advertise its policy to other service domains 
     according to its filtering policy.  
    
   - It must be able to negotiate the service, pricing, and customer 
     policy with other service domains. 
    
   - It must support various types of policies. 
    
   - The policy framework must be extensible to include other policy in 
     addition to QoS policy  
    
    
8.5. Service provisioning and control 
    
   - It must be able to interact with Service Management System (SMS) 
     to create, modify, and delete services 
    
   - It must be able to interact with SMS to provision services 
    
   - It must able to provision services based on Service Level 
     Specification (SLS) with its access customers 
    
   - It must be able to provision services based on Service Level 
     Agreement (SLA) with its peer service providers 
    
   - It should be able to exchange SLA with other service domains  
    
    
8.6. OAM&P 
    
   A CE must be able to perform the following standard OAMP functions: 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   18 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
    
   - Operation management: load/boot, software/hardware upgrade, 
     capability to enable or disable resource and/or features. 
    
   - Configuration management: provisioning and configuring components 
     and applications 
    
   - Performance management: performance monitoring, data collecting 
     and analysis 
    
   - Accounting management: gathering statistics and usage information 
     for accounting or billing purposes 
    
   - Fault management: problems/symptoms report and handling 
    
    
8.7. Robustness 
    
   The control architecture must provide three level protections: 
    
   - Network level protection: When one CE fails, other CEs will 
     automatically take care of all the TEs under failed CE∆s control.  
    
   - Link level protection: Physical or logical link failure should not 
     cause the association termination. 
    
    
9. General Protocol Requirements 
    
   In the control architecture described in Section 6, three protocols 
   have been defined. They are control protocol, measurement protocol, 
   and inter-CE protocol. The inter-CE protocol is divided into two 
   portions: intra-domain part and inter-domain part. This section 
   discusses general protocol requirements that apply to all three 
   protocols. 
    
    
9.1. Transport Network Assumptions 
    
   The protocols must assume that the underlying network: 
    
   - May be over large shared networks. 
    
   - Assures reliable delivery of messages. 
    
   - Does not guarantee message delivery delay. 
    
   - Does not guarantee ordering of messages: sequenced delivery of 
     messages associated with the same source of events is not assumed. 
    
    
9.2. Association requirements 
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   19 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   For any of the three protocols to function, an association must be 
   established between two parties. The following are association 
   related requirements.   
    
   Each protocol must 
    
   - be able to establish, maintain and terminate association between 
     two communication parties (between CE and TE or between two CEs) 
    
   - allow the association to be specified by provisioning 
    
   - allow the association between CE and TE to be established by auto-
     discovery 
      
     Each TE is able to discover and registered with CE automatically. 
     CEs should be able to decide which CE should control the 
     discovered TE. 
    
   - provide a method for the TE to inform a CE that the it received a 
     command that is under the control of a different CE 
    
   - support a method for the TE to inform a CE that it cannot handle 
     any more requests 
    
   - allow a CE to terminate an association and redirect a TE to 
     another CE 
    
    
9.3. Protocol performance requirements 
    
   Each of the three protocols: 
    
   - should minimize message exchanges between TE and CE and between 
     CEs 
     
   - should make efficient use of the underlying transport mechanism 
      
     For example, protocol PDU sizes vs. transport MTU sizes needs to 
     be considered in designing the protocols. 
    
   - must not contain inherent architectural or signaling constraints 
     that would limit peak throughput rates or the number of TEs a CE 
     can control 
    
   - should allow for default/provisioned settings so that commands 
     need only contain non-default parameters 
    
    
9.4. Transport Requirements 
    
   Each of the three protocols: 
    

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   20 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   - must provide the ability to abort delivery of obsolete messages at 
     the sending end if their transmission has not been successfully 
     completed 
      
     For example, aborting a command that has been overtaken by events. 
    
   - should support priority messages 
      
     The protocol should allow a command precedence to allow priority 
     messages to supercede non-priority messages. 
    
   - should support large fan-out at the CE 
    
   - must provide a way for one entity to correlate commands and 
     responses with the other entity 
    
   - must provide a reason for any command failure 
    
   - must assure that loss of a packet not stall messages not related 
     to the message(s) contained in the packet lost 
    
    
9.5. Security requirements 
    
   Security mechanisms may be specified as provided in underlying 
   transport mechanisms, such as IPSEC.  The protocol, or such 
   mechanisms, must: 
    
   - allow for mutual authentication at the start of a CE-TE 
     association, especially for inter-domain associations 
    
   - allow for preservation of the control messages once the 
     association has been established 
    
   - allow for optional confidentiality protection of control messages 
      
   - allow a choice in the algorithm to be used 
    
   - across untrusted domains in a secure fashion 
    
   - define mechanisms to mitigate denial of service attacks 
    
   In addition, it may be desirable for the protocol to be able to pass 
   through commonly used firewalls. 
    
    
9.6. Other Requirements 
    
   Each of the three protocols must: 
    
   - support multiple operations to be invoked in one message and 
     treated as a single transaction 
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   21 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   - be both modular and extensible 
      
     Not all implementations may wish to support all of the possible 
     extensions for the protocol. This will permit lightweight 
     implementations for specialized tasks where processing resources 
     are constrained. This could be accomplished by defining particular 
     profiles for particular uses of the protocol. 
    
   - be flexible in allocation of intelligence between CE and TE 
      
     For example, an CE may want to allow the TE to assign particular 
     TE resources in some implementations, while in others, the CE may 
     want to be the one to assign TE resources for use. In another 
     example, CE may allow TE to do path computation in some 
     implementations, while in others, the CE does the path computation 
     by itself and the TE must take that path. 
    
   - support scalability from very small to very large TEs 
      
     The protocol must support TEs with capacity ranging from one to 
     millions of connections. 
    
   - support scalability from very small to very large CE span of 
     control (i.e. The protocol should allow CEs to control from one to 
     a few thousands of TEs) 
    
   - support the needs of an edge TE that supports small number of 
     tunnels, and the needs of large TEs supporting tens of thousands 
     of tunnels 
      
     Protocol mechanisms favoring one extreme or the other should be 
     minimized in favor of more general-purpose mechanism applicable to 
     a wide range of TEs. Where special purpose mechanisms are proposed 
     to optimize a subset of implementations, such mechanisms should be 
     defined as optional, and should have minimal impact on the rest of 
     the protocol. 
    
   - facilitate TE and CE version upgrades independently of one another 
     (the protocol must include a version identifier in the initial 
     message exchange) 
    
   - facilitate the discovery of the protocol capabilities of the one 
     entity to the other 
    
   - specify commands as optional (can be ignored) or mandatory (must 
     be accepted or rejected) 
    
   - within a command, specify parameters as optional (can be ignored) 
     or mandatory (must be accepted or rejected). 
    
    
10. Control Protocol Requirements 
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   22 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   The control protocol is running between CE and controlled TEs. In 
   addition to the general protocol requirements listed in Section 9, 
   this protocol must meet the following requirements. 
    
     
10.1. Resource requirements 
    
   The control protocol must 
    
   - support resource allocation for use by a particular tunnel and 
     support its subsequent release at various granularities 
    
   - allow modification of resource reservation without affecting 
     existing services 
    
   - allow release in a single exchange of messages, of all resources 
     associated with a particular set of connectivity and/or 
     association between a given number of terminations 
    
   - not require the TE to maintain a sense of future time: a resource 
     allocation/reservation remains in effect until explicitly released 
     by the CE 
    
   - provide a method for the CE to request that the TE to release all 
     resources currently in use, or reserved, for any or all tunnels 
    
   - provide a way for the TE to indicate that it was unable to perform 
     a requested action because of resource exhaustion, or because of 
     temporary resource unavailability 
    
    
10.2. Tunnel Requirements 
    
   The control protocol must:  
    
   - support establishment, modification and deletion of connections 
     involving any types of layer 1 and layer 2 networks and any 
     combinations 
    
   - support establishment, modification and deletion of tunnels 
     involving any amount of resource reservation 
    
   - support unidirectional, symmetric bi-directional, and asymmetric 
     bi-directional tunnels 
    
   - support point-to-point, point-to-multiple, and multiple-to-point 
     tunnels  
    
   - allow TE to request CE for a tunnel setup (including admission 
     control, policy control, path computation, etc.) 
    
   - allow CE to specify the entire path or partial path for a tunnel  
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   23 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   - allow the specification of traffic filter (classifier) for the 
     tunnel with the granularity of the traffic filter as following: 
      
     PQ (Port Quadruples): same IP source address prefix, destination 
     address prefix, TTL, IP, protocol and TCP/UDP source/destination 
     ports 
      
     PQT (Port Quadruples with TOS): same IP source address prefix, 
     destination address prefix, TTL, IP, protocol and TCP/UDP 
     source/destination ports, and same IP header TOS field (including 
     precedence and TOS bits) 
      
     HP (Host Pair): same specific IP source and destination addresses 
      
     HPT (Host Pair with TOS): same specific IP source and destination 
     addresses with same IP header ToS field 
      
     NP (Network Pair): same IP source and destination address prefix 
     (variable length) 
      
     DN (Destination Network): same IP destination network address 
     prefix (variable length) 
      
     ER (Egress Router): same egress router ID 
      
     NAS (Next-hop AS): same next-hop AS number 
      
     DAS (Destination AS): same destination AS number 
      
     SST (Source Specific Tree): same source address and multicast 
     group 
      
     SMT (shared multicast Tree): same multicast group address 
      
     Same source and destination IP address with same DiffServ PHB 
      
     Same source and destination IP address with same RSVP flow ID 
    
   - allow dynamic modification of traffic filter to add or remove any 
     flows to/from the tunnel without affecting existing service 
    
   - support rerouting of an existing tunnel to a different path 
    
   - allow CE to specify the priority of the tunnel  
    
   - allow the TE to report events such as resource reservation and 
     tunnel setup completion 
    
    
10.3. Event Processing and Scripting 
    
   The control protocol must allow CE to enable/disable monitoring for 
   specific supervision events 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   24 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
    
    
10.4. Policy Requirements 
    
   The control protocol must: 
    
   - allow TE to communicate policy request (usually together with 
     tunnel setup request) to CE 
    
   - allow CE to communicate policy decision information to TE (usually 
     together with explicit path information for the tunnel) 
    
   - allow CE to install policy to TE 
    
   - allow CE to modify the installed policy at TE 
    
    
10.5. Media transformation Requirements 
    
   The control protocol must allow CE to instruct TE about 
   mediation/adaptation (or traffic mapping) of flows between different 
   types of transport interfaces. 
    
    
10.6. Operation/management Requirements 
    
   The control protocol must: 
    
   - support detection and recovery from loss of contact due to 
     failure/congestion of communication links or due to CE or TE 
     failure 
    
   - support detection and recovery from loss of synchronized view of 
     resource and tunnel states between CE and TEs (e.g. through the 
     use of audits) 
    
   - provide a means for CE and TE to provide each other with booting 
     and reboot indications, and what the TE's configuration is 
    
   - permit more than one backup CE and provide an orderly way for the 
     TE to contact one of its backup CEs 
    
   - provide for an orderly switch back to the primary CE after it 
     recovers 
    
   - provide a mechanism so that when a CE fails, tunnels already 
     established can be maintained 
      
     The protocol does not have to provide a capability to maintain 
     tunnels in the process of being connected, but not actually 
     connected when the failure occurs. 
    
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   25 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
10.7. Error Control 
    
   The control protocol must: 
    
   - allow for the TE to report reasons for abnormal failure of lower 
     layer tunnels 
    
   - allow the TE to notify the CE that an interface was terminated and 
     communicate a reason when an interface is taken out-of-service 
     unilaterally by the TE due to abnormal events. 
    
   - allow the CE to acknowledge that some resource has been taken out-
     of-service. 
    
   - allow the TE to request the CE to release some resource and 
     communicate a reason. 
    
   - allow the CE to specify its decision to take resource down, leave 
     it as is or modify it. 
    
    
10.8. Management Requirements 
    
   The control protocol must: 
    
   - provide information on: 
    
     . mapping between resources and supporting physical entities 
      
     . statistics on quality of service on the control and signaling 
       interfaces 
      
     . statistics required for traffic engineering within the TE 
    
   - allow the TE to provide to the CE all information the CE needs to 
     provide in its MIB 
    
   - allow the TE to provide the number of policy query, execution, and 
     advertisements 
    
    
11. Measurement Protocol Requirements 
    
   The measurement protocol also runs between CE and TEs. In addition 
   to the general protocol requirements listed in Section 9, this 
   protocol must meet the following requirements. 
    
    
11.1. Topology and resource information 
    
   The following information must be reported to the CE immediately 
   after a CE-TE association is established, whenever a network 

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   26 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   topology changed (node or link added into or removed from the 
   network), and upon the request from CE: 
    
   - TE must report underlying network topology information. Each TE is 
     only responsible for reporting its own interfaces.  
    
   - For each interface TE reports interface type (e.g., pure IP, RSVP, 
     DiffServ, PSC, TDM, LSC, or FSC), local and remote IP addresses, 
     and total network resource allocated to be used by this Control 
     System in both directions. 
    
   - For each interface, TE reports bandwidth reservation granularity 
     (e.g., number of bytes, slot rate, lambda capacity). 
    
   - For each interface, TE reports performance parameters including 
     propagation delay and packet loss rate. 
    
   The following information must be reported upon request from CE or 
   whenever a pre-specified network resource threshold is crossed due 
   to establishment of new tunnels or release or modification of an 
   existing tunnels: 
    
   - For a successfully established tunnel, the originating TE reports 
     the committed resource reservation. 
    
   - For tunnel release not triggered by CE, TE reports resource 
     release by indicating to CE the tunnel ID of the tunnel that has 
     been released. 
    
    
11.2. TE Capability Information 
    
   The protocol must allow TE to indicate to CE its capabilities as 
   listed below. 
    
   - Whether it is an internal TE or border TE 
    
   - Whether it is able to perform tunnel merge 
    
   - What kinds of traffic mapping it supports 
    
   - Whether it is able to setup uni-directional, synchronous bi-
     directional, or asynchronous bi-directional tunnels 
    
    
11.3. Status Information 
    
   The measurement protocol must allow the CE to request and the TE to 
   report the following: 
   - status and all information about the interface when a new 
     interface is added or activated. 
    
   - link failure or deactivation 
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   27 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
    
   - congestion status in the network 
    
    
11.4. Tunnel Information 
    
   In most cases, CE will keep all the tunnel related information. 
   There may be cases CE needs to request that information from the TE. 
   The protocol must allow: 
    
   - CE to request and TE to report tunnel related information (source 
     and destination IP address, traffic filter, merge point, etc.) 
    
   - CE to request and TE to report all tunnels associated with a 
     particular interface. 
    
    
11.5. Performance Information 
    
   The protocol must allow the CE to request and TE to report 
   performance information such as round-trip delay, packet loss rate, 
   etc. for a particular tunnel or a particular interface. 
    
    
11.6. Statistics Information 
    
   In most cases, the CE keeps all the statistics information for all 
   the TEs under its control. However, there may be cases that CE needs 
   to request the information from each a particular TE. So the 
   protocol must allow the CE to request and TE to report the following 
   statistics information:  
    
   - the number of tunnels that meet certain requirements (on the node, 
     on a particular interface, to a particular IP address, duration 
     exceeding 10 min, etc.) 
    
   - the duration of a particular tunnel  
    
   - the whole profile of a particular tunnel  
         
         
11.7. Accounting Requirements 
    
   The measurement protocol must: 
    
   - support a common identifier to mark resources related to one 
     tunnel 
    
   - support collection of specified accounting information from TEs 
    
   - provide the mechanism for the CE to specify that the TE report 
     accounting information automatically at end of a session, in mid-

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   28 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
     session upon request, at specific time intervals as specified by 
     the TEs and at unit usage thresholds as specified by the CE 
    
   - specifically support collection of: 
    
     . Start and stop time, by media flow 
      
     . Volume of content carried (e.g. number of packets/cells 
       transmitted, number received with and without error, inter-
       arrival jitter), by media flow 
    
   - allow the CE to have some control over which statistics are 
     reported, to enable it to manage the amount of information 
     transferred 
    
    
11.8. Event Processing and Scripting 
    
   The measurement protocol must allow CE to enable/disable monitoring 
   for specific supervision events. 
    
    
11.9. Operation/Management Requirements 
    
   The measurement protocol must: 
    
   - Support detection and recovery from loss of contact due to 
     failure/congestion of communication links or due to CE or TE 
     failure. 
    
   - Support detection and recovery from loss of synchronized view of 
     resource and connection states between CE and TEs (e.g. through 
     the use of audits). 
    
   - Provide a means for CE and TE to provide each other with booting 
     and reboot indications, and what the TE's configuration is. 
    
   - Permit more than one backup CE and provide an orderly way for the 
     TE to contact one of its backups. 
    
   - Provide for an orderly switch back to the primary CE after it 
     recovers.  
    
   - Provide a mechanism so that when a CE fails, tunnels already 
     established can be maintained. The protocol does not have to 
     provide a capability to maintain tunnels in the process of being 
     connected, but not actually connected when the failure occurs. 
    
    
11.10. Error Control 
    
   The measurement protocol must 
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   29 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   - allow for the TE to report reasons for abnormal failure of lower 
     layer tunnels  
    
   - allow the TE to notify the CE that an interface was terminated and 
     communicate a reason when an interface is taken out-of-service 
     unilaterally by the TE due to abnormal events 
    
   - allow the CE to acknowledge that some resource has been taken out-
     of-service 
    
    
12. Inter-CE Protocol Requirements 
    
   This protocol consists of two portions: internal part and external 
   portion. There are some common requirements that apply to both 
   internal and external portion. Some other requirements are specific 
   for internal portion or external portion. 
    
    
12.1. Common requirements 
    
   The following requirements apply for both internal portion and 
   external portion.  Both inter-CE protocol must CEs, both in the same 
   domain and in different domains, to: 
    
   - support arbitrary network topology of Controllers (meshed, star, 
     tree, etc.) 
    
   - allow the Controller peer relationship be provisioned 
    
   - support automatic peer discovery  
    
   - support detection and recovery from loss of contact due to 
     failure/congestion of communication links or due to Controller 
     failure 
    
   - support detection and recovery from loss of synchronized view of 
     resource and connection states between Controllers 
    
   - provide a mechanism so that when a Controller fails, connections 
     already established can be maintained 
      
     The protocol does not have to provide a capability to maintain 
     connections in the process of being connected, but not actually 
     connected when the failure occurs. 
    
    
12.2. Internal capability 
    
   The following information is exchange between CEs so that all the 
   CEs within a domain have a consistent view of the network. The 
   inter-CE protocol must allow CEs in the same domain to:  
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   30 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   - exchange topology information 
    
   - exchange network resource information 
    
   - exchange network status information  
    
   - exchange tunnel and its allocated resource information 
    
   - advertise policy information within the service domain  
    
   - negotiate the new assignment of TEs from one CE to another 
    
    
12.3. External capability 
    
   The inter-CE protocol must allow CEs in different domains to: 
    
   - exchange service level policy 
    
   - exchange pricing and usage information 
    
   - exchange performance measurements of their service domain 
    
   - exchange Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
    
    
13. Security Considerations 
    
   Security requirements for the protocols are listed in Section 10.5. 
    
    
14. References 
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 

   2  Cuervo, F., et al, "Megaco Protocol Version 1.0", RFC 3015, 
      November 2000. 

   3  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998. 

   4  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   5  Ashwood-Smith, P., et al, "Generalized MPLS - Signaling 
      Functional Description," Internet Draft, <draft-ietf-mpls-
      generalized-signaling-01.txt>, work in progress. 

   6  Katz, D., and Yeung, D., "Traffic Engineering Extensions to 
      OSPF," Internet Draft, <draft-katz-yeung-ospf-traffic-03.txt>, 
      work in progress. 

 

  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   31 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
 
   7  Durham, D., et al, "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) 
      Protocol", RFC 2748, January 2000. 

    
15. Author's Addresses 
    
   Jianping Jiang 
   SS8 Networks Inc. 
   55 Commerce Valley Drive West 
   Toronto, ON  L3T 7B9  
   Canada 
   Phone: +1 905 889 5900 
   Email: jainping@ss8.com 
    
   Dave Walker 
   SS8 Networks Inc. 
   495 March Road 
   Ottawa, ON  K2K 3G1  
   Canada 
   Phone: +1 613 592 2100 
   Email: drwalker@ss8.com 
    
   Jianli Wang 
   SS8 Networks Inc. 
   495 March Road 
   Ottawa, ON  K2K 3G1  
   Canada 
   Phone: +1 613 592 2100 
   Email: jianli@ss8.com 
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   32 

Internet Draft      CCAMP Framework & Requirements       February 2001 
 
 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 















































  
Jiang/Walker/Wang                                                   33 
