

CCAMP Working Group                           D. Dovolsky (Movaz Networks) 
                                              I. Bryskin  (Movaz Networks) 
                                              D. Awduche  (Isocore) 
Internet Draft                                                             
Expiration Date: May 2003                                    November 2002 
Document: draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-                               
flooding-00.txt 
 
 
              Limited Flooding as a scalability improvement to OSPF 
                                         
               draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-00.txt 
                                      
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
    
    
   This draft describes a limited flooding approach to address the 
   problem of routing scalability in link state IGPs. The solution is 
   based on decomposition  of a routing area into Ùzonesˆ and the 
   restriction of the exchange of routing information between zones.  
   This approach introduces an extra level in the isolation of 
   knowledge within a routing domain. The advantage of this solution is 
   that it considerably decreases the amount of information flooded in 
   link state advertisements and reduces the size of the link-state 
   database (and traffic engineering entries) on network elements 
   utilizing link state protocols.   The technique presented in this 
   document has been particularized to OSPF in order to make the 
   discussion practical and concrete. However, the underlying concepts 
   are very general and similar modifications can be easily applied to 
   other IGPs, such as ISIS.  
    
Table Of Contents 
  
  Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                Expires May 2003         1 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

 
    
1. Summary for Sub-IP Area 
    
    
1.1. Summary 
    
   This document describes a generic mechanism to enhance the 
   scalability of IGP routing protocols. More particularly, it 
   specifies extensions to the OSPF routing protocol to make the 
   protocol even more scalable in support of Generalized Multi-Protocol 
   Label Switching (GMPLS). The method described is quite general and 
   can be applied to other link state protocols, such as ISIS. 
    
1.2. Where does it fit in the Picture of the Sub-IP Work 
    
   This work fits squarely in either the CCAMP or OSPF box. 
    
1.3. Why is it Targeted at this WG 
    
   This draft is targeted at the CCAMP or the OSPF WG, because it 
   specifies extensions to the OSPF routing protocols in support of 
   GMPLS, because GMPLS is within the scope of the CCAMP WG, and 
   because OSPF is within the scope of the OSPF WG. 
    
1.4. Justification 
    
   The WG should consider this document as it specifies the extensions 
   to the OSPF routing protocols in support of GMPLS. 
    
    
2. Overview 
    
   This document proposes a method to enhance the scalability of link 
   state interior gateway routing protocols (IGPs). The proposed 
   solution is applicable to traditional link state routing protocols 
   such as OSPF [1]. The proposed solution is even more pertinent in 
   MPLS and GMPLS networks, where the IGP has been extended and 
   equipped with traffic engineering and GMPLS extensions.  
    
   The main idea behind the proposed approach is the reduction of a 
   single routing area into multiple Ùzonesˆ and the control of routing 
   information between the zones. With this approach, it is no longer 
   the case that network elements in the same routing area will 
   necessarily have an identical copy of the area link state database.  
   An important attribute of the zone concept is that it requires 
   minimal modifications to the existing IGPs. Another important 
   attribute is that it supports asymmetric exchange of routing 
   information between network elements in different zones. The 
   proposed approach also allows to: (1) decrease the size of the link 
   state database on each node, (2) restrict the amount of routing 
   information, (3) decrease the overhead associated with flooding, and 
   (4) decrease the complexity of path selection. 
    
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 2 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

   To make the discussions in this document concrete and practical, we 
   have used OSPF to illustrate the concepts. The solution is, however, 
   quite general and applies to other link state routing protocols, 
   such as ISIS, with very minor modifications.  
    
    
2.1 Background: Scalability of Interior Gateway Routing Protocols 
Context 
    
   Routing scalability is an important issue in operational networks. 
   This issue becomes even more acute with the advent of GMPLS, which 
   enables the use of IP routing protocols (after appropriate 
   extensions) for different types of transport networks.  
    
   The scalability of interior gateway routing protocols (IGPs) for IP 
   networks and other types of transport networks is a particularly 
   critical issue in operational networks, and is an important 
   requirement for major service providers. Yet, many aspects of this 
   issue have yet to be satisfactorily resolved. The most generic 
   approach to addressing the routing scalability problem is the 
   decomposition of a routing domain into multiple routing areas. This 
   approach has become an integral part of existing IGP routing 
   protocols such as OSPF [1]. Because the concept of routing areas by 
   itself is not sufficient to address all nuances of the routing 
   scalability problem, new improvements and workarounds have been 
   proposed [4, 5, 6]. The intention of virtually all of the proposed 
   solutions is to limit the amount of information advertised and to 
   limit the amount of information maintained and managed by each 
   routing engine on a network element. 
    
   There are many dimensions that demand consideration in attempting to 
   address the scalability of routing protocols. The main 
   manifestations of lack of scalability in routing protocols is 
   excessive consumption of CPU and memory resources on a network 
   element, and undue transaction of state information between network 
   elements to synchronize their routing databases. The transient 
   behavior of the routing protocol is another aspect that could also 
   have severe ramifications for scalability.  
    
   In the worst case, the impact of lack of routing protocol 
   scalability on the network itself can be devastating. In certain 
   circumstances, lack of scalability can result in severe instability 
   and a complete collapse of the network itself. Congestive collapse 
   of the routing system can also occur because of the duplication of 
   packet transmission inherent in the flooding mechanism [8]. In the 
   best case, lack of routing scalability can result in inefficient 
   network operation. Other manifestations of lack of routing 
   scalability include: long convergence time, large path computation 
   time, and slow forwarding time.    
    
   Path computation time is a function of the number of routes, the 
   size of the link-state database, the amount of traffic engineering 
   parameters, and the types of user preference associated with a 
   particular instance of the path computation process.  All recently 
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 3 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

   proposed solutions attempt to improve the routing scalability by 
   applying different algorithms to achieve one or more of the 
   following objectives: increase the number of SPF calculations [5], 
   avoid unnecessary flooding [6], restrict the   database information 
   exchange to only traffic-engineering link-state advertisements [4], 
   etc.  
    
   It is important to note that the most common operational network 
   scenario for link state routing protocols is a single area, which 
   encompasses the entire network. In many modern networks (especially 
   those utilizing MPLS or GMPLS), the single routing area will 
   implement the traffic engineering extensions  (for example [2]). In 
   such environments, the routing protocol disseminates the traditional 
   link state information as well as traffic engineering data and other 
   constraint information. Very large autonomous systems encompassing 
   entire continents containing only one routing area are in operation 
   today.    
    
   It is also important to note that the issue of multi-area traffic 
   engineering is an area in which the industry has not yet reached 
   consensus on an effective solution.  As an example, the classical 
   approach suggested in [1] of breaking the network into multiple 
   areas cannot be used to good effect.  
    
   A typical service provider network is built of network elements with 
   different capabilities, such as computational resources and memory.  
   Some of them (for instance, routers installed on metro networks) may 
   have more resources for keeping large databases and performing fast 
   forwarding and path computation than the other (for instance, 
   routers installed on access networks). 
    
   The solution proposed in this draft is to break a single link state 
   routing area into  Ùrouting zones.ˆ  Routers and other network 
   elements within the same zone maintain a synchronized topology state 
   database among themselves. This means that network elements within 
   the same zone receive full routing information (link-sate, traffic-
   engineering advertisements) from each other.  
    
2.2 The Zone Concept 
    
   The zone concept refers to a Ùsoftˆ partitioning of a routing area 
   into sub-domains, which allows to control the amount of routing 
   information exchange between the sub-domains in the area. The zone 
   concept also allows to decouple the advertisement of traditional 
   LSAs defined in the original OSPF specification ([1]) from the 
   advertisement of Traffic Engineering LSAs defined in the TE and 
   GMPLS extensions.  
    
   The zone concept allows grouping a collection of network elements 
   into a Ùzoneˆ which can be viewed as a single logical network 
   entity. Each zone is associated with one or more zone border routers 
   (ZBR). A ZBR exists at the boundary between a zone and the remainder 
   of the routing area exterior to the zone. That is, a ZBR has routing 
   IGP routing adjacencies with network elements within and outside the 
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 4 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

   zone. On the other hand, we say a network element is in the 
   Êinterior∆ of a zone if it maintains IGP routing adjacencies with 
   only network elements within its zone.  
    
   We define three types of routing visibility to support the zone 
   concept:  
    
     (1) full visibility,  
     (2) limited visibility, and  
     (3) zero visibility.  
    
   In the following discussion, when we say a Ùnetwork element,ˆ we 
   mean a network element participating in the link state routing 
   protocol.  
    
   To fix these ideas, let us consider two zones, say zone ÊA∆ and zone 
   ÊB∆. We say that network elements within zone ÊA∆ have Ùfull 
   visibilityˆ of zone ÊB∆ if the network elements participating in the 
   link state routing protocol in zone  ÊA∆ receive routing information 
   from all network elements in   zone ÊB∆.  
    
   We say that network elements within zone ÊA∆ have Ùlimited 
   visibilityˆ of zone ÊB∆ if they receive zero routing information 
   from network elements in the interior of zone ÊB∆, with the 
   exception of LSAs from one or more Zone Border Routers (ZBRs) at the 
   boundary between the two zones.  
    
   Lastly, we say that network elements within zone ÊA∆ have Ùzero 
   visibilityˆ of zone B if they receive zero routing information from 
   any router that belongs to zone B.  
    
   As a general concept, the notion of visibility defined above is not 
   symmetric. Thus, it may be the case that zone ÊA∆ can have limited 
   or zero visibility of zone ÊB∆, while zone ÊB∆ may have full 
   visibility of zone ÊA∆.  
    
   An immediate application of this concept in IP over circuit switch 
   networks occurs within the context of the peer and augmented models. 
   In such settings, some IP routers may have limited or full 
   visibility into the circuit switch network, but it may not be 
   beneficial for the circuit switch network elements to have full 
   visibility into the IP network.  
    
   Note, that routers within a given zone may have full visibility of 
   some zones while having limited or zero visibility of other zones. 
   For example, in an circuit switch network utilizing GMPLS, access 
   network elements within an Êaccess zone∆ may  have limited 
   visibility of a metro-area network zone and zero visibility of a 
   long-haul network zone, while metro-area network elements may have 
   full visibility of some access network zones and limited visibility 
   of a long-haul network zone. 
    
   This draft allows decoupling the advertisement of Êregular LSAs∆ 
   from the advertisement of traffic engineering LSAs∆. So that 
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 5 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

   different types of visibility can be applied with respect to 
   advertisement of regular LSAs and traffic engineering LSAs. For 
   example, routers within zone ÊA∆ may have full visibility of zone 
   ÊB∆ with respect to regular LSA advertisements, but limited or zero 
   visibility with respect to traffic engineering advertisements. The 
   nature of routing visibility (full, limited or zero) between two 
   zones can be asymmetrical, as noted earlier. This important 
   characteristic of the zone concept is certainly worth emphasizing.  
   For example, routers within zone ÊA∆ may have limited visibility of 
   zone ÊB∆, while routers with zone ÊB∆ may have full visibility of 
   zone ÊA∆.  
    
   Routing visibility between two zones ÊA∆ and ÊB∆ is configured on 
   ZBR(s) that belong(s) to both zones by limiting the flooding of the 
   routing information of certain types (regular link-state 
   advertisements, traffic-engineering advertisements, or both) through 
   ZBR interfaces connecting zone ÊA∆ and zone ÊB∆. ZBRs are 
   responsible for advertising themselves as default routes for network 
   elements within their zones, to support routing with zones that have 
   limited or zero visibility with respect to the target zone. 
    
   Transitive characteristics of zone visibility: If zone ÊA∆ is not 
   adjacent to zone ÊB∆ (i.e. no ZBRs in common), then we say that 
   network elements within zone ÊA∆ have full visibility of zone ÊB∆ if 
   they have full visibility of zone ÊC∆, which is adjacent to zone ÊA∆ 
   and have full visibility of zone ÊB∆. Otherwise, zone ÊA∆ has zero 
   visibility of zone ÊB∆.    This is an expression of the transitive 
   characteristics of zone visibility.  
    
 
                                   [---] 
                            -------[ B ]----------  
                           |       [---]          |                 
                           |                      |                  
                         [---]Limited Visibility [---] 
                         [ A ]     Zone1         [ C ] 
                         [---]                   [---] 
                           |       [---]          |                 
                            -------[ZBR]----------   
                            -------[---]---------- 
                           |                      | 
                         [---]  Full Visibility  [---] 
                         [ D ]     Zone          [ E ] 
                         [---]                   [---] 
                           |                      | 
                           |       [---]          |                 
                            -------[ZBR]----------   
                            -------[---]---------- 
                           |                      | 
                         [---]Limited Visibility [---] 
                         [ E ]     Zone2         [ F ] 
                         [---]                   [---] 
                           |                      | 
                           |       [---]          |                 
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 6 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

                            -------[ G ]----------   
                                   [---] 
                          
    
   In the example above routers A, B, C are within Limited Visibility 
   Zone1.  They contain full routing and traffic engineering 
   information about each other. However, the only information they 
   have about the rest of the network is the one that was generated by 
   the upper ZBR. Likewise, routers E, F and G are within Limited 
   Visibility Zone2. Routers D and E are within Full Visibility Zone. 
   They contain full routing and traffic engineering information about 
   all other routers in all zones. 
    
   The approach described in this draft is advantageous because it 
   allows controlling and decreasing the amount of routing information 
   and associated processing overhead on network elements. In some 
   types of network elements, it may also decrease convergence time and 
   boost the routing/forwarding performance.  The traffic engineering 
   capabilities also become more scalable because constraint-based path 
   selection, and tunnel setup and management can be distributed 
   between access network elements and ZBR(s). 
    
   This approach does not require changes to the routing protocol 
   packet format. And it is enough to have only ZBR(s) routers 
   supporting this feature. 
    
    
3. Proposed solution 
    
   A routing area may be divided into multiple zones by appropriately 
   configuring the interfaces of zone boarder routers (ZBRs). Each pair 
   of adjacent zones may be configured to have full or limited routing 
   visibility with each other. Each pair of adjacent zones may have one 
   or more ZBRs in common. Each ZBR in turn may have a number of 
   interfaces configured with one or more zone identifiers (zone IDs) 
   and flooding type. The flooding type indicates the type of routing 
   information that may be flooded across the interface. It may have 
   one of the following values: 
      . link-state advertisements only; 
      . traffic engineering advertisements only; 
      . both 
    
   The zone concept requires a slight modification to the OSPF Neighbor 
   state machine and flooding procedures [1]. The OSPF Neighbor state 
   machine defined in [1] should be amended as follows: 
    
   Ù10.3.  The Neighbor state machine 
   ‡ 
         State(s):  ExStart 
            Event:  NegotiationDone 
        New state:  Exchange 
           Action:  The router must list the contents of its entire 
   area link state database in the neighbor Database summary list. 
    
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 7 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

   If an interface associated with this neighbor is configured with 
   limited flooding option and one or more zone IDs, each non self-
   originated link-state and/or traffic engineering database entry must 
   be considered for inclusion into the Database Summary List according 
   to the following rule:   
      . non self-originated database entries must be included only if 
        they are received from incoming interfaces that have non-zero 
        overlapping list of zone IDs with the interface in question; 
      . self-originated entries must be included regardless of the 
        interface in question zone IDs; 
      . both self-originated and non self-originated database entries 
        that are disallowed to be distributed over the interface in 
        question by its configured flooding type MUST NOT be included; 
       
    Ù13.3. Next step in the flooding procedure 
     
   ‡ 
        Depending upon the LSA's LS type, the LSA can be flooded out 
        only certain interfaces.  These interfaces, defined by the 
        following, are called the eligible interfaces: 
   ‡ 
    
        When flooding an LSA, which has just been received, each 
        outgoing interface must be considered on whether it is eligible 
        outgoing candidate or not by comparing it∆s list of configured 
        zone IDs with one configured for the interface the LSA has 
        arrived on. The interface in question must be considered as 
        eligible outgoing candidate if all following conditions are 
        true: 
      . it has a non-zero overlapping list of zone IDs with the 
        incoming interface; 
      . this LSA type is allowed to be flooded over the interface in 
        question by its configured flooding type. 
    
    
   In every place in the protocol implementation, where a locally 
   originated Router LSA is needed to be flooded to a neighbor, the 
   following procedure should be performed:  
    
   For interfaces configured with one or more zone IDs and limited 
   flooding option the Default Route stub network link (0.0.0.0/0) must 
   be added to locally originated Router LSA. The Router LSA header 
   link number, length and checksum should be updated appropriately. 
    
   As a result of the described extensions routers within a particular 
   zone will receive the routing information only from routers within 
   the same zone and from other zones, which are fully visible from the 
   router. They will also receive Router LSAs originated on ZBRs that 
   belong to the zones, which the routers have limited visibility to 
   (these LSAs contain Default Route stub network links identifying 
   default routes that point to the ZBRs). They will receive no routing 
   information from routers within zones with zero routing visibility.   
    
4. Distributed Traffic Engineering across multiple zones 
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 8 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

    
   As a consequence of the flooding type definition (see 3.) the 
   limited visibility of a router to a particular zone may apply to: 
   a) link-state information; 
   b) traffic engineering information; 
   c) both. 
    
   If the router is presented with a request to establish a traffic 
   engineering tunnel that should go through one or more zones with the 
   limited traffic engineering visibility, the path selection and 
   tunnel setup is performed in the distributed way. Specifically, the 
   originating router can define a path for the tunnel and signal the 
   tunnel only up to one of ZBRs of a limited visibility zone towards 
   the destination. Note, that routers learn about ZBRs via Default 
   Route stub network links (0.0.0.0/0) found in received Router LSAs. 
   When the setup message arrives on the ZBR, it repeats the process. 
   Specifically, it defines the path and signal the tunnel either to 
   the destination or to ZBR of next zone towards the destination 
   depending on whether the destination is located in the zone fully 
   visible from the computing ZBR or not. This process completes when 
   the tunnel is established. 
    
   If a router has full visibility towards the tunnel destination as 
   far as link-state information is concerned, but has the limited 
   traffic engineering visibility, it can use the full link-state 
   visibility while deciding which ZBR to forward the tunnel setup 
   message to in case he knows about more than one. 
    
5. Topological Considerations Relating to Zones 
    
   It may be necessary to impose some topological restrictions on the 
   connectivity of zones within a routing area, especially for 
   traditional hop by hop routing. Such restrictions are necessary to 
   in order to avoid routing anomalies such as blackholes and routing 
   loops.  
    
   For getting end-to-end routing connectivity and avoiding black 
   holes, some central (core) zone should be configured with full 
   visibility. Hierarchical configured zones don∆t have to have direct 
   connectivity to this core zone. 
    
6. Example Network 
    
                 
                                +--------------+ 
                                |    Zone A    | 
                                +--------------+     
                                 */LF-Z1     *\ LF-Z2 
                                */          *\ 
                               */             *\ 
                         +---------+             +---------+  
                         |  Zone B |             |  Zone X |  
                         |        |             |         |  
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 2003 9 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

                         +---------+             +---------+  
                      LF-Z3 */  \ LF-Z4       LF-Z5 / *\ LF-Z6  
                         */    \                 /   *\      
                   +--------+ +--------+    +--------+ +--------+    
                   | Zone C | | Zone D |    | Zone Y | | Zone Z |    
                   |    X   | |       |    |        | |       |  
                   +--------+ +--------+    +--------+ +--------+   
    
    
    
   The above figure provides an example topology consisting of seven 
   (7) zones. While not a requirement, a likely configuration of zones 
   will be aligned with some topological or geographic regions. For 
   example, zone A may map to a network backbone, zones B and X may map 
   to local (interconnected) POPs, and zones C, D, Y and Z may map to 
   separate access networks.  In such a configuration, the zones could 
   operate in the following fashion: 
    
      . the zones C, D, Y and Z, have a limited visibility of directly  
        attached zones, i.e., B and X respectively; 
      . the zones  B and X have full visibility of directly attached 
        zones C, D, Y and Z, while having a limited visibility of zone 
        A; 
      . zone A has a full visibility of the directly connected zones B 
        and X, and therefore also a full visibility of the subtending 
        zones C, D Y and Z (and thus, becoming a backbone zone for the 
        whole network) 
    
   This example network can support both standard IP forwarding as well 
   as MPLS Label Switch Paths (LSPs).  To illustrate, consider an LSP 
   terminating at endpoints at zone C (router C) and zone Y (router Y).  
   Since, router C does not have information about router Y, it will 
   route the LSP to ZBR of the directly attached zone (A, router LF-
   Z3). Since router LF-Z3 does not have information about router Y, it 
   too will route the LSP to the ZBR of the directly zone (A, router 
   LF-Z1). Lastly, since router LF-Z1 has full information about all 
   routers on the network, it calculate a complete route for remaining 
   portion of the LSP. 
    
7. Compatibility Issues 
    
   There should be no interoperability issues with routers and other 
   network elements utilizing OSPF that do not implement this proposal. 
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   This document does not raise new security issues beyond those that 
   exist in OSPF with traffic engineering and GMPLS extensions. The 
   method described in this document can actually enhance security 
   because it can be used to block certain types of routing data from 
   being advertised to a subset of network elements.  
    
9. References 
      
  
   Dovolsky, Bryskin, Awduche                       Expires May 200310 

     draft-dovolsky-ccamp-ospf-limited-flooding-01.txt    November 2002 

     [1] Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April 1998. 
      
     [2] Katz, D., D. Yeung and K. Kompella, "Traffic Engineering        
   Extensions to OSPF", work in progress. 
      
     [3] Coltun, Rob, "The OSPF Opaque LSA Option", RFC 2370, FORE 
         Systems, July 1998. 
    
     [4] Venkata Naidu, "OSPF TE Only Option", draft-venkata-ospf-te-
   only-option-00.txt, April 2002. 
    
     [5] A. S. Maunder, G. Choudhury, "Explicit Marking and Prioritized 
   Treatment of Specific IGP Packets for Faster IGP Convergence and 
   Improved Network Scalability and Stability", <draft-ietf-ospf-
   scalability-00.txt>, March, 2001. 
    
     [6] Alex Zinin, Mike Shand, "Flooding optimizations in link-state 
   routing protocols", <draft-ietf-ospf-isis-flood-opt-01.txt>, March 
   2001. 
    
    [7] Yong Xue at all, "Carrier Optical Services Requirements", 
   <draft-ietf-ipo-carrier-requirements-01.txt>, March, 2002. 
    
   [8] Ash et al, ÙCongestion Avoidance and Control for OSPF 
   Networks,∆∆ <draft-ash-manral-ospf-congestion-control-00.txt>,  
   April 2002. 
 
10. Acknowledgements  
    The authors of this document would like to acknowledge the valuable 
   inputs from Lou Berger. 
 
11. Author's Addresses 
    
   Dan Dovolsky 
   Movaz Networks 
   7926 Jones Branch Dr., Suite 615 
   McLean, VA 22102 
   Phone: (703)847-2438 
   Email: ddovolsky@movaz.com 
    
   Igor Bryskin 
   Movaz Networks 
   7926 Jones Branch Dr., Suite 615 
   McLean, VA 22102 
   Phone: (703)847-4208 
   Email: ibryskin@movaz.com 
 
   Daniel Awduche 
   Isocore Corporation 
   8201 Greensboro Drive, Suite 102 
   McLean, VA 22102 
   Phone: (703)298-5291 
   Email: awduche@awduche.com
