



Network Working Group                                    P. Resnick, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                  Episteme
Intended status: Best Current Practice                     27 March 2020
Expires: 28 September 2020


           Variances to Provisions of Best Current Practices
                       draft-resnick-variance-00

Abstract

   From time to time, there are unforeseen circumstances which make
   following the requirements of a Best Current Practice (BCP)
   untenable, or where the procedures described in the BCP gives no
   guidance.  This document defines a process for the IETF to grant a
   variance to any IETF process for a single use or of very short
   duration.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 September 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.



Resnick                 Expires 28 September 2020               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Variances                     March 2020


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  The Variance Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Exclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

1.  Introduction

   The Best Current Practice (BCP) document series, among other things,
   defines the operations, policies, and processes of the IETF.  From
   time to time, there are unforeseen circumstances which make following
   the requirements of a BCP untenable, or where the procedures
   described in the BCP gives no guidance, yet the BCP gives no latitude
   for anyone in IETF leadership to simply call for a variance to the
   procedure.  RFC 2026 section 9 [RFC2026] describes a variance
   procedure for the IETF Standards Process, but the result of the
   variance is a published BCP, which is often inappropriate for a one-
   off or short-lived variance.

   This document defines a process for the IETF to grant a variance to
   any IETF process in cases where publishing an RFC in the BCP series
   is inappropriate because the variance is for a single use or of very
   short duration.  This variance procedure is modeled on the variance
   procedure described in RFC 2026 section 9 [RFC2026].

2.  The Variance Procedure

   Upon the recommendation of an IETF Working Group or an ad hoc
   committee of IETF participants, the IESG may craft a variance to any
   BCP requirement via the following procedure.  In approving a
   variance, the IESG must first determine that the likely benefits to
   the Internet community are likely to outweigh any costs to the
   Internet community that result from noncompliance with the
   requirements of the BCP in question.  In exercising this discretion,
   the IESG shall at least consider (a) the merit of waving the
   provision of the BCP in question, (b) the possibility of achieving
   the goals of the BCP provision without granting a variance, (c)
   alternatives to the granting of a variance, (d) the collateral and
   precedential effects of granting a variance, and (e) the IESG's
   ability to craft a variance that is as narrow as possible.  In
   determining whether to approve a variance, the IESG has discretion to
   limit the scope of the variance to particular parts of the BCP in
   question and to impose such additional restrictions or limitations as
   it determines appropriate to protect the interests of the Internet
   community.



Resnick                 Expires 28 September 2020               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Variances                     March 2020


   The proposed variance must detail the problem perceived, explain the
   precise provision of the BCP in question which is causing the need
   for a variance, and the results of the IESG's considerations
   including consideration of points (a) through (d) in the previous
   paragraph.  The proposed variance shall be issued as an Internet
   Draft.  The IESG shall then issue an extended Last-Call, of no less
   than 4 weeks, to allow for community comment upon the proposal.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the proposed variance, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  If the variance
   is approved, it shall be published on the IETF web site in a place
   designated for such variances.

3.  Exclusions

   This variance procedure is for use when a one-time waving of some
   provision of the BCP in question is felt to be required.  In no event
   shall the waiver remain in place for longer than one year.  Permanent
   changes to the BCP in question shall be accomplished through the
   normal BCP process.

   No use of this procedure may lower any delays for community
   notifications, nor exempt any procedure from the requirements of
   openness, fairness, or consensus, nor from the need to keep proper
   records of the meetings and mailing list discussions.

4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, DOI 10.17487/RFC2026, October 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2026>.

Author's Address

   Peter W. Resnick (editor)
   Episteme Technology Consulting LLC
   503 West Indiana Avenue
   Urbana, IL 61801-4941
   United States of America

   Phone: +1 217 337 1905
   Email: resnick@episteme.net
   URI:   https://www.episteme.net/




Resnick                 Expires 28 September 2020               [Page 3]
