

SIPPING                                                        D. Petrie
Internet-Draft                                             Pingtel Corp.
Expires: April 17, 2004                                 October 18, 2003


                          SIP Transfer Issues
                draft-petrie-sipping-xfer-issues-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Transfer features in SIP have been enabled via the REFER method  and
   Replaces header.  These constructs have been around for a while now
   with stable definitions for how they work.  However, there appear to
   be a small set of edge cases and requirements that are not yet
   satisfied.  This draft attempts to define some of those cases and
   requirements.  This is intended to spark discussion to whether these
   are legitimate requirements on which further standards work is
   appropriate.








Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1   Definitions of Transfer Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2   Requirements Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.1   Consultative Transfer to Lost Target . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2   Consultative Transfer User Experience  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2.1 Consultative Call Prompting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2.2 Consultative Turned Blind Double Ring  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.3   Gateway Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.3.1 Coerce Gateway Hairpins to the Same Gateway  . . . . . . . .  6
   2.3.2 Consultative Turned Blind Gateway Glare  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.4   Common Implementation Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   2.4.1 Consultative with Single Line UA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   2.4.2 Consultative Turned Blind Cancel Issues  . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.    Solutions and Directions to Consider . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.1   Use of Option Tokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.2   New Header for Related Dialog  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.3   Transfer on the TDM Side of Gateways . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.4   Transfer on the TDM Side of Gateways . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.5   New Header for Actors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.6   Use a Target URI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.7   Disallow Transition from Consultative to Blind Transfer  . . 11
   3.8   Continue Ringing after CANCEL of Consult . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   A.    Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 14





















Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


1. Introduction

   Transfer features in SIP [RFC3261] can be accomplished using the
   primitives based upon the REFER method [RFC3515] and the Replaces
   header [I-D.ietf-sip-replaces] as described in
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-cc-transfer].  Further examples of the signaling
   involved in transfer are demonstrated in
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-service-examples].  There are a few problems which
   come up in the field that are not obviously solvable by these
   constructs.  In this draft some of the requirements and problems are
   described so that they can be categorized as: solved by existing
   protocol, implementation issues, desirable to solve with new
   protocol, or not a requirement desirable to solve.  Also an attempt
   was made to propose some directions that can be pursued in fulfilling
   these requirements.

1.1  Definitions of Transfer Terminology

   transferor - the user agent initiating the transfer.

   transferee - the user agent to be transferred to the third party.

   transfer target - the third party to which the transferee is to be
      connected.

   original call - the dialog between the transferor and the transferee
      which is setup before initiating the transfer.

   consultative call - the dialog between the transferor and the
      transfer target which is setup before completing the transfer.

   target call - the dialog between the transferee and the transfer
      target which is the final outcome of the transfer.

1.2 Requirements Terminology

   Keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT" and
   "MAY" that appear in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in RFC 2119[RFC2119].

2. Requirements

   The following define requirements, problems and issues seen in
   current transfer implementations.  Some of these simply reflect the
   need for a better understanding of how transfer
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-cc-transfer], REFER [RFC3515] and replaces
   [I-D.ietf-sip-replaces] should be used.  Others may require new
   application of existing protocol constructs.  Some may require new



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   protocol constructs.

2.1 Consultative Transfer to Lost Target

   In many cases of general call setup, the routing functions that
   determine how to route a SIP request to a target user agent are not
   static.  The routing may be influenced by the time of day, dialog
   state on the target, availability of the call agent, etc.  For this
   reason, SIP requests sent to the same address of record will not
   necessarily be routed to the same target user agent.  This causes a
   problem for consultative transfer.  The consultative INVITE is sent
   and the dialog is setup with the transfer target prime (TT').  When
   the consultation is complete the transferor (TC) sends a REFER to the
   transferee (TE).  The transferee in turn sends an INVITE with
   Replaces to the transfer target (TT).  The INVITE with Replaces does
   not land on the correct transfer target prime (TT') where the dialog
   in the Replaces header matches.  The transfer target (TT) then
   according to [I-D.ietf-sip-replaces] sends a 481 and thus the
   transfer fails.  What is really needed is a globally routable means
   for the transferor to address the correct target TT' in the Refer-To
   header of the REFER (which is used as the URI for the INVITE with
   Replaces).

   For a more concrete example (See Figure 1) assume that the transfer
   target (TT) is forwarding calls when busy to TT'.  When the
   consultative INVITE gets to the transfer target it is redirected via
   a 302 to TT'.  Note that a proxy (P) is inserted below to illustrate
   that the transferor (TC) may have no way of knowing that the
   consultative call was forwarded from TT to TT'.






















Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   TC           TE           P            TT           TT'
    <=talking=>

    ---I(hold)--->
    <---100,200---
    -----ACK----->
                                        (busy)
    --------I(consult)------->
                              -I(consult)->
                              <----302-----
                              -----ACK---->
                              -------I(consult)--------->
                              <-------100,180,200--------
    <-------100,180,200-------
    -----------------------ACK------------------------->

    <================(consultation)====================>

                                      (not busy)
   ----REFER--->
    <----202-----
                 -I(replaces)->
                              -I(replaces)->
                              <-----481-----
                 <----481-----
                 -----ACK---->
    <---N(503)---
    -----200---->

   Consultative Transfer to the Wrong Target

                                Figure 1


2.2 Consultative Transfer User Experience

   The following set of issues and requirements relate to undesirable
   user experiences in consultative transfer scenarios.

2.2.1 Consultative Call Prompting

   Currently when a transfer target receives a consultative call it
   looks like any other independent INVITE.  The user agent cannot give
   the user any sort of hint that this is related to a transfer or that
   it is a consultation.  At best a user answering the consultative call
   is presented with the caller ID of the transferor.  It would be
   desirable to improve this user experience.  For example it might be
   better to be able to provide the user on the transfer target with



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   information of the form: "Incoming consultation from: <transferor ID>
   with intent to transfer: <transferee ID>".  The transferee Id is not
   present in the consultative INVITE.

2.2.2 Consultative Turned Blind Double Ring

   In the consultative turned blind case the transfer controller
   initiates a consultative INVITE to the transfer target, sends a
   CANCEL and then a REFER (to the transferee) to perform the blind
   transfer.  This sometimes creates an awkward experience on the
   transfer target.  The consultative INVITE comes in and rings for a
   short period of time.  Then that call is CANCELed.  Afterwards the
   transferee receives the REFERred INVITE and starts ringing again.
   The transfer target hears the phone ring twice and may see two
   different caller Ids.  It is probably not desirable to change the
   signaling approach (i.e. INVITE, CANCEL, REFER) at this point.
   However if the transfer target user agent were given more hints as to
   what was going on, it could potentially hide the double ring and
   changing caller Ids.

2.3 Gateway Issues

   The following set of requirements relate to SIP signaling gateways
   (PSTN and others).

2.3.1 Coerce Gateway Hairpins to the Same Gateway

   To illustrate how a hairpin situation can occur in transfer, consider
   this example.  The original call dialog is setup with the transferee
   residing on the TDM side of a SIP gateway.  The transferor is a SIP
   phone purely in the IP space.  The transfer target is on the TDM side
   of a SIP gateway as well.  After completing the transfer, (regardless
   of consultative or blind) the transferee is in a call with the
   transfer target (both on the TDM side of a gateway).  It is often
   desirable to remove the gateway(s) out of the loop.  This is likely
   to only be possible if both legs of the target call are on the same
   gateway.  With both legs on the same gateway, it may be able to
   invoke the analogous transfer on the TDM side.  Then the target call
   would not involve the gateway.

   Gateway ports can be expensive or limited resources.  It is therefore
   desirable to keep their utilization to a minimum.  For example, in a
   hybrid situation a SIP to PSTN gateway may be used to extend the life
   of a TDM switch that is at its maximum for line and trunk cards.  The
   last few valuable trunk cards are used to glue in the gateway with
   the desire of using SIP (proxy, etc.) to get a higher density of
   utilization from the trunk lines.  A hairpin through the gateway
   consumes two ports that could be switched in the TDM switch, freeing



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   both gateway ports.  This is easier to accomplish if the hairpin is
   on the same T1.  It is certainly very difficult to accomplish if the
   hairpin is across two different gateways.  Even if the hairpin cannot
   be eliminated by being pushed to the other side of the gateway, there
   are other scenarios where coercing the two legs of a hairpin onto the
   same gateway is very desirable for network traffic optimization (e.g.
   avoiding the traffic in and out over two limited WAN connections if
   the gateways are at different sites.).

   So the problem is how to give the proxy enough information so that it
   knows to route the call to the same gateway.  With a simple single
   call that hairpins, the incoming and outgoing leg have the same
   dialog.  The proxy should have enough information to optimize the
   routing.

   In the consultative transfer scenario, it is desirable to coerce the
   consultative INVITE out the same gateway as the original call to be
   transferred.  However there is no way to relate the consultation with
   the original call.  In the consultative case the target call INVITE
   includes the Replaces header which contains dialog information that
   can be used to relate it to the consultation.  However there is no
   information that relates the target call to the original.

   In the blind transfer scenario, it is desirable to coerce the target
   call onto the same gateway as the original call.  However the same
   problem exists in that the target dialog cannot be related to the
   original dialog.

   In either transfer scenario, it may be desirable to push the transfer
   operation onto the non-SIP side of the gateway.  Presumably this is
   not possible unless all of the legs go out the same gateway.  If the
   gateway supports more than one truck group, it might also be
   necessary to get all of the legs on the same trunk group in order to
   perform the transfer on the non-SIP side of the gateway.

2.3.2 Consultative Turned Blind Gateway Glare

   In the consultative transfer case turned blind, there is a glare-like
   problem.  The transferor initiates the consultation INVITE, the user
   gets impatient and hangs up, transitioning this to a blind transfer.
   The transfer target on the gateway (connected through a TDM switch to
   a single line or dumb analog phone) rings.  The user answers the
   phone just after the CANCEL is received by the transfer target.  The
   REFER and INVITE for the target call are sent.  The transferee
   attempts to setup the call on the TDM side, but gets either a busy or
   lands in the users voicemail as the user has the handset in hand and
   off hook.




Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   In this scenario the simplest requirement, might be to disallow
   consultative transfer.  An alternative requirement might be to
   disallow the transition from consultative to blind transfer.  Either
   way the transferor needs to know ahead of time what the transfer
   target can and cannot do.

2.4 Common Implementation Issues

   The following are mostly implementation oversights or
   misunderstandings that are commonly seen in the field and at SIPit
   events.  These are just a few examples. Transfer is very complicated
   and too few implementations get it right or are robust.  The
   robustness problem is probably largely due to the number of points of
   failure.  In the consultative case there are three dialogs among
   three user agents and it takes 8 or more transactions to complete it
   all. Each transaction can fail for various reasons, etc.

   [Should these be here at all?  Is it worth writing these up into a
   more expanded list in the next revision?]

2.4.1 Consultative with Single Line UA

   Some SIP user agents only support blind transfer.  This may be
   because the user agent only supports a single dialog or line or it
   may simply be a business decision.  The problem is that this is not
   typically discovered until the INVITE with Replaces header is sent.
   This is probably more a best current practices issue rather than a
   protocol issue.  If in the consultative INVITE, the transferor
   includes a Requires header with the "replaces" token in the value AND
   the transfer target correctly observes the Requires header, this
   would not be a problem.  The transferor would get a 420 Bad Extension
   response.  It could then try a blind transfer using REFER.

2.4.2 Consultative Turned Blind Cancel Issues

   Two common mistakes are made when a consultative transfer transitions
   to a blind transfer.  Some implementations of the transferor do not
   send a CANCEL.  They try to use Replaces to replace the early dialog.
   This is documented in Replaces [I-D.ietf-sip-replaces] as not
   supported because it just does not work.  You cannot reliably replace
   a dialog on the user agent server side because (due to forking )it is
   a moving target.

   The other common mistake is to not wait for the outcome of the
   CANCEL. The transferor MUST CANCEL the consultative INVITE, wait for
   the CANCEL to succeed, then send the REFER without Replaces.  If the
   CANCEL fails (as the dialog was setup with a 200 response), the
   transferor can then send the REFER with Replaces as the consultative



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   call is no longer an early dialog.

3. Solutions and Directions to Consider

   This section contains some initial thoughts on ways to resolve the
   requirements in Section 2.

   The following are at least preliminary approaches to resolving the
   requirements identified in this draft.  They are mostly independent
   and can be used separately or all together.  These solutions are not
   intended to be complete.  The descriptions are here for discussion on
   how to proceed.

3.1 Use of Option Tokens

   Applicable to: Section 2.2.2, Section 2.3.1, Section 2.3.2, Section
   2.4.1

   In the consultative INVITE, the transferor MUST put the replaces
   token in the Requires header.  In common practice this is often not
   done.  Even if it was used in practice, it is probably not sufficient
   to completely solve the double ring (see Section 2.2.2) and gateway
   glare (see Section 2.3.2) problems.  It will allow a gateway or user
   agent acting as the role of transfer target to say "I do not want to
   perform a consultative transfer".

   Often the only problem or limitation is the troublesome transition
   from consultative to blind transfer.  To avoid restricting the use of
   a pure consultative transfer, one could instead restrict the use of
   the transition from consultative to blind.  This can be accomplished
   by creating a new options token consult2blind.  The transferor MUST
   put this token in the Requires header if it allows the user to back
   out of the consultation and transition to a blind transfer.

3.2 New Header for Related Dialog

   Applicable to: Section 2.2.2, Section 2.2.1, Section 2.3.1

   Create a new header 'Related' to generally relate a request to
   another dialog.  Create tokens for that header that define the type
   of relationship between the message containing the Related header and
   the referenced dialog.  The syntax specifies a dialog similar to the
   Replaces [I-D.ietf-sip-replaces] syntax.  However the Related header
   specifies a relationship as opposed to a specific operation as the
   Replaces header does.  In addition the relationship is abstract for
   the header and specified by the relationship token.





Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   "Related" HCOLON relation SEMI dialog-param *(SEMI generic-param)
   relation        = ("consult" / token)
   dialog-param    = callid SEMI to-param SEMI from-param
   to-param        = to-tag / early-flag
   tfrom-param     = from-tag / early-flag
   to-tag          = "to-tag" EQUAL token
   from-tag        = "from-tag" EQUAL token
   early-flag      = "early-only"

   Example:
   Related: consult; 8719100197@10.1.1.123; to-tag=98748; from-tag=99173


   In the context of transfer this can be used to relate the
   consultative INVITE request with the original dialog between the
   transferor and the transferee.  This is useful to the transfer
   target's user agent.  The consultative INVITE should contain the
   Related header with the consult token and the dialog information of
   the original call.  In the gateway context it is useful to the
   location server in deciding which gateway to route the request to.
   The location server can use the dialog package
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-dialog-package] or any maintained call state to
   find which gateway is currently servicing the original call and
   attempt to use the same gateway for the consultation and target
   calls.  This also has the side effect of specifying that this INVITE
   is a consultation.

3.3 Transfer on the TDM Side of Gateways

   A proposal exists for conveying trunk group information
   [I-D.ietf-iptel-trunk-group].  This may be useful in helping to get
   all of the legs in the transfer on to the same gateway and trunk
   group.

3.4 Transfer on the TDM Side of Gateways

   By putting all of the TDM legs of the transfer parties on the same
   gateway and providing the gateway with the ability to disallow
   consultative transfer, it should be possible to perform the transfer
   on the TDM side.  The consultative dialog can be disallowed by the
   gateway as described in Section 3.1.  All of the transfer dialogs can
   be associated by the gateway as described in Section 3.2.  This also
   gives the gateway enough information to selectively decide when to
   disallow consultative transfer (i.e. if it knows it has one leg of
   the original call related to the consultation).  This also assumes
   the gateway location service has dialog state awareness of the
   original transfer dialog and can route the consultation to the same
   gateway.  If the gateway uses more than one trunk group it may be



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   necessary to apply [I-D.ietf-iptel-trunk-group] as well to get all of
   the TDM legs of the transfer out the same trunk group.

3.5 New Header for Actors

   Applicable to: Section 2.2.2, Section 2.2.1

   Create a new header to relate address of records outside of a dialog.
   Create named tokens to label the type of relationship of the AOR to
   this dialog or transaction. This could be thought of as a general
   purpose Referred-By header [I-D.ietf-sip-referredby].  This is useful
   in the consultative INVITE request to allow the transferor to say
   this consultation is with regards to transferring the given AOR who
   is the transferee.

   "Actor" HCOLON acttoken SEMI name-addr *(SEMI generic-param)
   acttoken = "transferee" / token

   Example:
   Actor: transferee; Joe Transferee<sip:joe@example.com>


    This syntax could be combined with that in Section 3.2.  However
   they seem more broadly applicable to other SIP features if they are
   useable independently.

3.6 Use a Target URI

   Applicable to: Section 2.1

   Create a transfer target URI analogous to the Conference URI in
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-cc-conferencing].  This URI needs to be globally
   routable such that the transferor and the transferee (potentially in
   different domains) can both reach the transfer target via the URI.
   The URI must be unique to the consultative dialog residing on the
   transfer target. It cannot be the same for other dialogs (early or
   established) created as a result of the consultation.

3.7 Disallow Transition from Consultative to Blind Transfer

   Applicable to: Section 2.2.2, Section 2.3.2

   A more drastic approach to the problems associated with transitioning
   from consultative to blind transfer would be to simply disallow it
   completely.  This would require that the transferor hang on to and
   complete the consultation dialog until it was setup or failed.  This
   might make it impossible for some user agents to do consultative
   transfer due to limitations of having only one active dialog at a



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   time.  This solution does not seem very desirable from a market
   requirements and end user expectations perspective.

3.8 Continue Ringing after CANCEL of Consult

   Applicable to: Section 2.2.2, Section 2.3.2

   An implementation approach to solving some problems on the transfer
   target caused by the transition from consultative to blind transfer
   is to hold on to the resources on the far end a little longer.  That
   is, on a phone user agent, hold on to the ringer resource a little
   longer (e.g. 5 seconds) in the hopes that the blind transfer will
   come in that can be associated with the CANCELed consultation.  If it
   does, then the blind transfer INVITE gets the ringer resource -
   covering up the audio artifact that the consultation was CANCELed.
   In the case where a PSTN gateway is the transfer target, it could
   hold on to the PSTN resource in an analogous way to the ringer on the
   phone.

4. Security Considerations

   TBD

References

   [I-D.ietf-iptel-trunk-group]
              Gurbani, V., "Representing trunk groups in sip/tel Uniform
              Resource Identifiers  (URIs)",
              draft-ietf-iptel-trunk-group-00 (work in progress),
              November 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-referredby]
              Sparks, R., "The SIP Referred-By Mechanism",
              draft-ietf-sip-referredby-03 (work in progress), August
              2003.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-replaces]
              Biggs, B., Dean, R. and R. Mahy, "The Session Inititation
              Protocol (SIP) 'Replaces' Header",
              draft-ietf-sip-replaces-04 (work in progress), August
              2003.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-cc-conferencing]
              Johnston, A. and O. Levin, "Session Initiation Protocol
              Call Control - Conferencing for User  Agents",
              draft-ietf-sipping-cc-conferencing-01 (work in progress),
              July 2003.




Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   [I-D.ietf-sipping-cc-transfer]
              Sparks, R. and A. Johnston, "Session Initiation Protocol
              Call Control - Transfer",
              draft-ietf-sipping-cc-transfer-01 (work in progress),
              February 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-dialog-package]
              Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An INVITE Inititiated
              Dialog Event Package for the Session Initiation  Protocol
              (SIP", draft-ietf-sipping-dialog-package-02 (work in
              progress), July 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-service-examples]
              Johnston, A. and R. Sparks, "Session Initiation Protocol
              Service Examples", draft-ietf-sipping-service-examples-05
              (work in progress), September 2003.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2223]  Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Instructions to RFC Authors",
              RFC 2223, October 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler,
              "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [RFC3515]  Sparks, R., "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Refer
              Method", RFC 3515, April 2003.


Author's Address

   Daniel Petrie
   Pingtel Corp.
   400 W. Cummings Park
   Suite 2200
   Woburn, MA  02476
   US

   Phone: "Dan Petrie (+1 781 970 0111)"<sip:dpetrie@pingtel.com>
   EMail: dpetrie@pingtel.com
   URI:   http://www.pingtel.com/

Appendix A. Acknowledgments






Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document. For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.



Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            SIP Transfer Issues               October 2003


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.







































Petrie                   Expires April 17, 2004                [Page 15]

