


Individual Submission                                          J. Fenton
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status:  Experimental                         February 12, 2009
Expires:  August 16, 2009


                     DKIM Reputation Hint Extension
                  draft-fenton-dkim-reputation-hint-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 16, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Abstract

   This document defines an extension to the DomainKeys Identified Mail
   (DKIM) specification to provide an identifier that may be used as a



Fenton                   Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Reputation Hint             February 2009


   "hint" by reputation services using DKIM wanting to maintain
   reputation information at a finer level of granularity than that of
   the signing domain itself.


1.  Introduction

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) [RFC4871] defines a simple, low
   cost, and effective mechanism by which email messages can be
   cryptographically signed, permitting a signing domain to claim
   responsibility for the use of a given email address.  Message
   recipients can verify the signature by querying the signer's domain
   directly to retrieve the appropriate public key, and thereby confirm
   that the message was attested to by a party in possession of the
   private key for the signing domain.

   A frequently cited use for email authentication is that it provides a
   basis for associating a reputation with the entity claiming
   responsibility for the message.  One way to do this is to associate
   the reputation with the signing domain itself (the d= value in the
   DKIM-Signature header field).  However, many have expressed the
   desire to provide more fine-grained information to aid reputation
   maintainers and users in classifying their mail in a more detailed
   manner.

   Several use cases have been proposed for identifiers of this sort:

   o  A domain that supports multiple email addresses (personas) per
      user may want to apply the same label to all messages from that
      user so that an aggregate reputation of all of that user's
      messages may accrue.

   o  A domain with a mixture of premium accounts (for which they
      charge) and free accounts may want to label mail from those
      accounts differently because of the higher potential for abuse of
      the free accounts.

   o  A domain with a mixture of transactional and other mail may decide
      to label the transactional mail separately from the other mail
      because of the low potential of abuse for the transactional mail.

   One approach to convey this identifier is to encode this information
   into the signing identity ("i=" value) in the signature.  Since
   [RFC4871] does not explicitly say that the signing identity is an
   email address (although it specifies an email address-like syntax for
   this value), either the local-part or the subdomain of the i= value
   might be available to convey information to reputation systems.
   However, this approach does not indicate the intent of the signer



Fenton                   Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Reputation Hint             February 2009


   that these fields be used for accruing and looking up reputation
   information, and conflicts with other uses for the signing identity
   value, such as to denote an email address.

   Use of the reputation tag defined herein is entirely at the
   discretion of the verifier and any reputation algorithm or service
   that may be associated with the receive-side processing of the
   message.  Verifiers MAY ignore the tag entirely or MAY use the
   reputation tag value when provided by domains they judge to be
   reliable.

   In order to permit useful reputation accrual, the value of the
   reputation tag will typically need to be stable over a relatively
   long period of time.  The use of a tag which is independent of other
   identifiers (such as email address) supports this need by providing
   continuity, even when other identifiers change.

1.1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  DKIM-Signature r= Tag Specification

   In the ABNF below, the FWS token is inherited from [RFC5322] with the
   exclusion of obs-FWS.  The hyphenated-word token is inherited from
   [RFC4871] and the overall ABNF syntax is from [RFC5234].

   The following new tag/value pair is defined for the DKIM-Signature
   header field:

   r= Reputation hint (plain-text; OPTIONAL, default is null value).
      This tag is a hint which MAY be used by verifiers and reputation
      systems for classifying messages at a level of granularity finer
      than that of the signing domain.  The value of this tag is
      significant only to the signer.  Messages from the same signing
      domain (d= value) with equal r= values MAY be considered together
      when accruing and obtaining reputation information.  The r= value
      is significant only within a given signing domain; messages with
      equal r= values but different d= values MUST NOT be considered
      together unless information relating the domains is available
      through a trusted out-of-band mechanism.







Fenton                   Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Reputation Hint             February 2009


      ABNF:

          sig-r-tag    = %x72 [FWS] "=" [FWS] reputation-hint
          reputation-hint = hyphenated-word



3.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines a new tag specification for the DKIM-Signature
   header field, for which a registry is defined in [RFC4871] Section
   7.1.  Upon publication of this draft as an RFC, IANA is requested to
   add an additional tag specificiation, "r", citing this document as a
   reference.


4.  Security Considerations

   Like other information in DKIM-Signature header fields, the DKIM
   reputation hint is an assertion on the part of the signer of the
   message.  Since bad actors as well as good actors are able to sign
   messages with DKIM, it is important to consider how these tags might
   be abused.

   One thing a bad actor might seek to do is to diffuse an adverse
   reputation by encouraging reputation maintainers to accrue reputation
   on an extremely fine-grained basis.  There is some evidence that bad
   actors are already signing using domains registered for the purpose
   of diffusing reputation; the r= value makes it potentially easier to
   do that, since it can be changed without the overhead of registering
   a new domain.

   The best defense against this attack is to make use of the r= value
   in conjunction with some other indication that the d= domain uses
   this value with good intent.  This other indication could be in the
   form of an aggregate reputation for the signing domain as a whole, or
   in the form of an accreditation or other reliable out-of-band
   indication of the good intent of the signing domain's r= assertion.


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4871]  Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", RFC 4871, May 2007.



Fenton                   Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Reputation Hint             February 2009


   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.


Author's Address

   Jim Fenton
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   MS SJ-9/2
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134-1706
   USA

   Phone:  +1 408 526 5914
   Email:  fenton@cisco.com
   URI:
































Fenton                   Expires August 16, 2009                [Page 5]


