Network Working Group                                  Rahul Aggarwal
Internet Draft                                         Nischal Sheth
Expiration Date: January 2005                          Juniper Networks


            IS-IS TE Procedures for Learning Local Addresses


                draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt



Status of this Memo


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, and any
   of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC
   3668.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Abstract


   This document describes procedures that enable a router to populate
   its Traffic Engineering Database (TED), with local addresses of other
   routers, that are not advertised in IS-IS TE extensions. The only
   addresses belonging to a router that are advertised in IS-IS TE LSAs
   are the router's local addresses on links enabled for TE and the
   Router ID. The described procedures enable a router to compute
   traffic engineered MPLS LSPs to a given router's loopback and non-TE
   capable interface addresses.









draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt                         [Page 1]


Internet Draft   draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt       July 2004



1. Motivation


   In some cases it is desirable to setup, constrained shortest path
   first (CSPF) computed MPLS TE LSPs, to local addresses of a router
   that are not advertised in the TE LSAs i.e. loopback and non-TE
   interface addresses.


   For instance in a network carrying VPN and non-VPN traffic, its often
   desirable to use different MPLS TE LSPs for the VPN traffic and the
   non-VPN traffic. In this case one loopback address may be used as the
   BGP next-hop for VPN traffic while another may be used as the BGP
   next-hop for non-VPN traffic. Its also possible that different BGP
   sessions are used for VPN and non-VPN services. Hence two separate
   MPLS TE LSPs are desirable, one to each loopback address.


   However currently there is no defined procedure for a router to
   populate the TED with loopback or non-TE capable interface addresses
   of other routers. IS-IS TE extensions [IS-IS-TE] only advertise the
   router ID and the local addresses of TE enabled links, of a given
   router. Thus other routers in the network populate the TED only with
   these addresses.


   This document describes a procedure for populating the TED with
   loopback and non-TE interface addresses.



2. Proposed Solution


   The proposed solution is to use the local addresses learned from the
   IP Interface Address TLV [IS-IS] and the IPv6 Interface Address TLV
   [IS-IS-v6], to populate the TED. [IS-IS, IS-IS-v6] mandate including
   the IP(v6) Interface Address TLV in the IS-IS link state PDUs (LSP).
   This TLV contains a list of one or more IP(v6) addresses
   corresponding to one or more interfaces of the router which
   originates the LSP. Hence the local addresses that are not advertised
   in IS-IS TE extensions can be learned from the IP(v6) Interface
   Address TLV and used to populate the TED.


   Despite the mandatory requirement in [IS-IS] an existing
   implementation may not advertise the IP(v6) Interface Address TLV in
   its LSPs as the IP(v6) reachability information can be learned from
   the IP(v6) reachability TLVs defined in [IS-IS, IS-IS-v6]. Such an
   implementation will have to start advertising the IP(v6) Interface
   Address TLV in order to support the procedure described in this
   document.







draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt                         [Page 2]


Internet Draft   draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt       July 2004



3. Security Considerations


   This document does not introduce any further security issues other
   than those discussed in [IS-IS, IS-IS-v6, IS-IS-TE].



4. Acknowledgments


   We would like to thank Kireeti Kompella for his contribution to this
   work. We would also like to thank Mike Shand and Robert Raszuk for
   their comments.



5. Normative References


   [IS-IS]    "Intermediate System to Intermediate System Intra-Domain
               Routing exchange Protocol for use in Conjunction with the
               Protocol for Providing the Connectionless-mode Network
               Service (ISO 8473)", ISO 10589, 1992.


   [IS-IS-v6] C. E. Hopps, "Routing IPv6 with IS-IS",
              draft-ietf-isis-ipv6-05.txt.


   [IS-IS-TE] H. Smit, T. Li, "IS-IS extensions for Traffic
              Engineering", draft-ietf-isis-traffic-05.txt.


   [RFC]      Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.



6. Author Information



   Rahul Aggarwal
   Juniper Networks
   1194 North Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: rahul@juniper.net


   Nischal Sheth
   Juniper Networks
   1194 North Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: nsheth@juniper.net








draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt                         [Page 3]


Internet Draft   draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt       July 2004



7. Intellectual Property


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.



8. Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78 and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.















draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt                         [Page 4]


Internet Draft   draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt       July 2004



9. Acknowledgement


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































draft-raggarwa-isis-te-node-addr-01.txt                         [Page 5] 