


Authentication, Authorization and Accounting            Frank M. Alfano 
Internet Draft                                          Peter J. McCann 
Document: draft-alfano-aaa-qosreq-00.txt                      Tom Towle 
Expires: December 2003                                    Richard Ejzak 
                                                    Lucent Technologies 
                                                              June 2003 
    
    
                    Requirements for a QoS AAA Protocol 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. Internet-Drafts are 
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes requirements for a protocol that would 
   perform Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting for Quality-of-
   Service reservations.  This protocol would be used by elements along 
   the path of a given application flow to authenticate a reservation 
   request, ensure that the reservation is authorized, and to account 
   for resources used during the life of the application flow.  A QoS 
   AAA protocol should also support dynamic authorization of QoS as a 
   function of application and account state.  While we assume the 
   existence of some QoS reservation protocol to allow endpoints to 
   request QoS from network elements, complete requirements for such a 
   protocol are outside the scope of this document and a QoS AAA 
   protocol could be used to support more than one kind of reservation 
   protocol.  A QoS AAA protocol could be used between any bearer-level 
   network element that lies along the path of an application flow and 
   an application server that lies anywhere in the network, allowing for 
   a wide variety of flexible service deployment models. 
    
 
 
Alfano, McCann         Expires - December 2003               [Page 1] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................6 
   3. Term Definitions...............................................6 
   4. Generic Requirements on a QoS Reservation Signaling Protocol...7 
      4.1 Identity Information.......................................7 
      4.2 Flow Information...........................................7 
      4.3 Authentication Information.................................8 
   5. Generic Requirements on a QoS AAA Protocol.....................8 
      5.1 Inter-domain Support.......................................8 
      5.2 Identity-based Routing.....................................8 
   6. Requirements for QoS Authentication............................8 
      6.1 Authentication Check.......................................8 
   7. Requirements for QoS Authorization.............................9 
      7.1 Flow Information...........................................9 
      7.2 Application State Pointer..................................9 
      7.3 Dynamic Authorization......................................9 
      7.4 Bearer Gating..............................................9 
   8. Requirements for QoS Accounting...............................10 
      8.1 Accounting Records........................................10 
      8.2 Accounting Rules..........................................10 
      8.3 Sending Accounting Records................................10 
      8.4 Loss of Bearer Notification Requirements..................10 
      8.5 Accounting Correlation....................................11 
   9. Interaction with other AAA Applications.......................11 
   10. Use Scenario.................................................12 
      10.1 Bearer Gating............................................12 
      10.2 Loss of Bearer...........................................13 
   11. Security Considerations......................................13 
   12. Reference....................................................13 
   13. Author's Addresses...........................................14 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   To meet the quality-of-service needs of applications such as voice-
   over-IP, it will often be necessary to explicitly request resources 
   from the network.  This will allow the network to identify packets 
   belonging to such application flows and ensure that bandwidth, delay, 
   and error rate requirements are met.  By performing admission control 
   on individual flows, the network can avoid congestion and the 
   resulting high packet drop rates. 
    
   Not every network deployment requires explicit reservation: for 
   example, if the network resources are provisioned far in excess of 
   demand, there will never be any contention for those resources and 

 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 2] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   there will be no need to manage them with a reservation protocol.  
   Also, if the transport or application layers can provide self-
   correcting congestion control, it may be possible to operate the 
   network even with high utilization and still meet the QoS 
   requirements of the various applications.  However, when bandwidth is 
   expensive and must be carefully managed, such as in wide-area 
   cellular networks, and/or when applications and transport protocols 
   lack the capability or cannot be trusted to perform congestion 
   control, explicit reservation techniques are required.  Note that a 
   reservation protocol might be used regardless of the mechanisms used 
   to enforce QoS, e.g., IntSrv or DiffSrv. 
    
   A variety of protocols could be used to make a reservation request, 
   such as: 
    
            1. RSVP. 
            2. NSIS. 
            3. Link-specific means. 
            4. SIP/SDP. 
    
   The most obvious choice, RSVP [2], is the existing IETF-defined 
   reservation protocol.  For a variety of reasons, RSVP has not seen 
   widespread deployment as an end-to-end reservation protocol.  The new 
   Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS) work [3] currently being undertaken 
   may address some of these issues.  In the meantime, deployments such 
   as 3rd generation cellular networks are defining their own 
   reservation procedures: these include link-specific means, such as 
   the PDP Context Activation procedures of 3GPP [4,5] or the service 
   instance establishment procedures of 3GPP2 [6].  Also, these 
   procedures are often tightly coupled to the application, and in the 
   3GPP/3GPP2 IP Multimedia Core Network subsystems, one could even say 
   that the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [7] and Session 
   Description Protocol (SDP) [8] are being used to request resource 
   reservations from the network.  This tight coupling is in the form of 
   private interfaces between the bearer elements (GGSN, PDSN) and the 
   SIP application servers.  For example, when a first-hop wireless 
   router receives a request for radio-link QoS, it might interact with 
   the nearest SIP proxy to see if the request should be authorized. 
    
   There are several inter-related reasons that are often cited for the 
   tight coupling.  First, application knowledge is sometimes needed to 
   authorize the use of bearer resources; for example, a SIP-layer 
   application might authorize (and later, account for and charge) the 
   use of the bearer on behalf of a party other than the one requesting 
   it.  Also, the application server might enable/disable ("gate") the 
   bearer flow according to the high-level state of the call.  Second, 
   applications can often be enhanced if knowledge about the bearer is 
   available.  For instance, when a mobile node is suddenly disconnected 
   from the network, application servers can generate BYE messages to 
 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 3] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   terminate the call with the other party.  Also, application servers 
   implementing an emergency call might provide higher priority access 
   and might also require the bearer elements to provide location 
   information about the device being used to place the call.  Finally, 
   the operator may wish to correlate accounting records from the bearer 
   path with those from the application layer.  Such correlation might 
   be used to provide alternative billing or settlement with 3rd 
   parties. 
    
   Despite the advantages of closer coupling between application and 
   bearer, the use of private, local interfaces between SIP servers and 
   the bearer path leads to several disadvantages: 
    
      * Use of SIP servers other than the ones provided by the operator 
        becomes more difficult. 
      * Deployment of some new applications requires close coordination 
        with the network operator. 
      * It becomes impossible to handle mobility at the network layer 
        when a change in the bearer element point of attachment to the 
        Internet requires a change in the associated SIP server. 
      * Use of protocols other than SIP to establish sessions becomes 
        impossible. 
    
   All of these drawbacks can be viewed as a result of the conflict 
   between the SIP-based reservation architecture and the end-to-end 
   service model espoused by most Internet architects, which emphasizes 
   a narrow interface between application, transport, and network.  Any 
   widening of these interfaces must be done in a carefully controlled 
   way that preserves the openness, robustness, and flexibility of the 
   Internet.  Such interfaces must support inter-domain operation, 
   imposing no limitations on where application servers can be placed, 
   and allowing for a clean layering so as not to interfere with 
   network-layer functionality. 
    
   To meet the requirements of network operators while at the same time 
   preserving the best of the end-to-end Internet service model, we 
   propose that a AAA protocol be developed that can be used by bearer 
   elements to authenticate, authorize, and account for individual 
   application flows that require QoS.  A high-level picture of the 
   resulting architecture is shown in Figure 1. 
    
                                           






 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 4] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
                          +------+         +------+ 
                          | Subs |         |      | 
                          |  DB  |         |  AS  | 
                          |      |         |      | 
                          +---\--+         +---/--+ 
                               \              / 
                                \            / 
                               /-\----------/\ 
                           ////               \\\\ 
                         ||                       || 
                        |         AAA Cloud         | 
                         ||                       || 
                           \\\\               //// 
                               \-------+-----/ 
                                       | 
                                   +---+--+ 
               Application         |      | 
               Flow ===============+  BE  +==========>> 
                                   |      | 
                                   +------+ 
             Figure 1.  An architecture supporting QoS-AAA 
    
   Figure 1 depicts a bearer element through which application flows 
   need to pass, a cloud of AAA servers, a database containing 
   subscriber records, and an application server.  Here the term "AAA 
   Cloud" is used to refer to the network of AAA proxy/broker 
   arrangements that may be in place.  Also, note that there may be more 
   than one bearer element that needs to interact with the AAA cloud 
   along the path of a given application flow, although the figure only 
   depicts one for clarity.  Similarly, a given user may have subscriber 
   records stored in more than one place and might make use of multiple 
   application servers.  In the simplest case, bearer elements will 
   request authentication and authorization for QoS from the AAA cloud, 
   which will route the request to the home network and consult a static 
   subscriber record of the endpoint making the request and return a 
   grant/deny decision.  In more complex deployment models, the 
   authorization will be based on dynamic application state, so the 
   request must be authenticated and authorized based on information 
   from one or more application servers.  If defined properly, the 
   interface between the bearer element and AAA cloud would be identical 
   in both cases.  Bearer elements are therefore insulated from the 
   details of particular applications and need not know that application 
   servers are involved at all.  Also, the AAA cloud would naturally 
   encompass business relationships such as those between network 
   operators and third-party application providers, enabling flexible 
   intra- or inter-domain authorization, accounting, and settlement. 
    

 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 5] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   The remainder of this document outlines high-level requirements for 
   the QoS AAA protocol.  Section 3 defines some terms that are used in 
   subsequent discussion.  Section 4 describes a small number of generic 
   requirements on a QoS reservation protocol.  Section 5 gives generic 
   requirements for a QoS AAA protocol.  Section 6 gives requirements 
   specific to Authentication.  Section 7 gives requirements specific to 
   Authorization.  Section 8 gives requirements specific to Accounting.  
   Section 9 discusses the relationship of a QoS AAA protocol to other 
   AAA applications.  Section 10 gives an example use scenario.  
   Finally, Section 11 outlines some security considerations. 
 
 
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [9]. 
    
 
3. Term Definitions 
 
   Accounting Rules 
        An accounting rule is a collection of data that identifies one 
        or more IP flows and provides related information. An accounting 
        rule defines the accounting treatment such as on-line or off-
        line accounting. The data may also identify, for example, volume 
        or time based accounting, rating information, termination 
        actions for on-line accounting (e.g., drop or re-route packets), 
        record correlation identifiers, etc. 
      
   Application Server 
       An application server is a network entity that exchanges 
       signaling messages with an application endpoint.  It may be a 
       source of authorization for QoS-enhanced application flows.  For 
       example, a SIP server is one kind of application server. 
     
   Application Endpoint 
       An application endpoint is an entity in an end user device that 
       exchanges signaling messages with application servers or 
       directly with other application endpoints.  Based on the result 
       of this signaling, the endpoint will make a request for QoS from 
       the network.  For example, a SIP User Agent is one kind of 
       application endpoint. 
    
   Authorizing Entity 
       The authorizing entity is that entity responsible for 
       authorizing QoS for a particular application flow.  This may be 
       a home subscriber database or an application server. 
    
 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 6] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   Bearer Element 
       A bearer element is a network entity such as an IP router on the 
       path between two endpoints, through which IP packets belonging 
       to application flows pass. Note that only a subset of the bearer 
       elements along a path are required to process and authorize QoS 
       requests.  In a typical service provider scenario, the first-hop 
       router (NAS) will be required to play this role.  
 
   Subscriber Database 
       A Subscriber Database holds information related to network users 
       such as what services they have signed up for.  In particular, a 
       user may subscribe to QoS independent of any application, which 
       would enable authorization for QoS without consultation of an 
       application server. 
 
    Termination Actions 
       On-line accounting allows for the on-line accounting 
       authorization entity to terminate flows in real time. A 
       termination action defines the action to be taken by the bearer 
       element for the case where a flow has been terminated. For 
       example flow packets might be dropped, might be redirected, or 
       might be allowed to continue but not be counted. 
    
    
4. Generic Requirements on a QoS Reservation Signaling Protocol 
    
   While the details of a particular QoS signaling protocol are outside 
   the scope of this document, we do list here some generic requirements 
   that any QoS signaling protocol must meet in order to act as a front 
   end for a QoS AAA protocol. 
    
    
4.1 Identity Information 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST carry information sufficient to 
   identify an authorizing entity for a QoS request. 
    
   For instance, the identity may be represented as the NAI of a user or 
   FQDN of an application server. 
    
    
4.2 Flow Information 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST carry information sufficient to 
   identify the application flow(s).  However, the protocol MUST allow 
   flow information to be under-specified ("wild carded") in the case 
   when specific endpoints are not known at the time of resource 
   reservation. 
    
 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 7] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   Flow information would include elements such as IP addresses and port 
   numbers, so that intervening bearer elements can classify packets and 
   give them proper QoS treatment.  Also, the flow information would be 
   used when consulting the subscriber profile or application servers 
   for authorization decisions. 
    
    
4.3 Authentication Information 
    
   The QoS signaling protocol MUST be integrity protected. 
    
   For example, each message could carry a cryptographic message 
   authentication code to ensure that only valid requests are granted by 
   the network.  This is especially important when a user is being held 
   responsible for charges associated with a QoS session.  The 
   authentication information would be verified by the AAA 
   infrastructure before authorization is granted. 
    
    
5. Generic Requirements on a QoS AAA Protocol 
    
   In this section we list some high-level requirements that must be met 
   by any QoS AAA protocol 
    
    
5.1 Inter-domain Support 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support inter-domain operation where the 
   bearer elements, subscriber databases, and application servers can 
   each belong to different administrative domains. 
    
    
5.2 Identity-based Routing 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST route AAA requests to the authorizing 
   entity based on the identity information given in the QoS signaling 
   protocol. 
    
    
6. Requirements for QoS Authentication 
    
   In this section we list some QoS AAA requirements specific to 
   authentication. 
    
    
6.1 Authentication Check 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support verification of authentication 
   information present in QoS signaling messages. 
 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 8] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
    
    
7. Requirements for QoS Authorization 
    
   In this section we list some QoS AAA requirements specific to 
   authorization. 
    
    
7.1 Flow Information 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST carry flow information to and from the 
   authorizing entity. However, the protocol MUST allow flow information 
   to be under-specified ("wild carded") in the case when specific 
   endpoints are not known at the time of initial resource 
   authorization. 
    
 
7.2 Application State Pointer 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST carry information sufficient for an 
   application server to identify the appropriate application session. 
    
   Note that this requirement might be met by the same mechanism as for 
   requirement 7.1, if flow information alone is sufficient to identify 
   an application session. 
    
 
7.3 Dynamic Authorization 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support dynamic authorization; that is, it 
   MUST be possible to push updates towards the bearer element(s) from 
   authorizing entities. 
    
   This requirement would support runtime changes to a subscriber 
   profile or application state transitions that would authorize/de-
   authorize application flows. 
    
    
7.4 Bearer Gating 
    
   Even though a given flow may be authorized, some applications may 
   want to toggle the flow on or off based on application state 
   transitions.  This control is called bearer gating.  In this case, a 
   capability separate from basic authorization must be provided, 
   because a negative authorization indication might lead to a failure 
   indication being passed during QoS signaling.  Such a failure 
   indication would mislead the endpoint into thinking that its request 
   had been denied when in reality the bearer flow was merely 
   temporarily disabled. 
 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003               [Page 9] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow the authorizing entity to gate 
   authorized application flows. 
    
 
8. Requirements for QoS Accounting 
    
   In this section we list some QoS AAA requirements specific to 
   accounting. 
 
 
8.1 Accounting Records 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST define QoS accounting records containing 
   duration or volume (bytecount) usage information, or both duration 
   and Volume usage information.  The records MUST also contain a 
   description of the QoS attributes (e.g., bandwidth, delay, loss rate) 
   that were supported for the flow. 
 
 
8.2 Accounting Rules 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow the authorizing entity to transfer 
   accounting rules that are applicable to specific flows. These rules 
   would define the on-line ("pre-paid") versus off-line ("post-paid") 
   nature of the accounting as well as convey other associated 
   parameters such as record identifiers, rating information, usage 
   quota, on-line termination actions, etc. 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow for accounting rules to be provided 
   at authorization time as well as to be pushed later as dynamic 
   updates. 
    
    
8.3 Sending Accounting Records 
    
   The bearer element MUST send accounting records for a particular 
   application flow to the authorizing entity for that flow or to 
   another entity identified by the authorizing entity. 
    
 
8.4 Loss of Bearer Notification Requirements 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST allow the bearer element to report loss of 
   bearer to the authorizing entity. 
    



 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 10] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
 
8.5 Accounting Correlation 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support the exchange of sufficient 
   information to allow for correlation between bearer accounting 
   records and application accounting records. 
    
   For example, an application server might create and pass an 
   accounting correlation identifier to the bearer element.  This 
   correlation identifier would be stored by the bearer element for 
   inclusion in subsequent accounting records.  This would allow the 
   home network to link the bearer accounting information with 
   application layer accounting records emitted by an application 
   server. 
    
    
9. Interaction with other AAA Applications 
    
   It is likely that an endpoint attached to a first-hop bearer element 
   was authenticated and authorized for basic, best-effort Internet 
   access prior to requesting any special QoS from the network.  If the 
   subscriber database for basic network access is the same as the one 
   containing a QoS subscription, it may be expeditious to define some 
   interactions between the AAA protocol used for basic access (e.g., 
   NASREQ [10]) and the one outlined here for QoS.  For example, it may 
   be useful to return some QoS-related attributes to the first-hop 
   bearer element at the time the endpoint is granted basic, best-effort 
   access.  This would allow for some future QoS requests to be granted 
   based on the cached profile, rather than requiring a round-trip to 
   the home subscriber database.  This gives rise to the following 
   requirement: 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST define a QoS profile that can be re-used in 
   other AAA applications. 
    
   Also, it may be useful to allow application servers to push QoS 
   authorization information to a bearer element prior to any explicit 
   request from the endpoint.  This could support application endpoints 
   that do not support an explicit QoS signaling mechanism.  In this 
   case, the authorization may be pushed via the home AAA server, which 
   presumably knows to which NAS the endpoint is currently attached.  
   Alternatively, the QoS AAA protocol may define some sort of 
   redirection facility that would allow application servers to send AAA 
   messages directly to selected bearer elements such as a NAS.  This 
   operation could be considered a special case of dynamic authorization 
   where no explicit request for QoS was made prior to the 
   authorization: 
    

 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 11] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   The QoS AAA protocol MUST support dynamic authorization initiated by 
   the authorizing entity. 
    
 
10. Use Scenario 
    
   This section provides an example use case for the proposed 
   application.   
    
   An application in a host computer (application endpoint) wants to 
   open a video session with a video server.  The application endpoint 
   and the video server negotiate the resources to be used for the 
   session and for which the application will be financially 
   responsible.  When negotiation of resources has completed, the video 
   server stores the resource information and assigns a session 
   identifier to the information that can be used as the primary key for 
   later information queries.  This identifier is passed to the 
   application endpoint.  
     
   The application endpoint makes a request for resources from the 
   bearer element.  The video server and the bearer element will verify 
   that the application endpoint has not requested more resources than 
   what were negotiated and for which the application has agreed to be 
   financially responsible.  To enable the authorization of the bearer 
   requested resources, the application endpoint passes the session 
   identifier received from the video server to the bearer element via 
   the QoS signaling protocol.  The bearer element makes a request to 
   the video server identified in the session identifier.  The video 
   server passes the relevant QoS state information to the bearer 
   element in an answer message, associating the origin host information 
   from the request with the state information stored by the video 
   server.  (This can then be used later for pushing information to the 
   bearer element.)  Included in the answer message is an accounting 
   correlation id to be included in all accounting messages from the 
   bearer entity. 
    
    
10.1 Bearer Gating 
    
   The video server can control the flow of packets on the bearer 
   element by sending packet flow gating information in the answer 
   message delivered for resource authorization.  If the flow of packets 
   is not immediately enabled, some event at the video server will 
   trigger the server to enable the flow.  The video server sends a 
   request containing flow gating information to the bearer element to 
   allow the flow of packets.  The bearer element returns the state of 
   the packet flow in the response message to the video server. 
    
    
 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 12] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
10.2 Loss of Bearer 
    
   The bearer element determines that bearer connectivity of the 
   application flow has been lost.  The video server needs this 
   information in order to take corrective action, charge appropriately, 
   and/or release resources associated with the session.  The bearer 
   element informs the video server of the loss of bearer in a request 
   message containing bearer state information.  The video server 
   acknowledges the request in an answer message.  The video server may 
   then issue a session abort request message to other network 
   functional entities. 
    
 
11. Security Considerations 
    
   The QoS AAA protocol whose requirements are given in this draft 
   assumes that a security relationship exists between the authorizing 
   entity (the home AAA server or application server) and the bearer 
   element (AAA client).  This relationship implies that the bearer 
   element should grant service based on the say-so of the authorizing 
   entity, presumably because the used resources will be paid for in 
   some later settlement phase.  The relationship may be direct or it 
   may be indirect via a AAA cloud consisting of brokers and proxies.  
   Each link in this chain of relationships MUST be secured to prevent 
   spoofed authorizations. 
    
   The authentication outlined in Section 6 MUST be cryptographically 
   strong and protected against replay and other attacks. 
    
   Once QoS resources have been authorized, it may be possible for an 
   unauthorized party to subvert them for its own use.  Steps MUST be 
   taken to bind the authorization to the actual flow of packets using 
   the QoS bearer in the bearer element.  Actual mechanisms applied to 
   the bearer traffic for this purpose might include, e.g., ingress 
   filtering and/or IPSec, but in general are beyond the scope of a QoS 
   AAA protocol. 
    
    
12. Reference
                     
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., Jamin, S., 
        "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional 
        Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 
    


 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 13] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
                                                                         
   [3]  Hancock, R., Freytsis, I., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., and 
        Van den Bosch, S., "Next Steps in Signaling: Framework", draft-
        ietf-nsis-fw-02.txt, March 2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
   [4]  3GPP TS 29.208, "End-to-end Quality of Service (QoS) Signaling 
        Flows", April 2003. 
    
   [5]  3GPP TS 29.207, "Policy control over Go interface", March 2003. 
    
   [6]  3GPP2 C.S0017-0 (also TIA IS-707-A), "Data Service Options for 
        Spread Spectrum Systems." 
    
   [7]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and Schooler, E., "SIP: 
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
    
   [8]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., Perkins, C., "SDP: Session 
        Description Protocol", draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-new-13.txt, May 
        2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
   [9]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [10]  Calhoun, P., Zorn, G., Spence, D., Mitton, D., "Diameter 
        Network Access Server Application", draft-ietf-aaa-diameter-
        nasreq-11.txt, February, 2003.  Work In Progress. 
    
    
13. Author's Addresses 
    
   Frank M. Alfano 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226L 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 979 7209 
   Email: falfano@lucent.com 
    
   Peter J. McCann 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-226R 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 713 9359 
   Email: mccap@lucent.com 
    


 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 14] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
   Thomas T. Towle 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 9C-229 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 979 7303 
   Email: ttowle@lucent.com 
    
   Richard Ejzak 
   Lucent Technologies 
   Rm 7H-245 
   1960 Lucent Lane 
   Naperville, IL  60563 
   Phone: +1 630 979 7036 
   Email: ejzak@lucent.com 
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   At the time of submission the authors are not aware of any 
   intellectual property rights that pertain to the implementation or 
   use of the technology described in this document.  However, this does 
   not preclude the possibility that Lucent Technologies, Inc. or other 
   entities may have such rights.  The patent licensing policy of Lucent 
   Technologies, Inc. is on file with the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
 


 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 15] 
                       Requirements for QoS-AAA              June 2003 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    






















 
 
Alfano et al.          Expires - December 2003              [Page 16] 