


Network Working Group                                     S. Jeong (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Intended status: Informational                             C. Vogt (Ed.)
Expires: May 22, 2008                                           Ericsson
                                                             R. Wakikawa
                                                         Keio University
                                                              M. Liebsch
                                                NEC Network Laboratories
                                                             S. Sugimoto
                                                                Ericsson
                                                             B. Sarikaya
                                                 Huawei Technologies USA
                                                       November 19, 2007


  Problem Statement and Requirements for Route Optimization in PMIPv6
                 draft-jeong-netlmm-pmipv6-roreq-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 22, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).





Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


Abstract

   This document provides the problem statement for route optimization
   in Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6).  It also investigates design goals and
   requirements for route optimization considering the characteristics
   of Proxy Mobile IPv6.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Application Scenarios for Route Optimization in Proxy
       Mobile IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Route Optimization in Proxy Mobile IPv6 Design Goals . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Low Protocol Complexity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Trust Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.3.  Security Aspect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.4.  Common Solution for IPv4 and IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.5.  Policy Control and Charging  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12























Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


1.  Introduction

   The Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) base protocol document specifies a
   network-based local mobility management protocol [1].  The Proxy
   Mobile IPv6 base protocol describes a mobility management solution
   without a mobile node's participation in mobility management related
   signaling process.  The Proxy Mobile IPv6 base document considers
   IPv6 home address mobility over IPv6 transport network.  The IPv4
   support document [2] extends the Proxy Mobile IPv6 base protocol in
   order to support IPv4 home address mobility and IPv4 transport
   network.

   The Mobile IPv6 [3] and Enhanced Route Optimization [5] specify route
   optimization procedures that allow a mobile node (MN) to register its
   binding information to a corresponding node (CN).  After the route
   optimization procedures, the correspondent node can directly send and
   receive packets from the mobile node's care-of address.

   In Proxy Mobile IPv6, packets originated from or sent to a mobile
   node are routed through bidirectional tunneling between Mobile Access
   Gateway (MAG) and Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) by default, so packets
   from/to the mobile can be delivered through longer path than the
   optimized route, especially when the mobile node and a correspondent
   node are in topologically close location and local mobility anchor is
   away from the mobile node.  Hence, route optimization is useful, when
   Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain spans large area.


2.  Terminology

   Terminology used in this document is taken directly from [1].


3.  Problem Statement

   Conventional route optimization mechanisms in Mobile IPv6 [3][5]
   assume no prior configuration and no trust relationship between route
   optimization process participants, i.e., mobile node and correspond
   node [4].  However, Mobile IPv6 route optimization mechanisms may not
   be directly applicable to Proxy Mobile IPv6 because of the following
   Proxy Mobile IPv6 characteristics.

   o  Since a mobile node is kept completely agnostic on its topological
      location (i.e., care-of address), basically it is not possible for
      the mobile node to perform correspondent binding update.






Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


   o  Unlike Mobile IPv6, a mobile node does not participate in binding
      management procedures and signaling is contained within the
      network entities in Proxy Mobile IPv6.  Hence, the mobile node
      cannot perform binding registration to a correspondent node and
      intermediate nodes in the network should do route optimization
      procedures on behalf of the mobile node.  However, since network
      entity, such as mobile access gateway, is intermediate entity of
      MN-CN communication, it does not seem to be easy to trigger Mobile
      IPv6 route optimization.

   o  In Mobile IPv6, a correspondent node validates whether a mobile
      node is reachable through the mobile node's home address and
      care-of address and sets up trust relationship between the two
      nodes.  However, the correspondent node cannot establish trust
      relationship with a mobile node in Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain,
      because the reachability test is not applicable.


4.  Application Scenarios for Route Optimization in Proxy Mobile IPv6

   Since route optimization requires support on the side of a
   correspondent node, application scenarios for route optimization can
   be separated into the following three:

   (1) The correspondent node supports (host-based) Mobile IPv6 [3] and
       handles route optimization itself.

   (2) Route optimization support on the correspondent node side is
       handled by Proxy Mobile IPv6 in the correspondent host's network.

   (3) Route optimization in Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain supporting IPv4
       and IPv6.


   Application scenario (2) can furthermore be subdivided to reflect the
   relative topological location of mobile and correspondent hosts:

   (2a)   On the same mobile access gateway

   (2b)   On different mobile access gateways, but the same local
          mobility anchor

   (2c)   On different mobile access gateways and different local
          mobility anchors from the same Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain







Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


   (2d)   On different mobile access gateways and different local
          mobility anchors from different Proxy Mobile IPv6 domains


   Application scenario (3) can furthermore be subdivided based on IPv4
   support cases:

   (3a)   The mobile node and the correspondent node support IPv4 home
          address mobility

   (3b)   The mobile node and the correspondent node belong to different
          mobile access gateways and both mobile access gateways support
          IPv4 transport to the same local mobility anchor

   (3c)   The mobile node and the correspondent node belong to different
          mobile access gateways and the mobile access gateways support
          different IP version transport to the same local mobility
          anchor

   (3d)   Two local mobility anchors have either IPv4 or IPv6 when the
          mobile node and the correspondent node anchored to different
          local mobility anchor


5.  Route Optimization in Proxy Mobile IPv6 Design Goals

   This section investigates the fundamental design goals which serve to
   identify requirements for route optimization solutions in Proxy
   Mobile IPv6.

   The function of route optimization is to enable the mobile node and
   the correspondent node to communicate through a path that is shorter
   (in terms of hop count) than the path chosen by base Proxy Mobile
   IPv6.  The benefit of this is a reduction in packet propagation
   delays, in bandwidth consumption and in congestion at local mobility
   anchor.

   The general design goals for route optimization solutions are to
   reduce handover latency, to provide security, and to require low
   signaling overhead [5].  Based on these fundamental route
   optimization design goals, this section describes special features
   and goals concerning route optimization design.  Route optimization
   in Proxy Mobile IPv6 have following unique properties to consider.

   Route optimization solutions should be designed so that the following
   design goals can be satisfied.





Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


5.1.  Low Protocol Complexity

   In the case of Mobile IPv6 route optimization, if route optimization
   is used, the mobile node and the correspondent node maintain the
   binding cache about the mobile node's home address and care-of
   address.  However, since mobility related signaling is exchanged
   between network entities in Proxy Mobile IPv6, it is expected that
   route optimization is also performed by the network entities.  Thus,
   route optimization will create state on the network.  Therefore,
   route optimization solutions should be secure, lightweight, and
   scalable.  Also, since route optimization participants are network
   entities, a mobile node and a correspondent node should not be aware
   of route optimization procedures.

5.2.  Trust Relationship

   In Mobile IPv6 route optimization, it is assumed that the mobile node
   and the correspondent node do not have any trust relationship [4],
   whereas in Proxy Mobile IPv6, network entities that perform route
   optimization are managed objects by the network and owned by the same
   administrative domain.  Thus, different approaches are possible to
   establish trust relationship.

   When route optimization support on the correspondent node side is
   handled by Proxy Mobile IPv6, route optimization solutions need to
   benefit from a trust relationship between network entities in Proxy
   Mobile IPv6.  However, we may not assume trust relationship between
   network entities located in Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain.

   When the correspondent node supports Mobile IPv6 and handles route
   optimization itself, route optimization solutions cannot assume trust
   relationship between network entities and the correspondent node.

5.3.  Security Aspect

   Security threats and limitations to route optimization in Mobile IPv6
   are investigated in [4].  Return routability procedures [3] and
   enhanced route optimization [5] address the threats without public-
   key infrastructure or a preexisting relationship between the mobile
   node and the correspondent node.  Thus, route optimization solutions
   in Proxy Mobile IPv6 also need to mitigate or to provide sufficient
   defense against those security threats.  When Proxy Mobile IPv6 route
   optimization participants are administered within the same domain,
   infrastructure-based authorization mechanisms, such as IPsec, also
   may be usable.






Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


5.4.  Common Solution for IPv4 and IPv6

   Proxy Mobile IPv6 base protocol specification and extension document
   enable a Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain to support both IPv6 and IPv4.  As
   defined in the IPv4 extension document in Proxy Mobile IPv6 [2], the
   mobile node and the correspondent node can be provided IPv4 home
   address mobility in the Proxy Mobile IPv6 domain.  Furthermore, the
   transport network between mobile access gateway and local mobility
   anchor can provide IPv4 transport and NAT may reside inside the
   network.  Thus, route optimization solutions should provide home
   address mobility and transport support for both IPv6 and IPv4.  Also,
   in the case of IPv4 transport support, NAT traversal mechanism may
   need to be in place.

5.5.  Policy Control and Charging

   In general, network operators that provide IP mobility service to the
   mobile nodes want to monitor the user traffic for the purposes of
   policy control and charging.  Therefore, it is desirable to ensure
   that route optimization solutions are designed so that network
   operators can figure out where to place enforcement point of policy
   control and charging.


6.  Requirements

   This section lists the requirements on route optimization for Proxy
   Mobile IPv6.

   R1:   The route optimization solutions MUST NOT conflict with design
         goals and requirements for network-based localized mobility
         management as they are described in [6].

   R2:   The route optimization solutions SHOULD have no negative impact
         on the scalability of a network-based localized mobility
         management domain.

   R3:   Route optimization solutions SHOULD be scalable in Proxy Mobile
         IPv6 domains.

   R4:   Route optimization solutions MAY use preconfigured or pre-
         established information for authenticating/authorizing route
         optimization participants and any signaling message for route
         optimization.







Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


   R5:   Any signaling message for route optimization SHOULD be
         exchanged securely during route optimization procedures.

   R6:   Route optimization solutions SHOULD mitigate or provide
         sufficient defense against possible security threats
         investigated in [4].

   R7:   Route optimization solutions SHOULD maintain route optimization
         states efficiently when mobile nodes handover in Proxy Mobile
         IPv6 domain(s).

   R8:   Route optimization solutions SHOULD operate over IPv6 and IPv4
         transport networks.

   R9:   Route optimization solutions MAY consider support both IPv6,
         IPv4 and dual stack mobile nodes.

   R10:  Route optimization solutions MAY provide NAT traversal
         mechanism for IPv4 private transport network.

   R11:  Route optimization solutions MUST NOT conflict with an
         operator's policy to protect its network.



7.  IANA Considerations

   No action is required by IANA for this document.


8.  Security Considerations

   Security issues are handled in Section 5.3.


9.  Contributors

   This contribution is a joint effort of several people.  The
   contributors can be reached at (in alphabetical order):

   Sangjin Jeong
       sjjeong@etri.re.kr

   Long Le
       Long.Le@nw.neclab.eu

   Jaehwoon Lee




Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


       jaehwoon@dongguk.edu

   Marco Liebsch
       liebsch@netlab.nec.de

   Alice Qinxia
       alice.Q@huawei.com

   Behcet Sarikaya
       bsarikaya@huawei.com

   Shinta Sugimoto
       shinta@sfc.wide.ad.jp

   Christian Vogt
       christian.vogt@ericsson.com

   Ryuji Wakikawa
       ryuji@sfc.wide.ad.jp


10.  References

   [1]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K., and
        B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6, draft-ietf-netlmm-proxymip6-06
        (work in progress)", September 2007.

   [2]  Wakikawa, R. and S. Gundavelli, "IPv4 Support for Proxy Mobile
        IPv6, draft-ietf-netlmm-pmip6-ipv4-support-01 (work in
        progress)", July 2007.

   [3]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and A. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [4]  Nikander, P., Aura, J., Montenegro, G., and E. Nordmark, "Mobile
        IP Version 6 Route Optimization Security Design Background",
        RFC 4225, December 2005.

   [5]  Arkko, J., Vogt, C., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route Optimization
        for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, May 2007.

   [6]  Kempf, Ed., J., "Goals for Network-Based Localized Mobility
        Management (NETLMM)", RFC 4831, April 2007.








Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Sangjin Jeong
   Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
   138 Gajeongno, Yuseong
   Daejeon,   305-700
   Korea

   Email: sjjeong@etri.re.kr


   Christian Vogt
   Ericsson Research, NomadicLab
   Hirsalantie 11
   02420 Jorvas,
   Finland

   Email: christian.vogt@ericsson.com


   Ryuji Wakikawa
   Keio University
   5322 Endo
   Fujisawa, Kanagawa  252-8520
   Japan

   Email: ryuji@sfc.wide.ad.jp


   Marco Liebsch
   NEC Network Laboratories
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   69115 Heidelberg,
   Germany

   Email: liebsch@netlab.nec.de


   Shinta Sugimoto
   Nippon Ericsson K.K.
   Koraku Mori Building
   1-4-14, Koraku, Bunkyo-ku
   Tokyo,   112-0004
   Japan

   Email: shinta.sugimoto@ericsson.com





Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


   Behcet Sarikaya
   Huawei Technologies USA
   1700 Alma Dr. Suite 500
   Plano, TX  75075
   USA

   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org












































Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   Proxy Mobile IPv6 RO Problem Statement    November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Jeong (Ed.), et al.       Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 12]

