


Network Working Group                                       S. Josefsson
Internet-Draft                                             April 8, 2006
Updates: 4120 (if approved)
Expires: October 10, 2006


Extended Kerberos Version 5 Key Distribution Center (KDC) Exchanges Over
                                  TCP
                  draft-josefsson-krb-tcp-expansion-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 10, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes an extensibility mechanism for the Kerberos
   v5 protocol when used over TCP transports.








Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Kerberos V5 TCP extension             April 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Expansion Mechanism for TCP transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Interoperability Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Appendix A.  Copying conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 7






































Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Kerberos V5 TCP extension             April 2006


1.  Introduction

   The Kerberos 5 [3] specification, in section 7.2.2, reserve the high
   order bit in the length field for TCP transport for future expansion.
   This document update [3] to describe the behaviour when that bit is
   set.  This expansion mechanism is intended for features that are
   specific for the TCP transport.

   The required behaviour regarding the reserved bit is described as
   follows in [3]:

      Each request (KRB_KDC_REQ) and response (KRB_KDC_REP or
      KRB_ERROR) sent over the TCP stream is preceded by the
      length of the request as 4 octets in network byte order.
      The high bit of the length is reserved for future
      expansion and MUST currently be set to zero.  If a KDC
      that does not understand how to interpret a set high bit
      of the length encoding receives a request with the high
      order bit of the length set, it MUST return a KRB-ERROR
      message with the error KRB_ERR_FIELD_TOOLONG and MUST
      close the TCP stream.


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].


3.  Expansion Mechanism for TCP transport

   The reserved high-order bit of the request length field is used to
   provide an extension mechanism.  When the reserved high bit is set,
   the remaining 31 bits of the 4 octets are treated as an extension
   identifier, and thus form a 31 bit integer enumerating various
   expansions.  Each of the values indicate a specific extended
   operation mode, which are to be described elsewhere.

   If the KDC does not understand a requested expansion, it MUST return
   a KRB-ERROR with a KRB_ERR_FIELD_TOOLONG value (prefixed by the 4
   octet length integer, with the high bit clear, as usual) and close
   the TCP stream.

   The following table specifies the meaning of the 31 lower bits in the
   4 octet field, when the high bit is set:





Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Kerberos V5 TCP extension             April 2006


   0               RESERVED.
   1...2147483647  AVAILABLE for registration, through IANA.
   2147483648      RESERVED.

   Each expansion mechanism MUST describe the structure of protocol data
   beyond the length field, and also the behaviour of the client and
   KDC.


4.  Interoperability Consideration

   Implementations with support for TCP that do not claim to conform to
   RFC 4120 may not handle the high bit correctly.  Behaviour may
   include closing the TCP connection without any response, and logging
   an error message in the KDC log.  When this was written, this problem
   existed in modern versions of popular implementations.
   Implementations experiencing trouble getting the expected responses
   from a server SHOULD assume that it does not support this expansion
   mechanism.  Clients MAY remember this semi-permanently, to avoid
   excessive logging in the server.  Care should be taken to avoid
   unexpected behaviour for the user when the KDC is eventually
   upgraded.  How to handle these backwards compatibility quirks are in
   general left unspecified.


5.  Security Considerations

   Because the initial length field is not protected, it is possible for
   an active attacker (i.e., one that is able to modify traffic between
   the client and the KDC) to make it appear to the client that the
   server does not support this expansion.  Client and KDC policies can
   be used to reject connections that does not use any expansion.


6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA needs to create a new registry for "Kerberos 5 TCP Expansions".
   The initial contents of this registry should be:

   [[RFC Editor: Replace xxxx below with the number of this RFC.]]

   Decimal         Meaning                             Reference
   -------         -------                             ---------
   0               RESERVED.                           RFC XXXX
   1...2147483647  AVAILABLE for registration.
   2147483648      RESERVED.                           RFC XXXX

   IANA will register new values on a First Come First Served basis, as



Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Kerberos V5 TCP extension             April 2006


   defined in BCP 64 [2].  Changing the RESERVED values (0 and
   2147483648) will require IETF Consensus.

   While the registration procedures do not require expert review,
   authors of expansion are encouraged to seek community review and
   comment whenever that is feasible.  Authors may seek community review
   by posting a specification of their proposed mechanism as an
   Internet-Draft.  Expansions intended for widespread use should be
   standardized through the normal IETF process, when appropriate.


7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Andrew Bartlett who pointed out that some implementations
   (MIT Kerberos and Heimdal) did not follow RFC 4120 properly with
   regards to the high bit, which resulted in an Interoperability
   Consideration.

   Nicolas Williams and Jeffrey Hutzelman provided comments that
   improved the document.

8.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
        Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 1998.

   [3]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The Kerberos
        Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120, July 2005.


Appendix A.  Copying conditions

   Regarding this entire document or any portion of it, the author makes
   no guarantees and is not responsible for any damage resulting from
   its use.  The author grants irrevocable permission to anyone to use,
   modify, and distribute it in any way that does not diminish the
   rights of anyone else to use, modify, and distribute it, provided
   that redistributed derivative works do not contain misleading author
   or version information.  Derivative works need not be licensed under
   similar terms.








Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Kerberos V5 TCP extension             April 2006


Author's Address

   Simon Josefsson

   Email: simon@josefsson.org














































Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Kerberos V5 TCP extension             April 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Josefsson               Expires October 10, 2006                [Page 7]
