


Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                         December 15, 2008
Updates: 5378, 3978, 4748
(if approved)
Intended status: BCP
Expires: June 18, 2009


 A Workable Variation on Rights Contributors Provide to the IETF Trust
                    draft-klensin-rfc5378var-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 18, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2008 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.






Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


Abstract

   RFC 5378, "Rights Contributors Provide to the IETF Trust", has been
   interpreted in a way that is unworkable in practice for updates to
   documents created before it came into effect, and for other documents
   that derive significant amounts of text from such earlier documents.
   It requires, as a condition of Internet Draft posting or RFC
   publication or even as a condition of posting of Internet Drafts,
   that authors or editors obtain rights from people who may be
   unavailable or uncooperative.  This specification modifies the RFC
   5378 rules to permit the IETF to continue to do work in an orderly
   fashion when documents containing earlier text are involved and
   permission is not easily obtained.


Table of Contents

   1.  Author's Note  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Older Documents and Older Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Update to RFC 5378 -- Variant Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  A Better Plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     11.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     11.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     A.1.   Changes for -01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10


















Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


1.  Author's Note

   [[Comment.1: This section will be removed if a -02 of this document
   is posted.]]

   This document is provided in the interest of being constructive and
   specifically of creating a meaningful focus for a serious and, I
   hope, rapid and efficient, discussion in the IETF about the
   implications of RFC 5378 to IETF work on documents containing older
   text, specifically text for which 5378 releases to the IETF Trust are
   neither already on file nor very readily available.  The proposal it
   makes --to create a variant procedure for older documents that
   essentially restores the previous rules for them -- is not the
   author's preferred long-term choice but, since it appears that the
   only way to get things unstuck is with a BCP, this document is
   offered as the foundation for a transitional BCP.  An additional
   note, in Section 7 below, proposes a better choice and mechanisms for
   getting there.

   Some of the discussion on the IETF list about RFC 5378 indicates that
   the Trustees of the IETF Trust simply implemented the instructions of
   the IETF.  Some of the discussions in the IPR WG assumed that the
   draft that became RFC 5378 would simply be, and was, an
   implementation in legal language of principles laid out in the WG.
   At least some participants in the WG did not believe that those
   principles would include the restrictions and requirements on
   revisions of older documents that 5378 now appears to imply.  In the
   hope of avoiding further iterations of those misunderstandings, this
   draft is much more explicit than is usual in the IETF about
   responsibility and authority for making various types of decisions.
   Those provisions can, of course, be changed if the community decides
   it wants something else, but the author hopes that such changes will
   not [re-]introduce ambiguity and that no one will take any of the
   current specifications and directions as anything other than a
   constructive attempt to avoid such ambiguity.


2.  Introduction

   In November 2008, the IETF published "Rights Contributors Provide to
   the IETF Trust" [1].  That document changed the IETF's IPR model from
   one in which authors granted full rights to modify and derive
   material for IETF purposes to the IETF to one in which authors were
   expected to grant the IETF Trust a broad range of rights to license
   use of the documents for other purposes.  While not problematic for
   newly-written documents, that change in model poses significant
   challenges for revisions of older specifications and for new
   specifications that reuse text from older ones (See Section 3).  The



Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


   difficulty arises because 5378 requires that document submitters make
   strong assertions that they can actually transfer those broader
   rights.  Those assertions require that authors/ Contributors obtain
   permission from those who hold those rights, whether legal
   (copyright) or moral.  That permission may not be able to be easily
   obtained, especially from authors who have ceased participation in
   the IETF due to death or other reasons.  The requirement for that
   assertion and transfer as a condition for posting would, in turn,
   prevent posting Internet Drafts (I-Ds) and working in the IETF on
   documents containing older text even though rules in effect since the
   beginning of the contemporary IETF standards process [2] would have
   permitted that work to be done in the IETF.

   In order to permit the IETF to continue to do work, rather than
   having posting blocked when permissions from authors of earlier text
   cannot be readily obtained, this document modifies RFC 5378 to permit
   the older license grants and intellectual property rights to continue
   to be applied to older text in new documents and postings.

   References to RFC 3978 [3] in this document explicitly assume that
   the changes specified in RFC 4748 [4] are incorporated; all
   references to RFC 3978 are to be treated as references to both
   documents.


3.  Older Documents and Older Text

   One complication about interpretation of RFC 5378 is that there
   appears to be controversy about what text is old enough to require
   obtaining authorization from earlier contributors for posting, rather
   than being able to assume the necessary permissions from earlier
   Contributions to the IETF.  The relevant transition dates have been
   assumed, by different parties, to be:

   o  The date on which the Internet Draft that became RFC 5378 was
      approved by the IESG.

   o  The date on which RFC 5378 was published.

   o  The date on which the IETF Trust approved policies and text
      relevant to RFC 5378 and announced them to the community.
      Presumably this is the 10 November 2008 date shown on the
      Trustee's "Policies and Procedures" web page [6].

   o  The date on which the IETF Trust "announces the adoption of these
      procedures" (referring to the procedures in RFC 5378 and quoting
      from Section 2.1 of that document).  This may or may not also be
      the 10 November 2008 date.



Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


   o  The date on which the new policies were widely enough publicized
      to the community as applying to to all IETF Contributions that it
      is reasonable to assume that all of those who might make
      Contributions to the IETF were aware of them.  Some who are
      convinced that this is the relevant date believe that it
      intrinsically coincides with one of the dates above, presumably
      the 10 November 2008 one.  Others note that the IETF has a history
      of widely-disseminated announcements to obtain agreement to IPR
      policies (the "Note Well"), and that very recent versions of those
      announcements still point to earlier policies (See, e.g., the IETF
      73 version of that announcement [7] or, as of 14 December 2008,
      the IETF's announcement to mailing list subscribers [8]).  They
      believe that continuing use of the old "Note Well" for more than a
      month after the 10 November 2008 date makes that date untenable as
      the basis for assuming that subsequent IETF participation
      constitutes agreement to RFF 5378's terms and consequent transfer
      of rights.

      In any event, to the extent to which the critical date is
      determined by the Note Well or similar widespread announcements,
      it appears fairly clear that intent to update those announcements
      doesn't count; only the wide availability of the revised forms do.

   o  For a given document, the date on which a reference to RFC 5378
      was incorporated into its text by the person responsible for
      posting it or otherwise contributing it to the IETF.

   The author has no reason to believe that list of possible cutoff
   dates is comprehensive or that there are no other theories which
   would establish different dates.  While RFC 5378 might reasonably
   have contained language to establish that boundary, it does not
   appear to do so.  Should the differences among the various dates
   become significant, it appears likely that the issue would need to be
   settled through some judicial process external to the IETF.  In this
   document, the author, not being a lawyer, takes no position on which
   interpretation is correct but merely notes the ambiguity as an
   additional complication in interpreting RFC 5378 with regard to older
   documents and Contributions.

   The term "new text" is used in this document to refer to text that
   unambiguously falls under the RFC 5378 rules, i.e., text that was
   first written after RFC 5378 became effective and that, when posted
   or published, contains the RFC 5378-derived language in the
   associated copyright notice.







Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


4.  Update to RFC 5378 -- Variant Procedure

   This specification modifies the provisions of RFC 5378 with respect
   to documents containing text that, in the informed opinion and best
   judgment of the Contributor, meets all of the following criteria:

   o  The text is a significant excerpt or copy of older text or text
      from an older document under any of the definitions above that the
      Contributor believes to be applicable.

   o  The text was made available to the IETF under circumstances that
      would make the provisions of RFC 3978 [3] or relevant and
      consistent predecessor documents and "Note Well" statements
      applicable.

   o  The text is being used strictly for IETF purposes consistent with
      provisions of RFC 3978 or relevant and consistent predecessor
      documents.

   o  A transfer of rights for the text to the IETF Trust that would
      give the IETF Trust all of the rights called for by RFC 5377 has
      not been made by the author (or other rights-holder) of the
      relevant text.

   o  Such a transfer cannot be readily obtained within a period of time
      that is satisfactory for consideration or progression of the
      Contribution within the IETF.

   If those criteria are met, the Contributor may incorporate the
   "boilerplate" text called for by RFC 3978 in the new document rather
   than the copyright notice and associated "boilerplate" text specified
   by the IETF Trust and IAB pursuant to RFC 5378.  If the RFC 3978 text
   is incorporated, the IETF Trust will acquire only those rights
   historically granted and summarized in RFC 2026 [2] and the specific
   provisions of RFC 3978.  Those rights can be informally summarized as
   unlimited permission for the copying, extracts, or reuse within the
   IETF for purposes connected to its Standards Process and permission
   to the broader community to reproduce and distribute that document.

   Because this document creates a new dependency on RFC 3978 (and
   4748), the action taken by RFC 5378 to identify them as obsolete is
   formally nullified.  In order to make the threads as clear as
   possible, those documents should be shown in the various indexes as
   updated, but not obsoleted, by both 5378 and this document.







Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


5.  Applicability

   The net effect of this suggested change is to make RFC 5378 apply
   only to:

   o  Documents newly-written after its applicability date and
      containing no older text.

   o  Documents containing older text for which text the IETF Trust has
      obtained RFC 5378-compatible rights through spontaneous action of
      original Contributors, efforts of contemporary authors or
      Contributors, or its own activities.

   All other Contribution and documents remain covered only by the
   provisions of RFC 3978 or, if published earlier, by the policies
   relevant at the time of publication.  To the degree it is relevant,
   the reader's attention is called to Section 2.1 of RFC 5378.

   It is perhaps worth noting that, if Contributors are able to obtain
   rights from prior Contributors as RFC 5378 anticipates, this
   specification has no net effect on RFC 5378 and its provisions.
   Conversely, the IETF Trust's ability to manage newly-posted documents
   for which rights cannot be easily obtained is no different from the
   situation that exists with documents published prior to RFFC 5378.

   Section 4 above puts the decisions as to significance of copied or
   excerpted text, the ability to obtain transfers of rights that are
   not already on file, and the urgency with which those transfers must
   be obtained, strictly in the hands of the Contributor who is
   compiling a document.  That is necessary because of the burdens of
   responsibility and risk that RFC 5378 places on the Contributor who
   incorporates older material.  Neither the IETF Trust nor the IESG are
   empowered to place additional restrictions or burdens on the
   Contributor in respect to that decision-making.  For example, this
   specification prohibits an IESG or Trustee-imposed requirement that
   the Contributor document efforts to contact prior Contributors and
   obtain releases from them.

   This document does not update or alter the advice given to the
   Trustees on Rights to be Granted [5].  It is worth repeating from
   other documents the observation that the Trustees cannot grant any
   rights that they do not have, so they will not be able to grant any
   rights to documents published in accordance with this specification
   and RFC 3978 provisions that they could not grant to pre-RFC 5378
   documents for which they have not obtained the additional RFC 5378
   rights.





Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


6.  Directions

   To the extent permitted under RFC 2026 and subsequent procedures
   approved by IETF consensus, the IETF directs that:

   1.  The Trustees of the IETF Trust prepare appropriate guidelines,
       boilerplate, legal language, etc., to implement the provisions of
       this specification and present them to the community for review
       and approval.  This is to be done on an expedited basis with the
       reasons for any delays reported to the community on an ongoing
       basis.  The intent is to make the window in which RFC 5378 is
       considered to be in effect without the variant procedure
       specified by this document as short as possible.

   2.  The Trustees, with the advice of Counsel as needed, devise and
       implement mechanisms to prevent the provisions of RFC 5378 from
       impeding IETF work while the procedural and legal details called
       for by this document are sorted out.  If, in the judgment of the
       IESG or Counsel, the only way to accomplish that end is for this
       document to obsolete RFC 5378 in its entirety, restoring the RFC
       3978/RFC 4748 status quo ante, then approval of this document is
       to be considered as indicating IETF consensus for taking that
       action.

   3.  To avoid the appearance of conflicts of interest or
       responsibilities, any Trustee of the IETF Trust who is also a
       member of a review or approving body for this document shall
       recuse himself or herself from all voting, and isolate him or
       herself from all considerations or discussion, of this document
       in that review or approving body.
       [[Comment.2: Note in initial draft only: This text is motivated
       by the recognition that there is an inherent conflict between the
       implicit requirement on the IETF Trust and its Trustees to
       provide the IETF with as clear and unambiguous an intellectual
       property environment as possible and the implicit requirement on
       IAB and IESG members to make the work of the IETF as efficient as
       possible.  It is unreasonable for the community to expect anyone
       to provide both roles in a situation that has become highly
       controversial.  While this text could have been written in either
       direction (i.e., excluding Trust participation rather than
       approving body participation) the author believes that it is more
       important to have IETF leadership represent the IETF's position
       and needs to the Trust than vice versa.]]








Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


7.  A Better Plan

   The solution proposed here is probably less satisfactory than one
   that would apply the old rules exclusively to the old text, bringing
   new text, text created by the author of the new document, or text for
   which the IETF Trust has specific releases on file under the RFC 5378
   rules or their successors under the new rules.  Some of the
   definitions and other elements of RFC 5378 might be helpful even in
   combination with the general theory of rights grants and transfers
   that prevailed historically and with the procedures documented in RFC
   3978.  However, the drafting of such hybrid rules and definitions is
   clearly a matter for expert legal counsel, not amateurs, and
   experience indicates that it would take some time to obtain that text
   and properly review the details and implications.  Consequently, the
   Trustees of the IETF Trust are strongly encouraged to view this
   specification as a temporary patch and to follow its adoption by
   preparing a replacement for it and RFC 5378.  That replacement should
   provide for a hybrid strategy and should be presented to the IETF
   community for review and approval.


8.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks are due to Sam Hartman for finally bringing part of this issue
   to the attention of the IETF in a way that was generally understood
   and that opened up consideration of the broader issues involved and
   to several people who commented on, or offered encouragement about,
   an early version of this draft (their names will be included in later
   drafts if they prefer).  Alfred Hoenes found several typographical
   errors in the initial draft that made the document harder to follow
   than necessary; his corrections are gratefully acknowledged.


9.  IANA Considerations

   [[Comment.3: RFC Editor: Please remove this section before
   publication.]]

   This memo includes no requests to or actions for IANA.


10.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations associated with RFC 5378 also apply to
   this document and are incorporated by reference.


11.  References



Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


11.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Rights Contributors Provide to
        the IETF Trust", BCP 78, RFC 5378, November 2008.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", RFC 3978,
        March 2005.

   [4]  Bradner, S., "RFC 3978 Update to Recognize the IETF Trust",
        RFC 4748, October 2006.

11.2.  Informative References

   [5]  Halpern, J., "Advice to the Trustees of the IETF Trust on Rights
        to Be Granted in IETF Documents", RFC 5377, November 2008.

URIs

   [6]  <http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info/>

   [7]  <http://www.ietf.org/meetings/73/notewell.html>

   [8]  <http://www.ietf.org/maillist.html>


Appendix A.  Change Log

A.1.  Changes for -01

   o  Added an explicit statement that this un-obsoletes 3978 and 4748,
      where were obsoleted by 5378.

   o  Corrected several typographic errors that escaped my proofreading
      but that were caught and reported by Alfred Hoenes.














Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             RFC 5378 Variation              December 2008


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, Ste 322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 245 1457
   Email: john+ietf@jck.com










































Klensin                   Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 11]


