CCAMP Working Group                                         Jaihyung Cho
INTERNET DRAFT                                                      ETRI
Expires: May 2005                                          November 2004


           Requirement for (G)MPLS implantation over Ethernet
              <draft-jaihyung-ccamp-lserequirement-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

     By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
     patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
     and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance
     with RFC 3668.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other docu-
     ments at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
     reference material or to cite them other than as "work in pro-
     gress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

     This Internet-Draft will expire on February 2005.


Abstract

     In this draft, we propose requirement to implement MPLS technology
     for Ethernet switched network. Ethernet has become major building
     block in local area network and the area of deployment is quickly
     expanding to core network. While there have been industry needs to
     overcome weakness of Ethernet, MPLS has not been considered as key
     technology to improve Ethernet. Currently MPLS [RFC3031] and GMPLS
     [GARCH] architecture do not define label-switching function on
     L2SC interface, i.e. over LAN media. Hence, it is necessary to
     discuss lightweight implementation of MPLS for Ethernet. Since
     there is disparity in requirements depending on hierarchy of Ethernet,
     it is appropriate to separate discussion in Customer Premise Network
     (CPN), Access Network (AN) and Core Network (CN). Some candidate 
     methods to consider for label encoding for Ethernet are discussed.





Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT    Link Scoped IPv6 Multicast Addresses      October 2004


Table of Contents:

     1. Introduction................................................2
     2. Candidate Methods for Label Encoding in Ethernet............3
     3. Issues at Each Hierarchy of Ethernet........................4
     4. Conclusion .................................................5
     5. Security Considerations.....................................5
     6. References..................................................5
     Author's Addresses.............................................6



1. Introduction

     In the last several years, Ethernet has become a prevalent
     technology in the area of both private network and metro access
     network. Some network service providers now desire to push Ethernet
     beyond the range of MAN/WANs where long-haul technologies, such as
     SONET, are still dominant. The hope the network could be based
     entirely on Ethernet simplify network management as well as make
     operations more efficient and less expensive by eliminating
     overhead for converting between Ethernet and other technologies.
     However, industry experts note that Ethernet doesn't offer the
     scalability, reliability and quality of service that ATM and MPLS
     provide.

     There have been approaches to overcome the limitations and to
     extend service of Ethernet across MAN/WANs, such as [L2VPN],
     Provider Bridge [PBRIDGE], however, MPLS has not been considered as
     a scalable control mechanism for Ethernet. In current specification
     of MPLS architecture [RFC3031], such functionality as label
     switching and traffic control is only available in IP level where
     Ethernet service is terminated. When two MPLS nodes are connected
     via Ethernet switches, Ethernet nodes do not take a role in
     delivering labeled packets, although the actual performance
     bottleneck may be in Ethernet switches. GMPLS architecture [GARCH]
     also does not consider on L2SC interface at the moment. Given the
     importance of Ethernet switches in modern network, we therefore
     propose it is necessary to consider implementation of (G)MPLS
     technology for Ethernet switched network.

     The (G)MPLS implementation for Ethernet will be broadly
     characterized as employment of lightweight Internet protocol for
     control of Ethernet data flows. In underlying hardware layer, most
     data link feature and interface defined in IEEE 802.3 shall not be
     altered. However, intelligent signaling and routing control that
     understands IP protocols will be necessary in replacement to simple
     bridge control algorithms [STP][MSTP]. Nevertheless, this does not
     necessarily mean that Ethernet switches must run all essential set
     of MPLS protocols. Given the nature of simplicity and operational
     environment, much lightweight and compatible method to legacy LAN
     environment will be necessary.




Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT    Link Scoped IPv6 Multicast Addresses      October 2004


     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
     "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
     this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119].



2. Candidate Methods for Label Encoding in Ethernet

     In current specification of MPLS label encoding [RFC3032], MPLS
     shim header does not have effect on underlying LAN media. A
     proprietary implementation exists that Ethernet switch decodes the
     shim header and forward frames according to label information
     [ATRICA]. While this can be a solution to employ MPLS over
     Ethernet, overhead to implement all processing function of label-
     stacks must be compared with legacy Ethernet and MPLS routers.

     Another option to consider is using 48bits of destination address
     field (and also source address field, if necessary) in Ethernet
     header for labels. This method was proposed in [SRINIVASAN] and
     [ETHREAL1] independently. S. Varadarajan demonstrated excellent
     capability of MAC address swapping that real-time applications
     receive guaranteed service without relying on priority fields
     [ETHREAL2][ETHREAL3]. In his method, Ethernet switches swap
     destination address as they forward frames. As a result, address in
     MAC header only has local meaning between two nodes, and real-time
     frames are distinguished from best-effort frames according to
     address block assigned for swapping operation.

     The method exhibits several unique characteristics. For example, it
     requires relatively simple modification to Ethernet hardware to
     support MPLS function. It also minimizes changes in user terminal
     in order to provide real-time service. However, Varadarajan used
     proprietary protocol to establish switched data path and distribute
     label information. His work needs further sophistication to improve
     inter-operability.

     Finally, approaches that utilize VLAN tag or stack of tags can be
     found in [KAWAKAMI] and [PBRIDGE]. The proposals present some
     potential benefit in that they make use of well-defined feature of
     VLAN. However, complexity and efficiency of the protocols, and
     merits against the method using MPLS shim header explained above
     must be calculate.

     In conclusion, there can be numerous methods for encoding label
     information in Ethernet. Whichever method is favored, the level of
     sophistication required to improve must not harm simple and
     economic feature of Ethernet.









Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 3]


INTERNET-DRAFT    Link Scoped IPv6 Multicast Addresses      October 2004


3. Issues at Each Hierarchy of Ethernet

     The issue of (G)MPLS implementation for Ethernet can be considered
     separately in three different level of hierarchy; Customer Premise
     Network (CPN), Access Network (AN) and Core Network (CN).

     CPN is a local area network administered by private owner. The
     scale of CPN is diverse; from enterprise scale to small residential
     network. Deployment of Ethernet is dominant in CPN. Network
     congestion is hardly a problem in CPN because CPN is usually over-
     provisioned. However service differentiation is still necessary in
     order to provide secure and stable commercial service. VLAN tagging
     is often considered as means for flow segregation. However,
     commercial service providers do not trust user tagging of VLAN
     field because VLAN tag is easy to be modified by malicious user.
     Furthermore, stateless approaches that use priority field, such as
     DiffServe, are vulnerable to theft of service class in some
     environment such as University campus. A secure method to protect
     value-added traffic in Ethernet is necessary.

     MPLS provides good protection and service guarantee to customer in
     router network [L2VPN]. Similarly, the MAC address swapping method
     of [ETHREAL1] also shows several good properties to protect real-
     time service flows in Ethernet. However, MPLS and [ETHREAL1] both
     require assistance of signaling protocol and explicit path setup of
     which none of the kinds has been successfully deployed in local
     area network.

     There have been approaches using RSVP for proactive signaling in
     LAN environment [RFC2814] [RFC2815] [RFC2816] [RFC2998].
     Modification of the proposals can be considered, however, the set
     of protocols required to support RSVP could be unacceptably heavy
     in some residential environment. User burden in configuring network
     also must be carefully examined. A simple protocol that require
     near-zero configuration may be necessary in CPN.

     In access network, deployment of Ethernet for cost-effective
     aggregation of subscriber lines is now a common practice in
     provider network. However a tradeoff to the statistical
     multiplexing is that access network becomes a hot spot of
     congestion due to high concentration of user flows. Over-
     provisioning in Ethernet access is meaningless because even circuit
     network could perform better. A method to classify flows and to
     provide appropriate service segregation in Ethernet level is
     necessary.

     Some QoS solutions, such as [FlOWSWITCH], require access switches
     or edge routers to have capability of TCP/IP header lookup in order
     to classify frames in application level, and dynamic setup of per-
     flow state for traffic policing. However, we argue that overhead
     for deep packet processing in access switch is unacceptably high
     because required role at the position is low-cost flow aggregation
     rather than complex packet processing. Furthermore, dynamic flow-
     state allocation according to TCP/IP header is also burdensome even


Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 4]


INTERNET-DRAFT    Link Scoped IPv6 Multicast Addresses      October 2004


     in edge routers because of performance and scalability concern.

     An explicit flow-state allocation using UNI signaling protocol may
     provide simple and clear solution for per-flow policing in access
     switch. It will also reduce burden in mid-end switches if traffic
     aggregates are properly marked at access switches. Hence, (G)MPLS
     implementation for Ethernet access switches need to seek solution
     for light-weight UNI signaling and forefront tagging of MPLS labels
     in order to facilitate efficient label switching in core network.

     Meanwhile in core network, it is envisaged that high-performance
     Ethernet switches may takeover the role of sophisticated routers in
     some provider network. In network where layer-2 switches constitute
     core, different set of requirements must be satisfied. Reliability,
     scalability and quality of service are the issues frequently
     raised. The main concept and features developed for MPLS routers
     can be modified and employed for Ethernet. However some
     simplification is necessary due to limitation in expressing divers
     functions using MAC header.



4. Conclusion

     In overall, while the solutions for (G)MPLS implementation at each
     hierarchy of Ethernet may independently be developed, the solutions
     must provide inter-operability with MPLS network.

     It is also noted that efficiency is usually not the prime concern
     than simplicity because Ethernet will lose competitiveness to
     routers if any added complexity overrides economic merit.



5. Security Considerations

     The issues are addressed in section 3



6. References



 [RFC3031]   E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan, R. Callon,
               "Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031,
             Jan. 2001
 [GARCH]     Eric Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol
             Label Switching Architecture", IETF draft-ietf-ccamp-
             gmpls-architecture-07.txt, May 2003
 [L2VPN]     Loa Andersson, Eric C. Rosen, "L2VPN Framework",
             draft-ietf-l2vpn-l2-framework-03.txt, Oct. 2003




Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 5]


INTERNET-DRAFT    Link Scoped IPv6 Multicast Addresses      October 2004


 [PBRIDGE]   IEEE, "Provider Bridges", 802.1ad, work in progress
 [KAWAKAMI]  T. Kawakami et al., "Method to Setup LSP using
             VLAN Tag Switching", draft-kawakami-mpls-lsp-
             vlan-00.txt, Feb. 2003
 [STP]       IEEE, "Media Access Control (MAC) Bridges",802.1D,
             ANSI/IEEE Standard Document, 1998
 [MSTP]      IEEE "Multiple Spanning Trees", 802.1s, 2002
 [RFC2814]   R. Yavatkar, D. Hoffman, Y. Bernet, F. Baker,
             M. Speer, "SBM (Subnet Bandwidth Manager): A Protocol
             for RSVP-based Admission Control over IEEE 802-style
             networks", RFC 2814, May 2000
 [RFC2815]   M. Seaman, A. Smith, E. Crawley, J. Wroclawski,
             "Integrated Service Mappings on IEEE 802 Networks",
             RFC 2815, May 2000
 [RFC2816]   A. Ghanwani, W. Pace, V. Srinivasan, A. Smith,
             M. Seaman, "A Framework for Integrated Services
             Over Shared and Switched IEEE 802 LAN Technologies",
             RFC 2816, May 2000
 [RFC2998]   Y. Bernet, et. al, A Framework for Integrated
             Services Operation over Diffserv Networks",
             RFC 2998, Nov. 2000
 [RFC3032]   E. Rosen, D. Tappan, G. Fedorkow, Y. Rekhter,
             D. Farinacci, T. Li, A. Conta, "MPLS Label Stack
             Encoding", RFC 3032, Jan. 2001
 [ATRICA]    Atrica, http://www.atrica.com
 [SRINIVASAN] D. Bussiere, H. Esaki, A. Ghanwani, S. Matsuzawa,
              J.W.Pace,V.Srinivasan,"Labels for MPLS over LAN
              Media",  draft-srinivasan-mpls-lans-label-00.txt,
              Aug.1997
 [ETHREAL1]  S. Varadarajan, T. Chiueh, "EtheReal: a
             host-transparent real-time Fast Ethernet switch",
             Sixth International Conference on Network Protocols,
             p12-21,1998
 [ETHREAL2]  S. Varadarajan, "Experiences with EtheReal:
             a fault-tolerant real-time Ethernet switch", ETFA
             2001. 8th International Conference on Emerging
             Technologies and Factory Automation, Proceedings, 
	     vol.1, p183-194, 2001
 [ETHREAL3]  S. Varadarajan, T. Chiueh, "Automatic fault detection
             and recovery in real time switched Ethernet
             networks", IEEE INFOCOM '99, vol.1, p161-169, 1999
 [FLOWSWITCH] J. W. Roberts, "Internet Traffic, QoS, and Pricing",
             Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.92, no. 9, p1389-1399,
             sep. 2004


Authors' Addresses

       Jaihyung Cho
       BcN Lab.
       ETRI
       161 Gajeong-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-350, Korea




Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 6]


INTERNET-DRAFT    Link Scoped IPv6 Multicast Addresses      October 2004


       Phone: +82 42 860 5514
       Email: jspark@pec.etri.re.kr


Intellectual Property Statement

     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
     to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
     in this document or the extent to which any license under such
     rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
     it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
     Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
     documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
     of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
     at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
     ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

     This document and the information contained herein are provided on
     an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
     THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
     EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
     THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
     ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
     PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is
     subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP
     78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their
     rights.








Park et al.                Expires April 2005                   [Page 7]

