
Internet Engineering Task Force                                  V.Bajaj
Internet Draft                                                    K.Laha
Document: draft-hss-megaco-r1package-00.txt     Hughes Software Systems
April 11, 2000
Expires october 11, 2000



                              Megaco/H.248 R1 Package



Status of this document

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [ ]. 

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups 
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



1. Abstract

This document is work in progress and defines the MF package in association with 
the Megaco/H.248 Protocol that can be used to control a Media Gateway (MG) from 
an external controller, called a Media Gateway controller (MGC). It is intended 
to satisfy the requirements in section 12 of the Megaco/H.248 requirement 
document [ ].


2. Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [ ].


3. Document Organization


Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 1]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 



The subsequent portion of this draft is organized into the following 
major sections:

* Introduction to R1 signaling
* Assumptions
* Description of the R1 package
* References
* Author's Address


4. Introduction to R1 signaling

Signaling System R1 [ ] may be applied for automatic and semi-automatic 
operation of one-way or both-way circuits, within an international region.
It employs both line and register signaling to convey supervisory and 
address signals respectively.

Signaling System R1 transmits supervisory signals, link-by-link, using a 
single frequency in-band continuous tone for analogue working. The 
presence or absence of this frequency on the line indicates a specific 
signal. The line signaling on PCM systems is channel associated. 

The register signaling uses link-by-link multi-frequency (MF) in-band 
pulse signaling for the transmission of address signals. The address 
signals follow a 2-out-of-6 frequency combination preceded by a 
start-of-pulsing indication (KP) and terminated by an end-of-pulsing 
indication (ST).


5. Assumptions

The following draft assumes the support of ITU-T compliant [4] R1 
signaling only. 

R1 defines a "delay-dialing" backward line signal to acknowledge the 
"seizing" forward signal and delay the attachment of registers at the 
outgoing end till registers are attached at the incoming end for 
collecting address signals. When registers are attached at the incoming 
end and it is ready to receive address signals, the incoming end sends 
the "start-dialing"/"proceed-to-send" signal to the outgoing end. The 
"start-dialing" signal is simply an indication to start out-pulsing the 
address signals and it is sufficient that the interpretation of this 
signal remains confined to MG and is not needed to be routed to MGC as 
an event. Hence the event reporting "delay-dialing" to MGC is equivalent 
to an acknowledgement to the signal that generates "seizing" signal on 
the trunk. 

The KP and ST signals which form the pre-amble and post-amble of the 
inter-register signaling, can also be confined to MG which it attaches 


Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 2]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 


or strips on its own without the MGC bothering about the same. The MGC 
only sends the digit information and collects the same from MG. 

6. R1 Package Description

6.1 Package

    Package Name: R1 Package
    Package ID: r1 (To be allocated through IANA)
    Description: This package is used to handle signals and events on 
       terminations supporting Signaling System R1 between the Media 
       Gateway and the PSTN network.
    Version: 1
    Extends: None

6.2 Properties

None defined by this package

6.3 Events

6.3.1 
    Event Name: Seizure
    EventID: sz (0x0001)
    Description: The Seizure event shall be reported when an incoming R1 
      "Seizing" signal occurs on the termination and an events descriptor 
      is activated that requests the Seizure event. The line signal 
      condition against which the "Seizing" signal is verified is 
      provisioned in the MG.

    EventsDescriptor Parameters:
      Parameter Name: Seize signal validation time
      Parameter id: sztim (0x0001)
      Description: specifies the minimum duration for which the "Seizing" 
        signal must persist for the same to be reported as an event. 
        Gateway shall have default value for this timer.
      Type: integer, in milliseconds
      Possible values: 0 and up
 
    ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
      none defined by this package

6.3.2
    Event Name: Seizure Acknowledge
    EventID: sa (0x0002)
    Description: The Seizure Acknowledge event shall be reported when an 
      incoming R1 line signal "delay-dialing" occurs on the termination 
      in response to an outgoing "Seizing" signal already sent and an 
      events descriptor is activated that requests the Seizure Acknowledge
      event. The line signal condition against which the "delay-dialing" 
      signal is verified is provisioned in the MG.


Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 3]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 




    EventsDescriptor Parameters:
      none defined by this package
 
    ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
      none defined by this package

6.3.3
     Event Name: Answer
     EventID: ans (0x0003)
     Description: The Answer event shall be reported when an incoming R1 
       line signal "Answer" occurs on the termination and an events 
       descriptor is activated that requests the Answer event. The line 
       signal condition against which the "Answer" signal is verified is 
       provisioned in the MG.

     EventsDescriptor Parameters:
       none defined by this package
 
     ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
       none defined by this package

6.3.4
     Event Name: Clear
     EventID: clr (0x0004)
     Description: The Clear event shall be reported when an incoming R1 
       line signal "Clear-forward" or "Clear-back" occurs on the 
       termination and the an events descriptor is activated that requests 
       the Clear event. Whether "Disconnect" or "Hang-up" shall depend on 
       the end initiating the call clearing. The line condition against 
       which either of the signals is verified is provisioned in the MG.


     EventsDescriptor Parameters:
      Parameter Name: Clear-forward signal validation time
      Parameter id: clftim (0x0001)
      Description: specifies the minimum duration for which the Gateway 
        if behaving as an incoming end, validates the "clear-forward" 
        signal before declaring it as a Clear event reportable to MGC. 
        This validation time differs depending on whether registers have 
        been attached or not. Gateway shall have default value for this 
        timer.
      Type: integer, in milliseconds
      Possible values: 0 and up

     ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
      none defined by this package





Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 4]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 



6.3.5
    Event Name: Address
    EventID: addr (0x0005)
    Description: Detects the complete R1 address information as received 
      through register signaling. The event shall be reported after 
      collecting the complete address digits and an events descriptor is 
      activated requesting the Address event. The address digits shall be 
      collected as per a digitmap. The actual frequency, cadence, duration 
      and amplitude values against which the multi-frequency tones that 
      convey the address information are validated are provisioned in the 
      MG.

    EventsDescriptor Parameters:
      none defined by this package

    ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
      Parameter Name: Digit String 
      ParameterID: ds (0x0001)
      Description: The portion of the collected address digits which 
        matched part or all of an alternative event sequence specified 
        in the digit map. 
      Type: string of digits (possibly empty) returned as a quoted string.
      Possible Values: a sequence of the characters "0" through "9"

      Parameter Name: Termination Method
      ParameterID: tm (0x0002)
      Description: indicates the reason for the generation of the Address 
                   event.
      Type: enumeration
      Possible Values:
        "UM" (0x0001) Unambiguous Match
        "PM" (0x0002) Partial Match, completion by timer expiry or 
                      unmatched event
        "FM" (0x0003) Full Match, completion by timer expiry or unmatched 
                      event
  

6.3.6
     Event Name: Failure
     EventID: fail (0x0006)
     Description: Reports a failure condition in the working of the R1 
        line or register signaling when an events descriptor is activated 
        requesting the Failure event.

     EventsDescriptor Parameters:
      none defined by this package
 
     ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters:
      Parameter Name: Error code


Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 5]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 


      ParameterID: ec (0x0001)
      Description: describes the failure reason
      Type: enumeration
      Possible Values: 
       "ULS" (0x0001) Unexpected line signal
       "LTO" (0x0002) Line signal timeout
       "RTO" (0x0003) Register signal timeout
       "SME" (0x0004) Protocol State machine malfunction


6.4 Signals

6.4.1 
    Signal Name: Seizure
    SignalID: sz (0x0001)
    Description: Applies a "Seizing" signal on the R1 termination. The 
       line signal that is actually sent on the physical termination is 
       provisioned in the MG.
    Signal Type: (OO) on/off 
    Duration: Not applicable
    Additional Parameters: None

6.4.2
    Signal Name: Seizure Acknowledge
    SignalID: sa (0x0002)
    Description: Applies "delay-dialing" in response to "seizing" signal 
       and "start-dialing" once the registers are ready to receive the 
       address digits. The line condition that is actually sent on the 
       physical termination is provisioned in the MG.
    Signal Type: (OO) on/off 
    Duration: Not applicable
    Additional Parameters: None

6.4.3
    Signal Name: Answer
    SignalID: ans (0x0003)
    Description: Applies an "Answer" signal on the R2 termination. The 
       line condition that is actually sent on the physical termination 
       is provisioned in the MG.
    Signal Type: (OO) on/off 
    Duration: Not applicable
    Additional Parameters: None

6.4.4
    Signal Name: Clear
    SignalID: clr (0x0004)
    Description: Applies a "Clear-forward" or a "Clear-back" signal 
       depending on whether the Gateway represents the outgoing or incoming 
       side for the call on the concerned physical termination (R1 trunk). 
       The line condition that is actually sent on the physical termination 


Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 6]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 


       is provisioned in the MG.
    Signal Type: (OO) on-off
    Duration: Provisioned


6.4.5
    Signal Name: Address
    SignalID: addr (0x0005)
    Description: Applies the address signals in the form of MF-tones on 
        the R1 trunk. The actual frequency, cadence, duration and amplitude 
        values for the multi-frequency tones that convey the address 
        information are provisioned in the MG.
    Signal Type: (BR) Brief
    Duration: Provisioned
    Additional Parameters: 
      Parameter Name: Digit String
      ParameterID: ds (0x0001)
      Description: The digit string that needs to be sent as address signals.
      Type: string of digits.
      Possible Values: a sequence of the characters "0" through "9"


6.5 Statistics
none 

6.6 Procedures

None


7. References


8. Author's Addresses

           Vikas Bajaj
           Hughes Software Systems,Ltd.
           Gurgaon,Haryana,India. 122015.
           Ph: (91)-11-6346666.Ex-2804.
           Fax: (91)-124-6342810 or 811.
           mEmail: vbajaj@hss.hns.com.


           Kushanava Laha
           Hughes Software Systems,Ltd.
           Gurgaon,Haryana,India. 122015.
           Ph: (91)-11-6346666.Ex-3083
           Email: klaha@hss.hns.com.




Bajaj,Laha               	                                [page 7]


Internet Draft            Megaco/H.248 R1 Package        April 11,  2000 


Full Copyright Statement

"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (April,2000). All Rights Reserved. 
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included 
on all such copies and derivative works. However, this document itself 
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice 
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, 
except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in 
which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards 
process must be followed, or as required to translate it into


1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9, 
   RFC 2026, October 1996.

2. Draft Recommendation H.248 (February 2000), Temporary Document 37 
   (PLEN), Study Group 16, ITU-Telecommunication Standardization Sector 
   (to be issued as draft-ietf-megaco-protocol-07.txt)

3. Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", 
   BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

4. Specifications of Signaling System R1, Q.310-Q.331, Blue Book, CCITT



