



Network Working Group                                            E. Ivov
Internet-Draft                                                     Jitsi
Intended status: Standards Track                        November 9, 2014
Expires: May 13, 2015


   Non-disruptive Candidate Updates for the Interactive Connectivity
                      Establishment (ICE) Protocol
                    draft-ivov-mmusic-ice-updates-00

Abstract

   This document describes a mechanism for updating the transport
   parameters of real-time communication sessions (e.g. as a result of
   mid-session device mobility) without disrupting ongoing communication
   and without requiring Offer/Answer negotiation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 13, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Multipath ICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Triggering a Trickle ICE Restart  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Trickle-triggering an ICE restart . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.2.1.  Re-checking currently valid pairs . . . . . . . . . .   4
       3.2.2.  Relationship with Multipath ICE . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  The case against infinite trickling . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  Switching to a better interface. No ICE restart.  . . . .   6
     5.2.  Adding an interface. ICE restart required . . . . . . . .   6
     5.3.  Scenarios involving MICE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   The Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) protocol [RFC5245]
   defines a way of discovering and validating a path between two peers.
   Switching an ongoing media session to an alternative path is
   therefore only possible after an ICE restart that would again produce
   a single "nominated" candidate pair for use by the applications.

   As a result, implementing path optimizations is currently a
   cumbersome process that is often implemented in a disruptive way or
   not supported at all.

   This document discusses ways of simplifying the process.  Special
   attention is being paid to preserving existing features in ICE and
   trickle ICE [I-D.ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice] that allow implementations
   today to promptly release unused candidates or detect failures in a
   deterministic way.

2.  Multipath ICE

   An ongoing discussion in MMUSIC [ICE-OPTS] is already investigating
   the possibility of having ICE processing yield multiple usable
   candidate pairs.  A rough proposal for achieving this is being
   currently fleshed out [MPICE] and an IETF submission would likely
   follow shortly.

   Having ICE produce multiple usable candidate pairs opens up
   possibilities for various application specific adjustments and
   optimizations.  Using multiple routes concurrently
   [I-D.singh-avtcore-mprtp]  is one such example.  Being able to
   swiftly switch between existing routes based on RTT or local



Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


   indicators (e.g., perceived Wi-Fi signal strength) is another.  Rapid
   route switching can also be used to support network mobility as
   described in [I-D.wing-mmusic-ice-mobility].  (PENDING: use with MICE
   requires some further thought in order to optimize the case of a
   mobile peer talking to a public media server).

   Being able to update the list of available routes however, is a
   separate problem that is best handled by reusing of ICE restarts,
   trickle ICE and slightly improved signalling Section 3.

3.  Triggering a Trickle ICE Restart

   The vanilla ICE specifications [RFC5245] defines ICE restarts as a
   non disruptive process where media can continue flowing between
   existing candidates while ICE is being re-run to discover new paths.
   ICE restarts can be triggered by either party and are signalled with
   the generation of new ice-ufrag and ice-pwd attributes by the party
   who is triggering the restart.

   An ICE restart may result in a set of valid candidate pairs that
   contains none, some, or all of the candidate pairs being used prior
   to the restart.  The new candidate pair set may obviously also
   contain zero or more new valid pairs that were not available prior to
   the restart.

   It is entirely possible for an ICE restart to complete without
   triggering even a single change to current media flows.  This is
   important because it gives implementors the possibility to use ICE
   restart as an incremental process that does not in any way disrupt
   existing paths.

3.1.  Trickle-triggering an ICE restart

   Vanilla ICE defines trigger for an ICE restart as a change in the
   ice-ufrag and ice-pwd attributes.  While this constitutes a trivial
   change, standard Offer/Answer semantics imply the generation of a
   complete offer and answer even if the above to attributes are so far
   the only change in the session.

   To avoid such a heavy process, this document suggests using trickle
   ICE semantics for the delivery of the two attributes.  This way,
   whenever an ICE implementation stack issues the new values for the
   ice-ufrag and ice-pwd attributes, the using application will deliver
   them the same way it usually delivers trickled candidates.

   For example, for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] this
   would imply sending an SIP INFO request
   [I-D.ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-sip] that could look like the following:



Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


         INFO sip:alice@example.com SIP/2.0
         ...
         Info-Package: trickle-ice
         Content-type: application/sdp
         Content-Disposition: Info-Package
         Content-length: ...

         a=ice-pwd:asd88fgpdd777uzjYhagZg
         a=ice-ufrag:8hhY



   In the case of XMPP Jingle [XEP-0176] the ICE restart trigger could
   look like this:


       <iq from='romeo@montague.lit/orchard'
           id='pd81b49s'
           to='juliet@capulet.lit/balcony'
           type='set'>
        <jingle xmlns='urn:xmpp:jingle:1'
                action='transport-info'
                initiator='romeo@montague.lit/orchard'
                sid='a73sjjvkla37jfea'>
          <content creator='initiator' name='this-is-the-audio-content'>
            <transport xmlns='urn:xmpp:jingle:transports:ice-udp:1'
                       pwd='asd88fgpdd777uzjYhagZg'
                       ufrag='8hhy'>
            </transport>
          </content>
        </jingle>
       </iq>


3.2.  Operation

   Once a restart is triggered, ICE processing will mostly continue
   similarly to the way it does with initial session establishment.
   Pairs and checklists will be recreated as per regular trickle ICE
   procedures.

3.2.1.  Re-checking currently valid pairs

   Depending on the event that triggered the ICE restart, some of the
   newly formed pairs will likely be identical to those currently in-use
   by the agents.  This would be the case, for example, in situations
   where a new interface has become available.  While it is very likely
   for these pairs to continue working the same way as before the



Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


   restart, it is RECOMMENDED that they be subject to a new set of
   connectivity checks in case the change in network configuration has
   further impact than the usually expected.

   For example, a newly available network interface would normally only
   imply new connection possibilities.  In some cases however, such as
   the launch of a VPN application, the new interface might have been
   accompanied by a change of routing policies that have invalidated the
   earlier available routes.

3.2.2.  Relationship with Multipath ICE

   An ICE restart would typically result in a set of valid pairs.  In
   cases where Multipath ICE is being used, agents MUST make sure that,
   as long as they are still valid, all paths that were in use prior to
   the restart, would still be usable after it completes.

   The exact semantics for selecting and enabling one or multiple such
   paths simultaneously are still being discussed and worked out in
   [MPICE].  Still, regardless of the specific messaging to take place,
   it is important that ICE implementations can and should behave in a
   way that does not, even briefly, disrupt media flow on pairs that are
   still valid.

4.  The case against infinite trickling

   As part of the ongoing discussions on improving ICE, it has been
   suggested [MPICE] that candidate updates be handled by making
   candidate trickling an endless process.

   While endless trickling does provide a simple solution to some common
   use cases, it also introduces some significant drawbacks:

   o  Clearly determining failure.  In the vast majority of cases, ICE
      agents would likely have a very finite set of candidates.
      Trickling and checking these candidates is currently a very
      clearly delimited process that makes it possible to detect failure
      and alert users in a timely manner.  Using endless trickling would
      make that impossible and would require the introduction of "magic"
      timers.

   o  Promptly releasing and reallocating unnecessary candidates.
      Currently, the finite nature of ICE processing makes it trivial
      for agents to decide when they need to release, stop maintaining,
      or reallocate resources such as relay or server-reflexive
      candidates.  Losing the clear boundaries of ICE processing would
      remove that ability and, once again, require the introduction of
      arbitrary timers in order to avoid wasting resources.



Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


   o  Endless trickling has been known to hang out with Ronan, the Green
      Goblin and various zombies.  It also regularly contributes to
      global warming and eats puppies.

5.  Examples

   The following examples try to describe a number of cases that require
   transport reconfiguration.  Some of them might be only a matter of
   switching between previously validated routes without requiring an
   ICE restart.  Others do trigger a restart without however disrupting
   existing connectivity.

5.1.  Switching to a better interface.  No ICE restart.

   Arya and Bran use the new multipath ICE mechanisms and have a set of
   pre-validated candidate pairs.  They are currently communicating over
   4G because, for example, it presented better RTT during ICE
   processing.  At a certain point Arya detects that the consent checks
   exchanged with Bob over her Wi-Fi interface start presenting a lower
   RTT.  Alternately she could also receive an indication from the OS
   that the Wi-Fi signal strength detected by her wireless interface has
   gone above a certain threshold.  For either of these reasons Arya
   wishes to switch media from her 4G to her Wi-Fi interface.

   This scenario DOES NOT require an ICE restart since no additional
   checks are necessary.  Hopefully such a switch will be natively
   supported by the new multipath ICE mechanism, for example, through
   the emission of a USE-CANDIDATE binding request over Arya's Wi-Fi
   interface.

5.2.  Adding an interface.  ICE restart required

   Arianne has an ongoing media session with Brienne over a 4G
   interface.  Brienne on the other hand posesses a wired and a wireless
   interface.  Her connection with Arianne is happening through a VPN
   interface configured on top of her wireless interface.

   Arianne's Wi-Fi interface then becomes available and she wishes to
   migrate her session from 4G to Wi-Fi.

   In order to do this Arianne does the following:

   o  She triggers an ICE restart by trickling new ice-ufrag and ice-pwd
      values to Brienne.

   o  She continues exchanging media with Brienne over her 4G interface.





Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


   o  She starts gathering and trickling local host, srflx and relay
      candidates to Brienne.

   o  She starts receiving trickled candidates from Brienne, she pairs
      them with her local ones and starts checking them

   In the same time Brienne:

   o  Continues exchanging media with Arianne.

   o  Re-allocates host and srflx candidates for her wireless and wired
      interfaces and then trickles them to Brienne.

   Once a new set of candidates are validated, Arianne and Brienne may
   decide to migrate their session to the pair containing any of
   Arianne's new Wi-Fi addresses.

5.3.  Scenarios involving MICE

   TBD

6.  Normative References

   [I-D.ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice]
              Ivov, E., Rescorla, E., and J. Uberti, "Trickle ICE:
              Incremental Provisioning of Candidates for the Interactive
              Connectivity Establishment (ICE) Protocol", draft-ivov-
              mmusic-trickle-ice-01 (work in progress), March 2013.

   [I-D.ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-sip]
              Ivov, E., Marocco, E., and C. Holmberg, "A Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) usage for Trickle ICE", draft-
              ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-sip-02 (work in progress), June
              2014.

   [I-D.singh-avtcore-mprtp]
              Singh, V., Karkkainen, T., Ott, J., Ahsan, S., and L.
              Eggert, "Multipath RTP (MPRTP)", draft-singh-avtcore-
              mprtp-09 (work in progress), June 2014.

   [I-D.wing-mmusic-ice-mobility]
              Wing, D., Reddy, T., Patil, P., and P. Martinsen,
              "Mobility with ICE (MICE)", draft-wing-mmusic-ice-
              mobility-07 (work in progress), June 2014.







Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 ICE Updates                 November 2014


   [ICE-OPTS]
              "MMUSIC Discussion on ICE Optimisations",
              <http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/mmusic/current/
              threads.html#13607>.

   [MPICE]    Uberti, J. and J. Lennox, "Improving ICE's Nomination
              Procedures", <https://docs.google.com/document/
              d/1P1XPCRJKBkSjwCzIIEUJmp7V694_FzJQe-fvN8bk-Xw/edit>.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245, April
              2010.

   [XEP-0176]
              Beda, J., Ludwig, S., Saint-Andre, P., Hildebrand, J.,
              Egan, S., and R. McQueen, "XEP-0176: Jingle ICE-UDP
              Transport Method", XEP XEP-0176, June 2009.

Author's Address

   Emil Ivov
   Jitsi
   Strasbourg  67000
   France

   Phone: +33 6 72 81 15 55
   Email: emcho@jitsi.org


















Ivov                      Expires May 13, 2015                  [Page 8]
