






                                                             J. Cuellar
Internet Draft                                                 M. Ersue
Document: draft-cuellar-geopriv-scenarios-00.txt             Siemens AG
Expires: 2002
                                                        Kenji Takahashi
                                                                    NTT
                                                               Feb 2002


                           Geopriv Scenarios


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Location-based services, navigation applications, emergency services,
   management of equipment in the field, and other location-dependent
   services need geographic location information about a target (user,
   resource or other entity). There is a need to securely transfer the
   location information to a location server and to authorize the
   location server to release securely the information to a client.

   This document describes some scenarios for such a protocol, as a
   basis to discuss and analyze the security (authentication,
   authorization, integrity and confidentiality) and privacy issues and
   requirements associated with the services.


   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi          Expires Aug 2002               1

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

Table of Contents

    1. Overview.......................................................2
    2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
    3. Entities and Data Flows........................................3
          3.1. Entities...............................................3
          3.2. Data Flows.............................................5
          3.3. Further explanations...................................6
    4. Services.......................................................8
          4.1. "Here I am!" Services..................................8
          4.2. "Where am I?" Services.................................8
          4.3. "Where is he?" Services................................9
    5. Scenarios......................................................9
          5.1. Scenario 1: The handset-based solution.................9
          5.2. Scenario 2: A Network-Based Location Data Source......10
          5.3. Scenario 3: External Location Server..................11
          5.4. Scenario 4: External Location Server and Recipients...12
          5.5. Scenario 5: External Location Data Source and Server..12
    6. Security Considerations.......................................14
    7. References....................................................14
    8. Author's Addresses............................................14
    9. Full Copyright Statement......................................14

1. Overview

   This draft introduces scenarios between the following 5 functional
   elements (or "entiites" of the protocol):

      Target: The entity whose location is desired by the Location
         Recipient.
      Owner of the privacy rights of the target, or, for abbreviation,
         the owner: An entity that has the authorization to detemine and
         write the privacy policies that apply to the location
         information of the target. Other probably better names are
         "policy maker" or "rule maker"
      Location Server (or "Intermediate Location Receiver"): Entity
         offering Location Service capabilities based on user-defined
         privacy policies.
      Ultimate Location Recipient: A Location Recipient that is the
         ultimate recipient of the location information (he may not pass
         this information, or derived one, to others, except to the
         target or the owner). This entity does not need to be aware of
         the policies defined by the owner.
      Location Data Source: The original source of the sighting.

   Those entities and the data flows between them are introduced in
   Section 3.

   Section 4 presents well-known commercial services. In Japan, all
   major mobile carriers provide the following types of services:

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     2

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

        1. "Where am I?" service (Carriers tell subscribers where they
           are located on a map.)
        2. "Here I am!" (Subscribers may send their location information
           to other subscribers or to Internet users via e-mail or other
           means.)
        3. "Where is he/she?" (Carriers tell users where someone is
           located.)

   Section 5 discusses some possible scenarios.


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].


3. Entities and Data Flows

   In this section we first explain the functional entities that
   participate in a location service system and present the basic
   communication between them. Note that there is no widely accepted
   terminology and hence some of the terms are perhaps still quite ad-
   hoc. The authors acknowledge the terminology discussions in the
   geopriv mailing list.

3.1. Entities

   Target:    The entity whose location is desired by the Location
              Recipient. The target may be a device (say, a cellular
              phone), a person (say, the subscriber of the cellular
              phone), an animal, a ship or truck, equipment in the
              field, etc.

   Owner of the privacy rights of the target, or, for abbreviation, the
              owner: An entity that has the authorization to decide the
              policies that apply to the location information of the
              target. When the target is a natural person, the owner of
              the target is often the target itself. After the initial
              registration of a target with the system, the owner is in
              possession of credentials showing that he is authorized to
              make the policies for the target. How this happens (that
              the owner proves that he owns the privacy rights and how
              he obtains the credentials) is outside of the scope of
              this discussion. We simply assume that the owner knows the
              correct secrets needed to authenticate the policies of the
              targets. The exact nature of the secrets and the mechanics
              of the authentication is perhaps also outside the scope of
              the WG.
              Other proposed names are "policy maker" and "rule maker"



   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     3

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   Location Recipient:  Entity that obtains the location of targets. To
              obtain location information for one or more targets, it
              interacts with a Location Server or with the Location Data
              Source. Depending on whether he forwards the information
              further or not, we distinguish two types of Location
              Recipients: Location Servers and Ultimate Location
              Recipients.

   Location Server: Software and/or hardware entity offering Location
              Service capabilities based on user-defined privacy
              policies.
              Another proposed name is "Intermediate Location Receiver".

   Ultimate Location Recipient: A Location Recipient that is the
              ultimate recipient of the location information (he may not
              pass this information, or derived one, to others, except
              to the target or the owner). Other proposed names for the
              Ultimate Location Recipient are: Location Requestor,
              Ultimate Location Requestor, Location Seeker, or Location
              Service Client. The name client is unfortunate, since the
              Ultimate Location Recipient may be a location-aware value-
              added service provider (to the owner or the target).

   Location Data Source: The original source of the sighting, that is,
              the matching of an identifier for the target, a position,
              and a time.

              In some scenarios,

              o  the target itself is the location data source (or
                 better, they are co-located).

              o  In some situations the "owner" (see below) may be the
                 original data source, for instance simply because he
                 knows where his equipment is.

              o  It is also possible that the Location Data Source is
                 fully aware of the owner's policies. In this case the
                 owner is able to authorize the Location Data Source to
                 provide the position to a recipient. Then, the
                 recipient can easily link the origin of the location
                 data and the origin of the policies, thus convincing
                 himself of the authenticity of the location data.

              In those cases we will say that the Location Data Source
              is a Location Server. (But there are other types of
              Location Servers.)

              In general, the Location Data Source is some network
              entity, properly authenticated and authorized by the
              network, but perhaps totally unknown to the target and in
              particular unaware of the full details of the policies of
              the owner, or not fully trusted by him.

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     4

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002


              The location data source, or the person who legally owns
              it, may have the "copyrights" of the sighting, but in
              general not the ownership of the privacy rights of the
              target.

   The user (that is, the owner) should have full control on his
   policies used by Location Servers. To quote the International Working
   Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications [EU-IWGDP]:

   "The user must be able to access, correct and delete his or her
   preference data also in cases where the preferences of the user are
   not stored on the mobile device, but within the network."

   Location Recipients may submit location requests asking for the
   location of a particular target, for the members of a group, or for
   targets with given attributes.

3.2. Data Flows

   The so called "pull-model" is as follows: the Location Server

        1.   receives Location Information from the Location Data Source
             or from other Location Servers,

        2.   receives, directly or through a repository or a trusted
             third party, the policies associated with the targets,

        3.   accepts services requests from Location Recipients
             (including other location servers),

        4.   matches the location request to the policies for the target
             and processes the Location Information accordingly, and

        5.   returns Filtered Location Information of the target.

   Of course, other models are possible, but in principle, they contain
   the same information flows between the entities. The single data
   flows are:
   LI (Location Information), FLI (Filtered Location Information), Pol
   (Policy), PolInfo (Policy Information) and LRequest (Location
   Information Request).

   They will now be discussed:

      LI (Location Information): the location data source sends the
         "full", raw location information to the location server.

      FLI (Filtered Location Information): The location server sends
         filtered location information to the Location Recipient. The
         information is filtered in the sense that in general not the
         full information is being delivered, but only a less precise
         version of the information.

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     5

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002


         There is no technical reason for distinguishing Location
         Information from Filtered Location Information; it is just a
         way of insisting that the information sent by the location
         server is (or could be) different from the information he has
         received.

      Pol (Policy): An owner of the target (or in particular, the target
         itself) sends a Policy to the location server.

      PolInfo (Policy Information): the server informs the Location
         Recipient which data type(s) are available for filtered
         location information for a given target. This mechanism must be
         able to be invoked by the Location Recipient before he sends an
         LRequest.

      LRequest (Location Information Request): the Location Recipient
         requests location information for a target, a given class of
         targets, or for targets with a particular set of attributes. In
         this request, the Location Recipient may select which location
         information data type it prefers. The Location Recipient can
         also specify the need for periodic location information
         updates.

3.3. Further explanations

   (Note: Parts of the contents of this subsection may be out of the
   scope of the work of the working group. But it is necessary to
   introduce some notation and concepts to later say: "*Precisely that*
   is outside of our scope".)

   The term "device" denotes the piece of physical electronic equipment
   (if any) that is presumed to be carried by or affixed to the target.
   There may be a few times we want to differentiate the target from the
   device.

   At this point of the discussion in the geopriv WG it is unclear to
   which extent the contents of the data flows LI, FLI, Pol, PolInfo,
   and LRequest will be in the scope of the WG, but at least a naive
   conceptual explanation of what could be meant is helpful for the
   understanding.

   Location Services deal with at least these two types of information:
   identities (for authentication, authorization, and, for the purposes
   of privacy, anonymity) and location (not any type of private
   information, like private medical information). Disregarding
   completely the formats or data types that are or will be used, the
   private data sent in LI may be seen as a pair:

        (user identifier, location information)

   (For shortness and simplicity, we assume no time-stamp as a third
   coordinate in this sighting, implicitly meaning "at the current time"

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     6

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   or "at a very recent time". Notice that this is in many cases enough,
   since anyway time-stamps are not exact and clocks are not usually
   synchronized. The question, where the target was during the last
   couple of hours is generally not addressed by location services.)

   But, instead of providing the full information ("user ABC is at
   coordinates xyz"), the location server matches the request of the
   Location Recipient and the policies for the target and changes
   perhaps both, the identifier and the location information. He just
   says: "a customer of yours is at the entrance of the Palace Hotel" to
   a taxi, or "Gottfried Frege is AtHome" to a friend of Gottfried,
   "pseudonym2947a is at 25 Main Street" to a nearby restaurant, or
   "truck27 is at HangarB371" to a manager in an airport.

   The location server has to know which Location Recipients have
   permission to access the Location Information, in which accuracy,
   etc.

   In other words, what the location server will forward to the Location
   Recipient is a new version of the pair:

        (user identifier-1, information-content-1)

   where information-content-1 is the "translation" of the location
   information to the proper format and accuracy, and user identifier-1
   is another identifier of the target.

   How exactly policies are written or what is their expressive power,
   is left out of the scope of this discussion. But for better
   understanding of what could be intended, an example of a policy is
   adequate:

        o "My family is allowed to know my street address;

        o within 8am-5pm during working days my boss is allowed to know
           the city and

             . if I am inside a campus of my corporation, then also the
                campus, building, and room number;

        o any member of my corporation is allowed to know the time zone
           I am."

   This policy contains 4 permission rules.

   There is another interface or set of interfaces between Location
   Recipient, target (or owner), and location service that is outside of
   the scope of this paper (and probably of the WG) but for better
   understanding needs to be considered in our picture. This set of
   interfaces will be denoted collectively by "Service":

      Service: A set of interfaces and data flows used to set-up and
         provide value-added location-aware services, where

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     7

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002


        o the Location Recipient subscribes himself to the services of
           the Location Server.

        o the Location Recipient and the owner agree on identities (say
           relation-pseudonyms, purpose-built-identities, local names,
           or real identities) to be used later as well as on
           credentials or cryptographic material to prove the ownership
           of the negotiated identities. This will be discussed later.

        o The value-added service may be provided by sending an
           encrypted e-mail or other type of e-message to the target or
           owner, or the owner one activates a web page of the Ultimate
           Location Recipient using TLS. Knowing now the location of the
           target, the web-server provides a location-based information
           service.

4. Services

   A more systematic treatment of scenarios will be given in forthcoming
   versions of this draft.

4.1. "Here I am!" Services

   After locating himself, the target (=owner) may send his location to
   the Ultimate Location Recipient. In this service, the target (=owner)
   may take the initiative to send the location, rather than responding
   to requests.

   This corresponsd basically to scenarios 1 and 2.

4.2. "Where am I?" Services

   Those are services where the Location Recipient wants to know where
   he is, but he does not have any Location Data resources needed with
   her.

   In one particular case, the Location Recipient does know the location
   (say, using a GPS chip), but not in the form that he needs it (say,
   as a street address). In this case, the owner asks an external
   Location Server to translate the information to a street address or
   position on a map. The Location Server obtains the location from the
   Location Data Source, which is the target itself converts the
   location information to the requested form and sends it back to the
   owner. This corresponds to Scenario 3

   In a second particular case, the Location Recipient does not know the
   location at all. The owner (e.g. cellular service subscriber) asks an
   external Location Server for the location of the target (e.g. the
   cellular phone he is carrying).  The Location Server obtains the
   location from the Location Data Source, (e.g. cellular carrier) over
   IP or other network. This corresponds to the particular case of
   Scenario 5, in which the Ultimate Location Recipient is also the

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     8

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   owner. Alternatively, the Location Server may internally obtain the
   location (in this case, the Location Server and Location Data Source
   are treated as the same entity).

4.3. "Where is he?" Services

   Location Recipient wants to know where a given target is. This
   corresponds to Scenarios 4 and 5.

5. Scenarios

   In the scenarios we only consider location recipients that require an
   explicit authorization from the owner to obtain the location
   information. This authorization is given in the form of user-defined
   policies. Other Location Recipients, for instance, the ones defined
   by regulatory requirements, (including the receivers of emergency
   calls, emergency alert, lawful interception) will probably have a
   different authorization status than the recipients considered in the
   following scenarios.

   We consider now the following 5 scenarios:

         1          2          3         4           5
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |   Loc    |    Loc   |    Loc   |   Loc    |    Loc   |
   |  Server  |   Server |   Server |  Server  |   Server |
   |     =    |     =    +----------+----------+----------+
   |   Owner  |   Owner  |   Owner  |   Owner  |   Owner  |
   |     =    |     =    |     =    |     =    |     =    |
   |  Target  |  Target  |  Target  |  Target  |  Target  |
   |     =    + ---------+     =    |     =    +----------+
   |   Loc    |   Loc    |   Loc    |   Loc    |   Loc    |
   |   Data   |   Data   |   Data   |   Data   |   Data   |
   |  Source  |  Source  |  Source  |  Source  |  Source  |
   +----------+----------+     =    +----------+----------+
   | Ultimate | Ultimate | Ultimate | Ultimate | Ultimate |
   |   Loc    |   Loc    |   Loc    |   Loc    |   Loc    |
   | Recipient| Recipient| Recipient| Recipient| Recipient|
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

   In this table, each column corresponds to one scenario. Two
   Functional Elements are in the same box if they are equal (or in the
   same physical entity). For instance in Scenario 1 there are 2
   physical entities, (the Ultimate Location Recipient is one; all other
   functional entities collapse to another) and in Scenario 5 there
   are 4 different physical entities, (only the owner and the target are
   the same).

   A more systematic treatment of scenarios will be given in forthcoming
   versions of this draft.

5.1. Scenario 1: The handset-based solution


   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                     9

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   The first case we want to consider is a mobile node (laptop or
   handheld) that at the same time is the target, owner, Location
   Server, and Location Data Source. The mobile node discovers its own
   position using a GPS mechanism, a manual input from the user or a co-
   located sensor that recognizes the relative position of some active
   badges or other reference points. An application running in the
   mobile node delivers its location to some Ultimate Location
   Recipients.

   An Ultimate Location Recipient that wants to know the position of the
   mobile node sends a Location Requests to the application running on
   the mobile node. After authenticating the Location Recipient, the
   application checks which policy rule matches, translates the location
   information to the appropriate form and sends back this Filtered
   Location Information to the Ultimate Location Recipient.

   Notice that in this case the policies are only for internal use of
   the mobile node and as such do not have to be standardized. Only the
   interface to the Ultimate Location Recipients has to be standardized.

   The Location Recipient himself has to obey some perhaps implicit
   policies, to be discussed in the requirements draft.

5.2. Scenario 2: A Network-Based Location Data Source

   This scenario is very similar to the first one, but instead of the
   mobile node discovering his position by himself, it uses an
   underlying location system based on a co-located active badge, a
   Layer 2 interface, a service provided by his access network or a
   similar infrastructure.


     +----------+
     | Location |
     |   Data   |
     |  Source  |
     +----------+
           |
           | LI
           V
     +----------+
     | Location |
     |  Server  |       LReq       +-----------+
     |    =     |<-----------------| Ultimate  |
     |  Target  |                  | Location  |
     |    =     |----------------->| Recipient |
     |   Owner  |       FLI        +-----------+
     +----------+

   Figure 1. Scenario 2




   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                    10

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   Notice that in this scenario no Location Recipient exists, besides
   the owner and the Ultimate Location Recipients served by the owner.
   Thus, the user (owner) is in full control of its private information.

   But it may be unclear how the user makes sure that the Location Data
   Source does not provide location information to other location
   recipients. Either the Location Data Source is aware of the full
   policies of the owner, (that is it is a Location Server), or of the
   mobile node subscription profile (or something of that sort). A
   precise requirement should be formulated to guarantee this privacy
   protection.

   Nevertheless, there is already some concern about the location
   information leaking to entities not authorized. To quote the
   International Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications
   [EU-IWGDP]:

   "The user must remain in full control on whether precise location
   information is generated in the network. In this respect, handset-
   based solutions where the creation of precise location information is
   initiated by the mobile device seem to offer a better degree of
   privacy than network-based solutions where location information is
   generated as a standard feature and choice of the user over this
   information is limited to the question whether it will be
   communicated to third parties."

   Another concern is that, depending on the sensing infrastructure and
   its trusts relationships to the user, authenticating the supplied
   location information is difficult for the following reasons:

        o some sensor systems only detect active badges that can be
           removed from the mobile object they represent.

        o sensor systems are not equipped with proper keys or key
           distribution software.

5.3. Scenario 3: External Location Server

   Another variant is when the target does not have enough resources to
   compute the translation of the location information to the data type
   that he requires. For instance, the target knows his exact
   coordinates and wants to retrieve the street address. To do this, the
   target sends first his (raw) location information to a location
   service that will perform the translation and than asks for the
   location information in the required format. Thus here the target is
   the client of the location service, that is, he is the Location
   Recipient.

   Let us further assume that

        o there are no other Location Recipients to the location
           service besides the target, and


   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                    11

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

        o the target is also the owner of the privacy rights.

   In this case, no explicit policies are needed for the location
   service, but he has to obey some standard user-independent policies
   (to be discussed in the requirements draft).

5.4. Scenario 4: External Location Server and Recipients


     +----------+
     | Location |
     |   Data   |       LI      +-----------+
     |  Source  |-------------->|           |
     |    =     |       Pol     | Location  |
     |  Target  |-------------->|  Server   |
     |    =     |               +-----------+
     |   Owner  |                    ^  |
     +----------+                Req |  | FLI
          ^                          |  V
            \                   +-----------+
              \                 | Ultimate  |
                --------------->| Location  |
                 Service        | Recipient |
                                +-----------+

   Figure 2. Scenario 4

   The next scenario we consider introduces policies to the external
   location server. This corresponds to scenario 3 when there are other
   Location Recipients besides the target or owner.

   Examples for this and the next scenarios are given by Location-Based
   Information services that allow subscribers to access filtered and
   tailored information based on the location of the requesting user.
   Those services include navigation, city sightseeing, location
   dependent content broadcast, and mobile yellow pages.

   There is a special case of Scenario 4 that could be considered
   separately: this is when the Location Recipient is also the owner.
   This situation is found in particular in some tracking services that
   include Fleet and Asset Management Services allowing the tracking of
   location and status of vehicles (cars, trucks, etc.), animal, assets,
   or people, for example when supervisor of a delivery service who
   needs to know the location and status of employees, parents who need
   to know where their children are. There are some examples of tracing
   services that do not fall in the special case, for instance stolen
   vehicle location.

5.5. Scenario 5: External Location Data Source and Server





   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                    12

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

                                +----------+
                                | Location |
                                |   Data   |
                                |  Source  |
                                +----------+
                                     | LI
                                     V
     +----------+              +-----------+
     |  Target  |       Pol    |           |
     |    =     |------------->| Location  |
     |   Owner  |              |  Server   |
     +----------+              +-----------+
          ^                         ^  |
           \                    Req |  | FLI
            \                       |  V
             \                 +-----------+
              \                | Ultimate  |
               --------------->| Location  |
                 Service       | Recipient |
                               +-----------+

   Figure 3. Scenario 5

   This scenario is a simple combination of previous ones, but it brings
   some new complications. The target itself is not able to calculate
   its position and requires an external location data source. But this
   location data source passes the information to an external location
   server, instead of the target itself.

   Even if the target was able to perform the necessary translations,
   this scenario will be common to support the operation of the access
   network: for instance Location Based Charging, which allows a
   subscriber to be charged different rates depending on the
   subscriber's location, or monitoring of QoS parameters correlated to
   location for monitoring of Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and for
   quality assurance, utilization review, credentialing, and other
   activities that are part of ensuring appropriate treatment and
   payment.

   In general, there are some issues with this scenario. The user may be
   roaming outside of his home network, and the location server in the
   visited network may be untrusted, or the regulations in the given
   country are not so stringent as in his. Or perhaps the visited domain
   does not support the privacy-protecting protocol he needs. That is,
   perhaps there is no location server or the location server of the
   visited domain is perhaps not able even to parse the policies of the
   user correctly. Another reason may be that the owner does not want to
   download his policy files at this location because they already
   contain some private information about the partners that he
   communicates with, to which groups he belongs to, or the location
   server may observe the IP addresses of the Location Recipients that
   ask for my location information and deduce from that sensitive
   information. The user wants to stipulate very simple instructions for

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                    13

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   the location data source of the visited domain, namely "send the
   location information to my trusted or my home location server!"

6. Security Considerations

   The purpose of the geopriv protocol is to allow a policy-controlled
   disclosure of location information for location services. Only the
   information carried by this protocol is secured in a way compliant
   with the privacy and security policies of the target. This does not
   mean that geopriv secures the target against general traffic analysis
   attacks or other forms of privacy violations.

7. References

   [RFC-2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997
   [EU-IWGDP] International Working Group on Data Protection in
      Telecommunications: Common Position on Privacy and location
      information in mobile communications services. Adopted at the 29th
      meeting of the Working Group on 15/16 Februar 2001 in Bangalore.
      http://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/doc/int/iwgdpt/locat_en.htm

8. Author's Addresses

   Jorge R Cuellar
   Siemens AG
   Otto-Hahn Ring 6
   81730 Munich                   Email:  jorge.cuellar@mchp.siemens.de
   Germany

   Mehmet Ersue
   Siemens AG
   Hofmannstr. 51
   81359 Munich                     Email:  Mehmet.Ersue@icn.siemens.de
   Germany

   Kenji Takahashi
   Information Sharing Platform Laboratories
   NTT
   3-9-11 Midoricho
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585      E-mail: takahashi.kenji@lab.ntt.co.jp
   Japan


9. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph

   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                    14

                          Geopriv Scenarios                  Feb 2002

   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




































   Cuellar, Ersue, Takahashi    Expires Aug 2002                    15