IAB                                                         B. Carpenter
Internet Draft
March 2000



            Charter of the Internet Architecture Board (IAB)



                             Copyright Notice

                      Placeholder for ISOC copyright



                                 Abstract

                        draft-iab-rfc1601bis-03.txt

       This memo documents the composition, selection, roles, and
       organization of the Internet Architecture Board. It replaces
       RFC 1601.



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

















Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


   Table of Contents:

      Status of this Memo.............................................1
      1. IAB Membership...............................................3
      1.1  Selection of voting IAB members............................3
      1.2 Ex-Officio and Liaison members..............................3
      2.  The Role of the IAB.........................................3
      2.1 Architectural oversight in more detail......................5
      3. IAB Organization.............................................5
      3.1 IAB chair...................................................5
      3.2 Executive Director..........................................6
      3.3 Selection of the IRTF chair.................................6
      3.4 Liaisons within the IETF....................................6
      3.5 Voting rule.................................................6
      3.6 Openness and confidentiality................................7
      Security Considerations.........................................7
      Summary of Changes from RFC 1601................................7
      References......................................................7
      Full Copyright Statement........................................7
      Author's Address................................................8




































Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


1. IAB Membership

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) shall consist of thirteen
   voting members, composed of the chair of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), and of twelve full members.  The IETF chair, who
   is also the chair of the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG),
   may vote on all official IAB actions except the approval of IESG
   members and appeals against IESG decisions. Ex-officio and liaison
   members of the IAB may also attend IAB meetings but shall have no
   vote on official actions.

   In the event that the number of voting members temporarily falls
   below thirteen for any reason, the IAB may function as normal subject
   to the voting rule of Section 3.5.

   Members of the IAB shall serve as individuals, and not as
   representatives of any company, agency, or other organization.
   Members of the IAB shall owe no fiduciary duty of loyalty or care to
   IAB, IETF, IRTF or IESG.



1.1  Selection of voting IAB members

   Voting IAB members, including the IETF chair, are selected and
   appointed according to the procedures defined in [BCP 10] . Normally,
   six full members are appointed each year to sit for two years, and
   the IETF chair is appointed every two years.

   There is no limit to the number of terms that a member of the IAB may
   serve, subject to the process defined by [BCP 10].



1.2 Ex-Officio and Liaison members

   Ex-officio and liaison members of the IAB have no vote but
   participate in IAB discussions. However, an ex-officio position may
   be held by a voting member, who does not thereby lose his or her
   vote. Liaison positions may not be held by a voting member.

   The chair of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) is an ex-officio
   member of the IAB. The IAB has an Executive Director who is an ex-
   officio member of the IAB.

   The Internet Society, the RFC Editor, the IANA and the IESG each
   appoints a liaison member to the IAB.




2.  The Role of the IAB

   The IAB is chartered both as a committee of the IETF and as an
   advisory body of the Internet Society.  Its responsibilities include:


Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


   (a) IESG Appointment

   The IAB appoints a new IETF chair and all other IESG candidates, from
   a list provided by the IETF nominating committee established under
   [BCP 10].

   (b) Architectural Oversight

   The IAB provides oversight of the architecture for the protocols and
   procedures used by the Internet. This point is expanded in Section
   2.1 below.

   (c) Standards Process Oversight and Appeal

   The IAB provides oversight of the process used to create Internet
   Standards [BCP 9].

   The IAB serves as an appeal board for complaints of improper
   execution of the standards process, with powers defined in [BCP 9].

   (d) RFC Series and IANA

   The RFC Editor executes editorial management and publication of the
   IETF "Request for Comment" (RFC) document series, which is the
   permanent document repository of the IETF.  The RFC series
   constitutes the archival publication channel for Internet Standards
   and for other contributions by the Internet research and engineering
   community. RFCs are available free of charge to anyone via the
   Internet. The IAB must approve the appointment of an organization to
   act as RFC Editor and the general policy followed by the RFC Editor.

   The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) administers various
   protocol parameters used by IETF protocols, delegating this
   administration as appropriate. The IAB must approve the appointment
   of an organization to act as IANA on behalf of the IETF. The IANA
   takes technical direction on IETF protocols from the IESG.

   (e) ISOC Liaison

   The IAB acts as a source of advice and guidance to the Board of
   Trustees and Officers of the Internet Society concerning technical,
   architectural, procedural, and (where appropriate) policy matters
   pertaining to the Internet and its enabling technologies. If
   necessary the IAB may convene panels of knowledgeable people, hold
   hearings, and otherwise pursue the investigation of specific
   questions or topics presented to it by the Internet Society.

   (f) External Liaison

   The IAB acts as representative of the interests of the IETF and the
   Internet Society in technical liaison relationships with other
   organizations concerned with standards and other technical and
   organizational issues relevant to the world-wide Internet. Liaisons
   are kept as informal as possible and must be of demonstrable value in
   improving the quality of IETF specifications.  Individual members of


Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


   the IETF are appointed as liaisons to other organizations by the IAB
   or IESG as appropriate.



2.1 Architectural oversight in more detail

   A major role of the IAB is long range planning and coordination
   between different areas of IETF activity.  The IAB, both collectively
   and on an individual basis, is expected to pay attention to important
   long-term issues in the Internet, and to make sure that these issues
   are brought to the attention of the group(s) that are in a position
   to address them.  It is also expected to play a role in assuring that
   the people responsible for evolving the Internet and its technology
   are aware of the essential elements of the Internet architecture.

   IAB members pay special attention to emerging activities in the IETF
   and to "Birds of a Feather" sessions at IETF meetings.  The IAB
   assists the IESG in evaluating such activities and in determining
   whether an IETF or an IRTF group is more appropriate.  When a new
   IETF working group is proposed, the IESG will forward a preliminary
   version of the charter to the IAB for review of architectural
   consistency and integrity.  The IAB shall review these proposed
   charters and give feedback to the IESG as appropriate.

   Pursuant to the architectural oversight function, the IAB sponsors
   and organizes the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) [BCP 8].  The
   IAB reviews proposed IRTF groups.

   The IAB will convene invitational workshops to perform in-depth
   reviews of particular architectural issues.  Such reviews may include
   consideration of relevant IETF and IRTF activities, and of work in
   other organizations, and for this purpose the workshop may invite
   presentations by qualified parties on the design goals and decisions,
   technology choices, and other pertinent aspects of these activities.
   The results of such a review will be a report which may give advice
   to the IETF community and the IESG.

   The IAB may organize ad hoc bodies of independent technical experts
   to adjudicate technical disputes.




3. IAB Organization



3.1 IAB chair

   The members of the IAB shall select one of its full members to serve
   as the chair of the IAB, with all of the duties and responsibilities
   normally associated with such a position.  The term of the IAB chair
   shall be one year, with no restriction on renewal.  The chair of the
   IAB may be removed at any time by the affirmative vote of two-thirds


Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 5]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


   of the members of the IAB, or as a result of his or her departure
   from the IAB.

   The chair of the IAB shall have the authority to manage the
   activities and meetings of the IAB.



3.2 Executive Director

   The chair of the IAB shall have the authority to appoint an honorary
   Executive Director (ExecD) for a one-year renewable term, and to
   remove him or her. The ExecD shall administer the internal operation
   of the IAB, e.g., organization of meetings and reporting of their
   results.

   The ExecD is an ex-officio member as defined in Section 1.2.



3.3 Selection of the IRTF chair

   The IAB shall have the authority to appoint the chair of the Internet
   Research Task Force (IRTF) for a two-year renewable term, and to
   remove him or her. The IRTF chair shall be responsible for the
   management and organization of the IRTF according to [BCP 8].

   The IRTF chair is an ex-officio member as defined in Section 1.2.



3.4 Liaisons within the IETF

   The chair of the IAB and another voting IAB member (other than the
   IETF chair), to be selected by the IAB, shall serve as liaisons to
   the IESG. In addition, the IESG will appoint one of its members
   (other than the IETF chair) to serve as a liaison to the IAB.  The
   IESG liaison may attend IAB meetings but shall have no vote.



3.5 Voting rule

   The IAB attempts to reach all decisions by unanimous consensus.  If
   consensus cannot be reached, meaning that a vote is required, a
   motion passes if there are not fewer than seven votes in favour and
   not more than two against.

   IAB votes may be taken by face to face meeting, teleconference,
   Internet communication, or any combination of the above.







Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 6]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


3.6 Openness and confidentiality

   The IAB publishes minutes of all its meetings on the Internet, and
   conducts an open meeting at every IETF meeting. It publishes all its
   findings as RFCs, Internet Drafts or messages to the IETF mailing
   list. However, discussion of personnel matters and possibly legal and
   financial matters may sometimes be required to be kept confidential.

   Specifically, the IAB makes use of the second level domain iab.org
   and the URL http://www.iab.org to publish information.



Security Considerations

   This memo does not raise any known security threats.



Summary of Changes from RFC 1601

   This document replaces [RFC 1601]. The principal change is the
   removal of material now covered in [BCP 8], [BCP 9] and [BCP 10],
   with many consequent editorial changes.  Additional changes are:

    - description of a voting rule
    - note on openness and confidentiality
    - addition of liaison seats for the Internet Society and the IANA
    - revised text concerning the IANA and the RFC Editor
    - clarifications following legal review




References

   [RFC 1601]

   [BCP 8]  RFC 2014 or its replacement

   [BCP 9]  RFC 2026 or its replacement

   [BCP 10] RFC 2282 or its replacement




Full Copyright Statement

   PLACEHOLDER for full ISOC Copyright Statement if needed.







Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 7]

Internet Draft                IAB Charter                     March 2000


Author's Address


      Brian E. Carpenter
      IBM
      c/o iCAIR
      Suite 150
      1890 Maple Avenue
      Evanston IL 60201
      USA

      email: brian@icair.org













































Carpenter               Expires September 2000                  [Page 8]
