
Network Working Group                                           R. White
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: August 1, 2008                                         J. Burns
                                                                Wachovia
                                                        January 29, 2008


            Common Practices in Routing Protocols Deployment
                         draft-white-rppract-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 1, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document discusses common practices used in deploying routing
   protocols in both public and private networks.  The focus is not to
   describe how routing protocols should be deployed, but rather how
   they are generally deployed, to provide those working on
   specifications which impact the operation of routing protocols with
   guidance in what will likely be deployed, or what will likely not be
   deployed.  The focus in thie document will be ionterdomain routing,



White & Burns            Expires August 1, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             RP Common Practices              January 2008


   but it will cover aspects of intradomain routing, as well.


1.  Background

   When considering new extensions to existing routing protocols, it's
   useful to consider them in the context of existing usage of these
   protocols.  Various questions come to mind, such as:

   o  The way in which routing information is originated into the
      routing protocol.
   o  The way in which routing information is aggregated within the
      network.
   o  The way in which routing protocol peering sessions are configured
   o  The types of security which are enabled at different places within
      the network.
   o  ....

   Each of these topics will be covered in a separate section below.
   10.1.1.0/24--(AS65000)---(AS65001)--(AS65002)


2.  Originating Routing Information

   Interior and exterior gateway protocols have a number of ways in
   which they classify routing information, the primary of which is the
   way in which destinations have been injected into the protocol.

2.1.  Interior Gateway Protocols

   For interior gateway protocols, routing information is normally
   classified as originating either from within the protocol, or from a
   source which is external to the protocol.  Destinations which are
   learned of through a direct connection, such as a connection to a
   subnet on a router running the protocol, are called internal routes.
   Destinations which are learned of through some other means, outside
   the protocol, are called external routes.

   Virtually all routing information is injected into interior gateway
   protocols as internal routing information, unless there is a specific
   reason for injecting external information into the IGP routing
   domain.  Some specific reasons might include:

      When multiple routing protocols are being used in the same
      network.  Generally, this occurs when two networks are merged, or
      when a part of the network runs a different routing protocol for
      policy or design reasons.




White & Burns            Expires August 1, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             RP Common Practices              January 2008


      When interaction is occuring with a network not under the local
      administrator's control.  Generally, injecting external live
      routing information between interior gateway protocols between
      routing domains is not encouraged, but there are instances when
      this occurs.
      To inject manually configured reachability information into the
      protocol.  This generally occurs along the edges of a network, to
      provide reachability to destinations not within the network
      itself.
      To provide reachability across some form of layer 3 virtual
      private network, when no mechanism is deployed or supported to
      provide the transport of native routing information across the
      VPN.

   Generally, injectiong of external routing information is avoided
   where possible in network designs, unless there is a specific policy
   or design related reason to do so.

2.2.  Exterior Gateway Protocols

   For exterior gateway protocols, the distinction between internal and
   external routing information is blurred, as all information is
   considered to be external.  There is an indicator of where a specific
   piece of routing information originated, but this information is used
   very low on the decision process.


3.  Aggregating Routing Information


4.  Common Practices In Peering


5.  Common Practices in Security


6.  Summary

   ....


7.  Acknowledgements

   ....







White & Burns            Expires August 1, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             RP Common Practices              January 2008


8.  Informative References

   [BGP-MD5]  Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5
              Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Russ White
   Cisco Systems


   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: riw@cisco.com
   URI:


   John Burns
   Wachovia


   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: john.burns1@wachovia.com
   URI:






















White & Burns            Expires August 1, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             RP Common Practices              January 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





White & Burns            Expires August 1, 2008                 [Page 5]


