



Network Working Group                                     S. Madanapalli
Internet-Draft                                                 LogicaCMG
Intended status: Standards Track                                B. Patil
Expires: February 5, 2007                                          Nokia
                                                          August 4, 2006


 Recommendation to make periodic Router Advertisements in IPv6 optional
            draft-madanapalli-ipv6-periodic-rtr-advts-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 5, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   Periodic IPv6 router advertisements are a concern in mobile and
   cellular networks in which the hosts are attached to the network and
   access router but switch state to dormant mode in order to conserve
   battery power.  In addition the air interface is a resource that
   should be used optimally and hence periodic router advertisements
   that an access router would send should be limited.  Transmission of
   Periodic router advertisements to hosts on a link by a router should



Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      IPv6 Periodic Rtr Advts optional         August 2006


   be optional.  At the very least the interval between such router
   advertisements should be configurable to a value that is
   significantly higher than currently specified.  This document
   provides a recommendation for the periodic router advertisement
   interval (MaxRtrAdvInterval) and router lifetime.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Adverse effects of frequent Periodic RAs  . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 7

































Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      IPv6 Periodic Rtr Advts optional         August 2006


1.  Introduction

   [1] defines neighbor discovery procedures for IPv6 for router
   discovery, prefix discovery, address resolution, neighbor
   Unreachability detection and parameter discovery. [1] defines Router
   Advertisements, which are sent either periodically or in response to
   Router solicitations from a host. [1] recommends the interval between
   periodic Router advertisements to be small enough such that the hosts
   will be able to discover all routers on a link within the span of a
   few minutes.

   [1] also defines parameter values for various parameters.  Two
   specific parameters are considered within the scope of this document:

   1.  Router Lifetime during which a router acts as the default router
       for a host.  The current maximum recommended value for this
       parameter is 150 minutes (9000 seconds).

   2.  MaxRtrAdvInterval: The maximum possible delay between two
       consecutive periodic router advertisements.  The current
       recommended value is 30 minutes (1800 seconds).

   Routers that implement the current recommendations would send the
   periodic multicast router advertisements every 30 minutes, which can
   be a significant problem in mobile/cellular network environments.
   This document looks at the adverse effects of the current [1]
   specification on mobile and cellular networks, resulting from
   periodic multicast router advertisements and recommends that the
   sending of such router advertisements be optional, i.e. it should be
   possible to configure a router in specific environments or deployment
   scenarios with periodic router advertisements switched off.


2.  Adverse effects of frequent Periodic RAs

   Mobile/cellular Networks like GPRS, 3G and WiMAX typically assign
   long lived prefixes, and the default access routers (GGSN, PDSN, ASN
   GW etc) for the hosts would typically be available for a long time on
   a given link (possibly infinite).  Generally there exists only one
   default router at any given time on a given link for a host.  The
   host devices in these networks, i.e. the mobile nodes, have
   constraints on battery power.  To conserve battery life, mobile nodes
   frequently enter idle or dormant mode.  Typically a mobile node will
   be in idle/dormant mode most of the time.

   IPv6 capable mobile nodes that are attached to an access router and
   are in idle/dormant mode will have to be awakened to deliver the
   router advertisement.  This incurs significant costs and has a



Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      IPv6 Periodic Rtr Advts optional         August 2006


   negative impact on the battery lifetime of such devices.  The mobile
   node has to be paged and switched to a state, which allows it to
   receive the router advertisement.  Additionally bandwidth over the
   air interface is used for transmission of such packets.  From an
   operational perspective, the periodic router advertisement in mobile
   networks is detrimental to optimal use of the radio resources as well
   as impacting battery power in mobile devices.  The transmission and
   delivery of periodic router advertisements to a mobile node which is
   in dormant/idle mode at the expense of paging, allocating radio
   resources and establishing a connection to the host is unnecessary.
   Router advertisement is useful at the MN if it relied on it as the
   means to detect movement.  However in many of the cellular networks,
   movement detection is not done at the IP layer.  If an MN needs a
   router advertisement for any reason, it can always solicit for it.
   And if the network needs to deliver a router advertisement to a host
   to convey changes, it can do so as well without having to depend on
   periodic RAs.


3.  Recommendations

   In order to optimize IPv6 behavior for deployment in mobile/cellular
   environments this document recommends the following changes to the ND
   [1] specification:

   o  The transmission of periodic router advertisements should be
      optional.  Access routers in mobile/cellular environments should
      have the option of switching off the sending of periodic RAs to
      hosts that are currently attached to the AR.  The host served by
      such an AR should not expect to receive unsolicited RAs.

   o  The maximum router lifetime be increased beyond the current max
      value of 9000 seconds.

   o  The maximum value of the parameter MaxRtrAdvInterval be greater
      than 1800 seconds.

   The changes recommended to be made for ND are as follows:

   1.  Router Life Time: Allow the setting of this parameter in the
       router advertisement to 65535.  This would imply that the router
       is available as the default router for infinity.  This value can
       be updated by the subsequent router advertisements with a
       specific value.

   2.  MaxRtrAdvInterval: Allow the parameter to be configurable with a
       value set to 0 (zero).  This indicates that the periodic
       multicast router advertisements are switched off on this



Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      IPv6 Periodic Rtr Advts optional         August 2006


       interface.  In case no value is specified for this parameter,
       then the MaxRtrAdvInterval should be computed as indicated below:

          MaxRtrAdvInterval = 0.33 * min of {Router Lifetime, Prefix
          lifetime}
          This allows a host to receive three router advertisements
          before either Router Lifetime, or Prefix lifetime expires so
          that if there is any pocket loss in transmission it can be
          alleviated.

   3.  Recommend that mobile nodes proactively solicit router
       advertisements in any of the following cases:

          The threshold of the router lifetime is 0.75 *
          AdvDefaultLifetime and is triggered.

          The threshold of the prefix lifetime is 0.75 *
          AdvValidLifetime and is triggered.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies a few amendments to the [1] and does not
   introduce any new security threats.  To reduce the threats associated
   with ND it is recommended that deployments use SeND [2] to secure
   neighbor discovery messages.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


6.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


7.  References

   [1]  "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6),
        draft-ietf-ipv6-2461bis-07.txt(work in progress)", May 2006.

   [2]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
        Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.






Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      IPv6 Periodic Rtr Advts optional         August 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Syam Madanapalli
   LogicaCMG
   125 Yemlur Main Road
   Off Airport Road
   Bangalore  560037
   India

   Email: smadanapalli at gmail dot com


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: basavaraj.patil@nokia.com
































Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      IPv6 Periodic Rtr Advts optional         August 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Madanapalli & Patil     Expires February 5, 2007                [Page 7]


