Network Working Group                                     G. Karagiannis
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                                    Q. Sun
Expires: July 23, 2015                                     China Telecom
                                                       Luis M. Contreras
                                                              Telefonica
                                                               P. Yegani
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                             JF Tremblay
                                                                Viagenie
                                                                    J.Bi
                                                     Tsinghua University
                                                        January 23, 2015

   Problem Statement for Shared Unified Policy Automation (SUPA)
           draft-karagiannis-supa-problem-statement-04

Abstract

   The rapid increase in the amount and type of traffic makes it
   significantly more challenging for operational and management
   applications to maintain the network and deploy new services. This
   is the root cause of one of the major challenges that network
   operators (service providers, SME, etc) are facing today. The
   operators are obliged to create a simplified view of their network
   infrastructure that can help network engineers to use such a
   simplified model rather than manipulating individual devices. In this
   context, providing network operators with a set of standard generic
   YANG-based data models that enable management and automation of
   services on their network is essential.
   This document describes what has to be addressed in order to equip
   service providers with the means to quickly and dynamically
   create/query/scale/update/delete the services they want to offer.
   This may include a variety of different service enabling scenarios
   and in particular VPN management within a data center or among a set
   of physical or virtualized data centers that belong to an
   organization or different organizations.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 23, 2015.

 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014




Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Requirements/Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7


1.  Introduction

   Network operators are faced with networks of increasing size and
   complexity while trying to improve their quality and availability, as
   more and more services depend on them. Programmatic ways to configure
   networks, often called software-defined, are considered by many
   network operators in order to shift the balance in their favor.

   Currently, the separation of development and operation of network
   technologies leads to slow deployment of network functions/devices
   and poor user experiences.

   Providing means of exposing a view of the network to applications
   may provide significant improvements in configuration agility, error
   detection and uptime for operators.

   However, the real value behind central configuration schemes lies
   within the possible simplification through abstract models
   provided by such systems to applications and network services running
   above them (on the so-called northbound side). Well-designed
   simplified models are able to provide a wide range of granularity for
   various applications and network services needs, from the lower-level
   physical network to high-level application services.


   1.1 Motivation
 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014



   The rapid increase in the amount and type of traffic makes it
   significantly more challenging for operational and management
   applications to maintain the network and deploy new services.
   Programmatic ways to configure and operate networks, often called
   software-defined, are one means used by many network operators to
   provide significant benefits in design and deployment agility.

   The purpose of the SUPA (Shared Unified Policy Automation) working
   group is to introduce the concepts of multi-level and multi-
   technology network abstractions to address the current separation
   between development and deployment operations. Business agility,
   along with OpEx reduction, cannot be obtained unless it becomes
   possible to deploy changes as products.
   Policy-based management is one way to help do this, but better
   abstractions of network resources and services are needed to achieve
   these goals.

   Several working groups in IETF such as I2RS (L3/ routing topologies),
   ALTO (cost maps), SFC (service chain), have already defined various
   schemes for the configuration of network devices and specific network
   controllers. However, none of these efforts offer (1) a vendor-
   neutral standardized scheme for applications to transmit their needs
   to controllers and (2) a set of generic YANG-based data models that
   enable management and automation of services.

   Figure 1 is copied from [ID.draft-zhou-supa-framework] to show the
   SUPA framework where applications can communicate with management
   agents of all types, which can be for example single or multiple
   management agents. These management agents can use any type of
   mechanisms for excahning information to and from NEs. In this
   framework NEs can interact with local or remote management agents
   (e.g., exchange configuration information, status, etc).

   Management agents, exchange configuration information with NEs and
   derive the actual and detailed network topology model. When an
   application needs to use this network topology it applies NETCONF
   [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [ID.draft-ietf-netconf-restconf] and it sends a
   request to receive a service specific abstraction from the network
   controller(s). Subsequently, the management agent(s) provides, a
   service specific abstraction of the network topology to the
   application, which should be able to meet the requirements imposed by
   this application. Different types of applications may get different
   service specific abstractions of the same network topology from the
   management agent (s). For example, for the same actual network
   topology, a VPN network service will receive a different service
   specific abstraction of the network topology, than an inter Data
   Center (DC) network service. By using policies, e.g., for traffic
   steering, the application can instruct the management agent(s) to
   map the service specific abstractions to the actual (detailed)
   network topology and NE specific configuration.

   The main goal of the SUPA working group is to develop a methodology
   by which the management and monitoring of network services can be
   done using standardized policy rules. Three types of YANG data models
   [RFC6020], [RFC6991] are envisioned, each at a different level of
   abstraction:

 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014


     1) model of network at the protocol level (logical topology)
     2) model of the service that relates the needs of the service to
        the physical and/or virtual topology used by the service
     3) model of the policy rules for managing the service

   In particular, the network is first defined as a topology. A service
   is then defined as a graph that uses that topology. A set of policy
   rules is then defined to manage the service. In this approach, the
   service data models, as well as the policy model, will be derived
   from a single information model, ensuring that each can be shared and
   reused as managed objects.
   Policy rules will be used to define the operational aspects of both
   the "southbound" (e.g., controller to network device) and
   "northbound" (e.g., controller to network application) portions of
   the service environment. The first example that the working group
   will focus on will be VPN management.

   Following the above described methodology, services can be quickly
   and dynamically created/deleted/updated, using proper mechanisms for
   exchanging information between the appropriate NEs. Examples of YANG-
   based data models for network topologies are provided in [ID.draft-
   contreras-supa-yang-network-topo].

   A YANG Data model for SUPA configuration is provided in
   [ID.draft-zaalouk-supa-configuration-model].

   The document [ID.draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping] describes
   guidelines for mapping high-level configuration and policy
   information into device-level configuration.

   This document is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
   terminology. Section 3 provides a brief overview of the use cases
   associated with SUPA. The requirements/objectives are provided in
   Section 4. Section 5 provides the security considerations. The IANA
   considerations are given in Section 6. Section 7 gives the
   acknowledgements and Section 8 provides the list of references.


                  +-------+           +-------+
                  | OAMA  |           | OAMA  |
                  +-------+           +-------+
                      |                   |  <---SUPA data model
                      |                   |
                 --------------------------------- BUS
                      |                   |
                      |                   |
               +-------------+       +-------------+
               | Management  |       | Management  |
               |    Agent    |       |    Agent    |
               +-------------+       +-------------+
                  |   |   |             |   |   |
                  |   |   |             |   |   |
                  |   |   |             |   |   |
                 NE1 NE2 NEn           NE1 NE2 NEn

                Figure 1: SUPA Framework overview

2.  Terminology
 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014



   Network Service: is the composition of network functions and defined
   by its functional and behavioural specification. The network service
   contributes to the behaviour of the higher layer service, which is
   characterized by at least performance, dependability, and security
   specifications.

   Network Element: a physical or virtual entity that implements one or
   more network function(s). NEs can interact with local or remote
   network controllers in order to exchange information, such as
   configuration information and status.

   Service specific abstraction: an abstract view of the actual topology
   of a network, which is associated with a specific network service
   type, e.g., VPN or Inter-DC.

3.  Use Cases

   This section briefly describes the use cases that are associated with
   different types of network services. The detailed description of
   these use cases is provided in other Internet draft(s).

   A large-scale IDC (Inter Data Center) operator provides server
   hosting, bandwidth, and value-added services to enterprises and ISPs,
   and has more than 10 data centers and more than 1Tbs bandwidth in a
   capital city. In current IDC networks, traffic is routed by
   configuring policy routes and adjusting routes prioritization to
   choose an outgoing link. Furthermore, the link bandwidth resources in
   the data centers are not efficiently utilized. Services usually do
   not have consistent bandwidth requirements at all times of a day,
   e.g. video ISP usually require more bandwidth at non-working hours
   but require less  bandwidth at working hours. Some customers have
   relative high QoS  requirement for their services, e.g. IM (Instant
   Messaging). Such scenarios may be worth modeling since Static
   bandwidth and QoS provisioning for all the customers and services is
   not reasonable and not a cost-effective solution.

   Operators such as China Telecom, are testing and implementing the
   DTS(DC  Traffic  Schedule) schema now. Due to the rapid development
   of Internet services, each single physical DC can not meet the
   requirements of an given service system, a general model is that
   service instances hosted in multiple DCs  collaborate to provide
   services to end-users correspondently,inter-DC traffic increase
   dramatically during the last several years. More specifically, the
   first driven factor to implement DTS is the scale of services,
   generally, single physical DC can not provide all the resources for
   large-scale service at all time which require the physical DCs to
   form a virtual DCso the system can apply for the resource for a
   'single' virtual DC more flexible and scalable. Another factor is
   for reliability and security of services, for instance service
   instances of an given service located in different DCs will exchange
   large volume of production data for backup and filing, which may
   occur at a fixed or non-fixed time of each day. In such a case, an
   management system monitors traffic volume on the link conveying the
   exporting traffic of a DC. When the volume exceeds the threshold set
   by the system, the system designs traffic adjustment system to move
   the overflowling traffic from that link to another exporting link in
 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014


   order to make sure that the traffic volume on the first link below
   the threshold. Such scenarios are well worth modeling as operators
   need to design flexible adjustment policies for optimizing the
   throughput of DC exporting router.

   There are requirements from campus network operators to flexibly
   manage traffic for multiple functions in a building, such as traffic
   for network operation, traffic for building monitoring network,
   traffic for professor working on test-bed/data for different research
   projects. Traditionally, the operation staffs manually set up VLANs
   for different users. However, the increasing number of projects/users
   makes it becoming very hard to manually set up those different
   network/test-beds in the shared building LAN, because sometimes one
   office having multiple rights to access different networks/projects.
   Therefore, SUPA could potentially proving flexible VPN set up on the
   shared infrastructure (based on IP/MAC address, VLAN ID, etc.). In
   this case, a controller and standardized northbound APIs could serve
   for an application for operators to flexibly set up the access to
   different resources. In general, SUPA will help operators or service
   providers to design flexible adjustment policies for optimizing the
   throughput of layer two devices.

   SUPA can be used to request the optimization of the traffic paths
   dynamically and has the ability to request load balancing between
   data centers and links, and direct customer traffic via network
   management policies. Path optimization can be accomplished using data
   models or software programs routines to differentiate customer based
   on their service class and/or QoS requirements.

   Moreover, when VPN tunnels are interconnecting DCs, SUPA can be used
   to dynamically reconfigure these VPN tunnels, e.g., L2VPN or L3VPN in
   order to avoid possible congested communication paths and improve
   end to end latency. Detailed descriptions of these use cases are
   provided in [ID.draft-cheng-supa-ddc-use-cases].

   Currently, there are VPCs (Virtual Private Clouds) that can support a
   various number of applications. The VPCs need to securely access
   services running in a data center, i.e., services that are not being
   exposed to the general Internet. VPNs have been the mechanism of
   choice to secure these connections. The number of VPCs accessing
   services running on data centers is significantly increasing.
   This increases the complexity of managing the VPNs supporting the
   secure connections between the large number of VPCs and the data
   centre.


   4. Requirements/Objectives

   The SUPA architectural framework must support the following
   capabilities:

  1) Define a Yang model that represents the logical topology and
      capabilities of a network within a single administrative domain.
      This will later be expanded to accommodate multiple administrative
      domains.

   2) Define a Yang model that maps network services to the
      capabilities of a network.
 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014



   3) Define a Yang model that specifies how policy rules may
      control the operational, administrative, and management aspects of
      a network service.

5.  Security Considerations

   Security is a key aspect of any protocol that allows state
   installation and extracting detailed configuration states of network
   elements. This places additional security measures on SUPA (e.g.,
   authorization, and authentication of network services) that needs
   further investigation.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors of this draft would like to thank the following
   persons for the provided valuable feedback and contributions:
   Diego Lopez, Spencer Dawkins, Jun Bi, Xing Li, Chongfeng Xie, Benoit
   Claise, Ian Farrer, Marc Blancet, Zhen Cao, Hosnieh Rafiee, Mehmet
   Ersue, Simon Perreault, Fernando Gont, Jose Saldana, Tom Taylor,
   Kostas Pentikousis, Juergen Schoenwaelder, Eric Voit, Scott O.
   Bradner.

   Tina Tsou and Will Liu contributed to an early version of this draft.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

8.2.  Informative References

   [ID.draft-cheng-supa-ddc-use-cases] Y. Cheng, C. Zhou,
   G. Karagiannis, JF. Tremblay, "Use Cases for Distributed Data Center
   Applicatinos in APONF", IETF Internet draft (Work in progress),
   draft-cheng-supa-ddc-use-cases-00, September 17, 2014

   [ID.draft-contreras-supa-yang-network-topo] L.Contreras, Andrew Qu,
   "A YANG Data Model for Network Topologies", IETF draft (work in
   progress), draft-contreras-supa-yang-network-topo, September 18,
   2004.

   [ID. draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping] K. Pentikousis, Junru Lin,
   Yiyong Zha, "SUPA Configuration and Policy Mapping", IETF Internet
   draft, draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping-00, September 23, 2014

   [ID.draft-zaalouk-supa-configuration-model] A. Zaalouk,
   K. Pentikousis, W. Liu, "YANG Data Model for Configuration of Shared
   Unified Policy Automation (SUPA)", IETF draft, draft-zaalouk-supa-
   configuration-model-00, 22 September, 2014

   [ID.draft-zhou-supa-framework] C. Zhou, L. M. Contreras, Q. Sun,
   P. Yegani, "The Framework of Shared Unified Policy Automation
  (SUPA)", IETF draft, draft-zhou-supa-framework-00, 15 January, 2015

 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           January 2014


   [ID.draft-ietf-netconf-restconf] A. Bierman, M. Bjorklund, K. Watsen,
   R. Fernando, "RESTCONF Protocol", IETF Internet draft (work in
   progress), draft-ietf-netconf-restconf-01, July 2014


   [RFC6020] M. Bjorklund, "YANG - A Data Modeling Language for the
   Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6020,
   October 2010.

   [RFC6241] R. Enns, M. Bjorklund, J. Schoenwaelder, A. Bierman,
   "Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6241, June 2011.

   [RFC6991]  J. Schoenwaelder, "Common YANG Data Types", RFC 6991,
   July 2013.

Authors' Addresses

   Georgios Karagiannis
   Huawei Technologies
   Hansaallee 205,
   40549 Dusseldorf,
   Germany
   Email: Georgios.Karagiannis@huawei.com

   Qiong Sun
   China Telecom
   No.118 Xizhimennei street, Xicheng District
   Beijing  100035
   P.R. China
   Email: sunqiong@ctbri.com.cn

   Luis M. Contreras
   Telefonica I+D
   Ronda de la Comunicacion, Sur-3 building, 3rd floor
   Madrid  28050
   Spain
   Email: luismiguel.contrerasmurillo@telefonica.com
   URI:   http://people.tid.es/LuisM.Contreras/

   Parviz Yegani
   JUNIPER NETWORKS
   1133 Innovation Way
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: pyegani@juniper.net

   Jean-Francois Tremblay
   Viagenie inc.
   Email: jean-francois.tremblay@viagenie.ca

   Jun Bi
   Tsinghua University
   Network Research Center, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   EMail: junbi@tsinghua.edu.cn


 Karagiannis, et al.        Expires July 23, 2015               [Page 8] 
