



Network Working Group                                          R. Sparks
Internet-Draft                                                    Oracle
Intended status: Informational                          October 19, 2015
Expires: April 21, 2016


                   Tracking Manual I-D Post Requests
              draft-sparks-genarea-manualpost-tracking-00

Abstract

   This memo discusses requirements for improvements to the datatracker
   related to tracking manual post requests.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Sparks                   Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 manualpost                   October 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Description of desired functionality  . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

   The transparency of the ID submission process needs to be improved,
   particularly for those submissions that are handled directly by the
   secretariat ("manual" and "forced" submissions).

   When an author uses the datatracker submission tool, SubmissionEvents
   are captured, noting when the draft was submitted, when it was
   approved by previous authors (and by who), when it was approved by a
   WG chair if such approval was necessary, and when it was posted into
   the repository.  Currently, the document's history shows only that a
   new version is available.

   The submission tool presents an option to authors to request that the
   secretariat finish the submission process.  The datatracker captures
   the candidate document and sends email to the secretariat.  Often the
   request is made because the submission tool was unable to extract the
   correct meta-data from the document.  In this case, the secretariat
   populates the meta-data, and forces the post.  In other cases, there
   are issues identified by idnits that the secretariat helps diagnose,
   and the author is guided through fixing the issues and restarting the
   submission process with a repaired document.  Again, SubmissionEvents
   are captured as the document goes through this process, but for
   drafts that are forced, the document history does not reflect these
   events.

   The secretariat also receives requests to post a draft by direct
   email, bypassing the submission tool altogether.  (Currently, the
   secretariat receives around 10 such requests each meeting cycle).
   The secretariat operates the submission tool on behalf of the author.
   The SubmissionEvents currently captured do not reflect that this was
   a manual submission request.

   The secretariat currently relies on a combination of RT and personal
   email archives to keep track of the outstanding manual submission
   requests.

   This project will address these issues through several improvements
   to the datatracker.




Sparks                   Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 manualpost                   October 2015


2.  Description of desired functionality

   When a document is posted via the normal submission process,
   DocEvents reflecting the SubmissionEvents for the initial submission,
   the approval of previous authors, and the approval of a stream
   authority (such as WG chairs for a WG -00) will be added to the
   document.  That is, where documents currently typically have a first
   history entry of "New version available: whatever-00", The first
   entries will be "New version submitted", "New version approved by
   previous author: (name)", "WG -00 approved by (name)", "New version
   available: whatever-00".  The entries for subsequent versions are
   analogous.

   When manual submission is requested via the submission tool, and the
   document is posted by the secretariat, DocEvents reflecting that the
   manual posting was requested, any approvals obtained, and that the
   document was forced will be added to the document.  An example of the
   entries would be "Manual submission requested by (name)", "Meta-data
   set to <metadata%gt; by (name)", "WG -00 approved by (name)", "New
   version available: whatever -00".

   When manual submission is requested by direct email, the secretariat
   will have the ability to tell the tracker that the request was
   received and upload the document from the email request, but not
   handle the request immediately.  After this indication, the document
   will be in the same condition as a document requesting manual
   submission via the submission tool.

   However the secretariat should not be forced to take that extra step
   if the request will be processed immediately.  The submission tool
   should be modified to allow the secretariat to indicate they are
   submitting the document on behalf of an author at their request for
   manual submission.  SubmissionEvents indicating that manual
   submission was requested will be created.  Once the document is
   posted, DocEvents reflecting the history of the submission (as
   described for the above cases) will be created.

   A page will be created (readable by anyone) that shows the set of
   outstanding manual submission requests.  Each entry will either show,
   or provide navigation to a separate page that shows, the
   SubmissionEvent history for the outstanding submission.  When logged
   in as the secretariat, there will be easy navigation from each entry
   to the page that allows processing the request.

   Note that as of release 6.6.1, the manual submission process results
   in a DocEvent that says simple "New version available" without
   providing a link to the version that became available.  This project
   will ensure that all paths that produce a "New version available"



Sparks                   Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 manualpost                   October 2015


   DocEvent include a link to the new version in the event's
   description.

3.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses requirements for tools to improve tracking
   manual post requests.  There are no exceptional security
   considerations introduced by these requirements.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

Author's Address

   Robert Sparks
   Oracle
   7460 Warren Parkway
   Suite 300
   Frisco, Texas  75034
   USA

   Email: rjsparks@nostrum.com




























Sparks                   Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 4]
