


ENUM                                                         R. Brandner
Internet-Draft                                                Siemens AG
Expires: December 14, 2003                                     L. Conroy
                                             Siemens Roke Manor Research
                                                              R. Stastny
                                                                   Oefeg
                                                           June 15, 2003


                Registration for enumservices web and ft
                     <draft-ietf-enum-webft-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 14, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document registers a group of 'enumservices' [2] to be used to
   indicate that the associated resources are primarily sources for
   information.

   Specifically, the "enumservices" registered with this document are
   'web' and 'ft' using the URI schemes 'http:', 'https:' and 'ftp:'.






Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Web Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2 Web Service Registration with 'http:'  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.3 Web Service Registration with 'https:' . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  FT Service Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 12







































Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


1. Introduction

   ENUM (E.164 Number Mapping, RFC2916bis [2]) is a system that
   transforms E.164 numbers [3] into domain names and then uses DNS
   (Domain Name Service, RFC1034 [4]) services like delegation through
   NS records and NAPTR records to look up what services are available
   for a specific domain name.

   This document registers 'enumservices' according to the guidelines
   given in RFC2916bis to be used for provisioning in the services field
   of a NAPTR [6] resource record to indicate what class of
   functionality a given end point offers. The registration is defined
   within the DDDS (Dynamic Delegation Discovery System [5][6][7][8][9])
   hierarchy, for use with the "E2U" DDDS Application defined in
   RFC2916bis.

   The following 'enumservices' are registered with this document: 'web'
   and 'ft'. These share a common feature in that they each indicate
   that the functionality of the given end points and the associated
   resources are primarily sources of information.

   According to RFC2619bis, the 'enumservice' registered must be able to
   function as a selection mechanism when choosing one NAPTR resource
   record from another. That means that the registration MUST specify
   what is expected when using that very NAPTR record, and the URI
   scheme which is the outcome of the use of it.

   Therefore an 'enumservice' acts as a hint, indicating the kind of
   service with which the URI constructed using the regexp field is
   associated. There can be more than one 'enumservice' included within
   a single NAPTR; this indicates that there is more than one service
   that can be achieved using the associated URI scheme.

   The common thread with this set of definitions is that they reflect
   the kind of service that the end user will hope to achieve with the
   communication using the associated URI.

   The services specified here are intended NOT to specify the protocol
   or even method of connection that MUST be used to achieve each
   service. Instead they define the kind of interactive behavior that an
   end user will expect, leaving the end system to decide (based on
   policies outside the remit of this specification) how to execute the
   service.

   Since the same URI scheme may be used for different services (e.g.
   'tel:'), and the same kind of service may use different URI schemes
   (e.g. for VoIP 'sip:', 'h323:' and 'tel:' may be used), it is
   necessary in some cases to specify the service and the URI scheme



Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


   used.

   The service parameters defined in RFC2916bis allow therefore a 'type'
   and a 'subtype' to be specified. Within this set of specifications
   the convention is assumed that the 'type' (being the more generic
   term) is defining the service and the 'subtype' is defining the URI
   scheme.












































Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


2. Web Service

2.1 Introduction

   The enumservices registered in this section indicate that the
   resource identified by the associated URI is capable of being a
   source of information.

2.2 Web Service Registration with 'http:'

   Enumservice Name: "web"

   Type: "web"

   Subtype: "http"

   URI Scheme: 'http:'

   Functional Specification:

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the
   associated URI scheme is capable of being a source of information.

   It has to be noted that the kind of information retrieved can be
   manifold. Usually, contacting a resource by an 'http:' URI provides a
   document. This document can contain all different kind of
   information, like audio or video or executable code. Thus, one can
   not be more specific what information to expect when contacting the
   resource.

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'enumservice'.
   However, the general considerations of Section 4 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author:

   Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny (for author contact
   detail see Authors' Addresses section)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None

2.3 Web Service Registration with 'https:'




Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


   Enumservice Name: "web"

   Type: "web"

   Subtype: "https"

   URI Scheme: 'https:'

   Functional Specification:

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the
   associated URI scheme is capable of being a source of information,
   which can be contacted by using TLS or Secure Socket Layer protocol.

   It has to be noted that the kind of information retrieved can be
   manifold. Usually, contacting a resource by an 'https:' URI provides
   a document. This document can contain all different kind of
   information, like audio or video or executable code. Thus, one can
   not be more specific what information to expect when contacting the
   resource.

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'enumservice'.
   However, the general considerations of Section 4 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author:

   Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny (for author contact
   detail see Authors' Addresses section)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None















Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


3. FT Service Registration

   Enumservice Name: "ft"

   Type: "ft"

   Subtype: "ftp"

   URI Scheme: 'ftp:'

   Functional Specification:

   This enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the
   associated URI scheme is a file service from which a file or file
   listing can be retrieved.

   Security Considerations:

   There are no specific security issues with this 'enumservice'.
   However, the general considerations of Section 4 apply.

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Author:

   Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny (for author contact
   detail see Authors' Addresses section)

   Any other information the author deems interesting:

   None




















Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


4. Security Considerations

   DNS, as used by ENUM, is a global, distributed database. Thus any
   information stored there is visible to anyone anonymously. Whilst
   this is not qualitatively different from publication in a Telephone
   Directory, it does open the data subject to having "their"
   information collected automatically without any indication that this
   has been done or by whom.

   Such data harvesting by third parties is often used to generate lists
   of targets for unrequested information; in short, they are used to
   address "spam". Anyone who uses a Web-archived mailing list is aware
   that the volume of "spam" email they are sent increases when they
   post to the mailing list; publication of a telephone number in ENUM
   is no different, and may be used to send "junk faxes" or "junk SMS"
   for example.

   Many mailing list users have more than one email address and use
   "sacrificial" email accounts when posting to such lists to help
   filter out unrequested emails sent to them. This is not so easy with
   published telephone numbers; the PSTN E.164 number assignment process
   is much more involved and usually a single E.164 number (or a fixed
   range of numbers) is associated with each PSTN access. Thus providing
   a "sacrificial" phone number in any publication is not possible.

   Due to the implications of publishing data on a globally accessible
   database, as a principle the data subject MUST give their explicit
   informed consent to data being published in ENUM.

   In addition, they should be made aware that, due to storage of such
   data during harvesting by third parties, removal of the data from
   publication will not remove any copies that have been taken; in
   effect, any publication may be permanent.

   However, regulations in many regions will require that the data
   subject can at any time request that the data is removed from
   publication, and that their consent for its publication is explicitly
   confirmed at regular intervals.

   The user SHOULD be asked to confirm opening a web page or starting an
   ftp session (particularly if the ftp client is configured to send the
   user's email address as an "anonymous" user password).

   Using a web:http or ft:ftp service is not secure, and so the user
   should apply the same caution when entering personal data as they
   would do if using a client application started with any other method.
   Whilst this is not a feature of ENUM or these enumservices, the
   ENUM-using application on the end system may appear different from



Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


   the user's "normal" browser, and so the user SHOULD receive an
   indication on whether or not their communication is secured.

   As evaluating a web page can involve execution of embedded (or
   linked) content that may include executable code, there are risks
   involved in evaluating a web URL. If automatic evaluation of a web
   link were to be used, the querying user would be exposed to risks
   associated with that automatic download and execution of content.
   Thus the client MUST ask the querying user for confirmation before
   evaluating the web URL; the client MUST NOT download and evaluate the
   web content automatically.

   In addition to the specific security considerations given above, all
   security considerations given in RFC2916bis apply.





































Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
         RFC 2026, BCP 9, October 1996.

   [2]   Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to URI DDDS
         Application (ENUM)", draft-ietf-enum-rfc2916bis-06.txt , May
         2003.

   [3]   ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Number
         Plan", Recommendation E.164 , May 1997.

   [4]   Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES", RFC
         1034, November 1987.

   [5]   Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         One: The Comprehensive DDDS", RFC 3401, October 2002.

   [6]   Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         Two: The Algorithm", RFC 3402, October 2002.

   [7]   Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403,
         October 2002.

   [8]   Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         Four: The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI)", RFC 3404,
         October 2002.

   [9]   Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
         Five: URI.ARPA Assignment Procedures", RFC 3405, October 2002.

   [10]  ETSI, "Minimum Requirements for Interoperability of European
         ENUM Trials", ETSI TS  102 172, February 2003.

   [11]  Berners-Lee, T., Masinter, M. and M. McCahill, "Uniform
         Resource Locators (URL)", RFC 1738, December 1994.

   [12]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
         Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -
         HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [13]  Rescola, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.








Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


Authors' Addresses

   Rudolf Brandner
   Siemens AG
   Hofmannstr. 51
   81359 Munich
   Germany

   Phone: +49-89-722-51003
   EMail: rudolf.brandner@siemens.com


   Lawrence Conroy
   Siemens Roke Manor Research
   Roke Manor
   Romsey
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44-1794-833666
   EMail: lwc@roke.co.uk


   Richard Stastny
   Oefeg
   Postbox 147
   1103 Vienna
   Austria

   Phone: +43-664-420-4100
   EMail: Richard.stastny@oefeg.at





















Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Registration for enumservices web and ft     June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Brandner, et al.       Expires December 14, 2003               [Page 13]


