


Network Working Group                                         L. Iannone
Internet-Draft                             Deutsche Telekom Laboratories
Intended status: Informational                                  D. Lewis
Expires: September 13, 2011                                     D. Meyer
                                                               V. Fuller
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                          March 12, 2011


                             LISP EID Block
                   draft-meyer-lisp-eid-block-02.txt

Abstract

   This is a direction to IANA to allocate a /16 IPv6 prefix for use with
   the Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 13, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               LISP EID Block                   March 2011


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Definition of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

































Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               LISP EID Block                   March 2011


1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Introduction

   This memo directs the IANA to allocate a /16 IPv6 prefix for use with
   the Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP - [I-D.ietf-lisp]), LISP Map
   Server ([I-D.ietf-lisp-ms]), LISP Alternative Topology (LISP+ALT -
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-alt]) (or other) mapping system, and LISP Interworking
   ([I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking]).

   This block will be used as global Endpoint IDentifier (EID) space
   (Section 3).


3.  Definition of Terms

   LISP operates on two name spaces and introduces several new network
   elements.  This section provides high-level definitions of the LISP
   name spaces and network elements.

   Legacy Internet:  The portion of the Internet which does not run LISP
      and does not participate in LISP+ALT or any other mapping system.

   LISP site:  A LISP site is a set of routers in an edge network that
      are under a single technical administration.  LISP routers which
      reside in the edge network are the demarcation points to separate
      the edge network from the core network.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp] for
      more details.

    Endpoint ID (EID):  An EID is a 32-bit (for IPv4) or 128-bit (for
      IPv6) value used in the source and destination address fields of
      the first (most inner) LISP header of a packet.  A packet that is
      emitted by a system contains EIDs in its headers and LISP headers
      are prepended only when the packet reaches an Ingress Tunnel
      Router (ITR) on the data path to the destination EID.  The source
      EID is obtained via existing mechanisms used to set a host's
      "local" IP address.  An EID is allocated to a host from an EID-
      prefix block associated with the site where the host is located.
      See [I-D.ietf-lisp] for more details.







Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               LISP EID Block                   March 2011


   EID-prefix:  A a power-of-two block of EIDs which are allocated to a
      site by an address allocation authority.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp] for
      more details.

   EID-Prefix Aggregate:  A set of EID-prefixes said to be aggregatable
      in the [RFC4632] sense.  That is, an EID-Prefix aggregate is
      defined to be a single contiguous power-of-two EID-prefix block.
      Such a block is characterized by a prefix and a length.  See
      [I-D.ietf-lisp] for more details.

   Routing LOCator (RLOC):  A RLOC is an IPv4 or IPv6 address of an
      egress tunnel router (ETR).  A RLOC is the output of a EID-to-RLOC
      mapping lookup.  An EID maps to one or more RLOCs.  Typically,
      RLOCs are numbered from topologically-aggregatable blocks that are
      assigned to a site at each point to which it attaches to the
      global Internet; where the topology is defined by the connectivity
      of provider networks, RLOCs can be thought of as Provider
      Aggregatable (PA) addresses.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp] for more
      details.

    EID-to-RLOC Mapping:  A binding between an EID-Prefix and the RLOC-
      set that can be used to reach the EID-Prefix.  The general term
      "mapping" always refers to an EID-to-RLOC mapping.  See
      [I-D.ietf-lisp] for more details.

   Ingress Tunnel Router (ITR):  An Ingress Tunnel Router (ITR) is a
      router which accepts receives IP packets from site end-systems on
      one side and sends LISP-encapsulated IP packets toward the
      Internet on the other side.  The router treats the "inner" IP
      destination address as an EID and performs an EID-to-RLOC mapping
      lookup.  The router then prepends an "outer" IP header with one of
      its globally-routable RLOCs in the source address field and the
      result of the mapping lookup in the destination address field.
      See [I-D.ietf-lisp] for more details.

   Egress Tunnel Router (ETR):  An Egress Tunnel Router (ETR) receives
      LISP-encapsulated IP packets from the Internet on one side and
      sends decapsulated IP packets to site end-systems on the other
      side.  An ETR router accepts an IP packet where the destination
      address in the "outer" IP header is one of its own RLOCs.  The
      router strips the "outer" header and forwards the packet based on
      the next IP header found.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp] for more details.

   Proxy ITR (PITR):  A Proxy-ITR (PITR) acts like an ITR but does so on
      behalf of non-LISP sites which send packets to destinations at
      LISP sites.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking] for more details.





Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               LISP EID Block                   March 2011


   Proxy ETR (PETR):  A Proxy-ETR (PETR) acts like an ETR but does so on
      behalf of LISP sites which send packets to destinations at non-
      LISP sites.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking] for more details.

   Map Server (MS):  A network infrastructure component which learns
      EID-to-RLOC mapping entries from an authoritative source
      (typically an ETR).  A Map-Server publishes these mappings in the
      distributed mapping system.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp-ms] for more
      details.

   Map Resolver (MR):  A network infrastructure component which accepts
      LISP Encapsulated Map-Requests, typically from an ITR, quickly
      determines whether or not the destination IP address is part of
      the EID namespace; if it is not, a Negative Map-Reply is
      immediately returned.  Otherwise, the Map-Resolver finds the
      appropriate EID-to-RLOC mapping by consulting the distributed
      mapping database system.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp-ms] for more details.

   The LISP Alternative Logical Topology (ALT):  The virtual overlay
      network made up of tunnels between LISP+ALT Routers.  The Border
      Gateway Protocol (BGP) runs between ALT Routers and is used to
      carry reachability information for EID-prefixes.  The ALT provides
      a way to forward Map-Requests toward the ETR that "owns" an EID-
      prefix.  See [I-D.ietf-lisp-alt] for more details.

   ALT Router:  The device on which runs the ALT.  The ALT is a static
      network built using tunnels between ALT Routers.  These routers
      are deployed in a roughly-hierarchical mesh in which routers at
      each level in the topology are responsible for aggregating EID-
      Prefixes learned from those logically "below" them and advertising
      summary prefixes to those logically "above" them.  Prefix learning
      and propagation between ALT Routers is done using BGP.  When an
      ALT Router receives an ALT Datagram, it looks up the destination
      EID in its forwarding table (composed of EID-Prefix routes it
      learned from neighboring ALT Routers) and forwards it to the
      logical next-hop on the overlay network.  The primary function of
      LISP+ALT routers is to provide a lightweight forwarding
      infrastructure for LISP control-plane messages (Map-Request and
      Map-Reply), and to transport data packets when the packet has the
      same destination address in both the inner (encapsulating)
      destination and outer destination addresses ((i.e., a Data Probe
      packet).  See [I-D.ietf-lisp-alt] for more details.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduces new security threats in the LISP
   architecture.



Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               LISP EID Block                   March 2011


5.  Acknowledgments

   Marla Azinger, Chris Morrow, Peter Schoenmaker all made insightful
   comments on early versions of this draft.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document instructs the IANA to allocate a /16 IPv6 prefix for
   use as the global LISP EID space.


7.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-lisp]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-10 (work in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-alt]
              Fuller, V., Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "LISP
              Alternative Topology (LISP+ALT)", draft-ietf-lisp-alt-06
              (work in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking]
              Lewis, D., Meyer, D., Farinacci, D., and V. Fuller,
              "Interworking LISP with IPv4 and IPv6",
              draft-ietf-lisp-interworking-02 (work in progress),
              March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-ms]
              Fuller, V. and D. Farinacci, "LISP Map Server",
              draft-ietf-lisp-ms-07 (work in progress), March 2011.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4632]  Fuller, V. and T. Li, "Classless Inter-domain Routing
              (CIDR): The Internet Address Assignment and Aggregation
              Plan", BCP 122, RFC 4632, August 2006.











Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               LISP EID Block                   March 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Luigi Iannone
   Deutsche Telekom Laboratories

   Email: luigi@net.t-labs.tu-berlin.de


   Darrel Lewis
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: darlewis@cisco.com


   David Meyer
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: dmm@cisco.com


   Vince Fuller
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: vaf@cisco.com



























Iannone, et al.        Expires September 13, 2011               [Page 7]

