




Network Working Group                                         Enke Chen
Internet Draft                                              Albert Tian
Expiration Date: March 2004                            Redback Networks


            TTL-Based Security Option for LDP Hello Message


                       draft-chen-ldp-ttl-00.txt


1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


2. Abstract

   To facilitate the deployment of the TTL-based security mechanism for
   LDP, in this document we propose a new optional parameter for the LDP
   Hello Message that can be used by a LSR to indicate its support of
   the TTL-based mechanism.












Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 1]





Internet Draft          draft-chen-ldp-ttl-00.txt            August 2003


3. Introduction

   The LDP [LDP] sessions established following the LDP basic discovery
   are between two directly connected LSRs. As a result, the TTL-based
   security mechanism described in [TTL-HACK] is fully applicable to
   such sessions.

   To deploy the TTL-based security mechanism, however, both LSRs
   involved in the LDP session must be coordinated and synchronized in
   setting and checking the TTL values. The coordination effort may not
   be trivial for a large network.

   To facilitate the deployment of the TTL-based security mechanism for
   LDP, in this document we propose a new optional parameter for the LDP
   Hello Message that can be used by a LSR to indicate its support of
   the TTL-based mechanism.


4. Protocol Extension

   The new optional parameter for the LDP Hello Message is defined as
   the following:

       Optional Parameter: Support for TTL-based Security
                     Type: See the IANA Considerations section
                   Length: 0
                    U bit: 1
                    F bit: 0

   This optional parameter can be used by a LSR to indicate its support
   for the TTL-based security mechanism [TTL-HACK].  When both LSRs
   exchanging the LDP Hello Messages support the TTL-based security
   mechanism, the LSRs should follow the TTL-based security procedures
   for the LDP peer to be established between them. More specifically,

     o The TTL field of an outbound packet for the LDP session must
       be set to the maximum value (255).

     o For an inbound packet to be accepted, the TTL field of the
       packet must be 255 if the TTL value is not decremented by
       the receiving LSR. Otherwise, the TTL field must be 254. The
       choice between these two values is implementation specific,
       and is a local matter.

   The optional parameter should not be included in a LDP targeted Hello
   Message sent by a LSR, and should be ignored in a targeted Hello
   Message received by a LSR.




Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 2]





Internet Draft          draft-chen-ldp-ttl-00.txt            August 2003


5. IANA Considerations

   This document defines a new optional parameter for the LDP Hello
   Message. The type code needs to be assigned by IANA.


6. Security Considerations

   This extension to LDP does not change the underlying security
   properties with the TTL-based security mechanism [TTL-HACK].  This
   extension is only application to LDP peers as a result of the LDP
   basic discovery. For LDP sessions resulting from the LDP targeted
   discovery, the TCP MD5 is recommended by [LDP].


7. Acknowledgments

   TBD


8. References

   [LDP] L. Andersson, P. Doolan, N. Feldman, A. Fredette, and B.
   Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 3036, January 2001.

   [TTL-HACK] V. Gill, J. Heasley, D. Meyer, "The Generalized TTL
   Security Hack (GTSH)", <draft-gill-gtsh-00.txt>, August 2003.


9. Author Information

   Enke Chen
   Redback Networks, Inc.
   300 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA 95134
   e-mail: enke@redback.com

   Albert Tian
   Redback Networks, Inc.
   300 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA 95134
   e-mail: tian@redback.com









Chen & Tian                                                     [Page 3]


