


 Network Working Group                                     Hong-Ke Zhang 
 Internet Draft                                            Xiao-Hua Chen 
                                                          Jian-Feng Guan 
                                                                 Bo Shen 
                                             Beijing Jiaotong University 
                                                              En-Hui Liu 
                                                         Spencer Dawkins 
                                            Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd. 
 Expires: July 2007                                    January 29, 2007 
                                       
              Mobile IPv6 Multicast with Dynamic Multicast Agent 
                  draft-zhang-mipshop-multicast-dma-03.txt 


 Status of this Memo 

    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

    This document may only be posted in an Internet-Draft. 

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

    This Internet-Draft will expire on July 29, 2007. 

 Abstract 

    This document addresses the problem of delivering IPv6 multicast 
    traffic to MN (Mobile Node). An approach named Mobile IPv6 Multicast 
    with Dynamic Multicast Agent is proposed  which combines Movement 
    Based Method [2] and Distance Based Method [3], Such a design allows 
    MN to optimize multicast route, and meanwhile reduce the handoff 
    frequency by selecting new multicast agent dynamically. In addition to 
    weakening the triangle route problem and diminishing the influence of 
    handoff to multicast, this approach provides global mobility in 
    Internet without limitations on network topology. This draft is the 
    same as the earlier version, it is just an update of it.  
  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 1] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
 Conventions used in this document 

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [5]. 

 Table of Contents 

     
    1. Introduction................................................2 
    2. Concepts and Framework......................................3 
    3. Operation of MSA............................................5 
    4. Operation of DMA............................................7 
    5. DMA switch decision-making algorithm in DMA.................9 
    6. Security Considerations....................................10 
    7. IANA Considerations........................................10 
    8. Conclusions................................................10 
    9. Acknowledgments............................................10 
    10. References................................................11 
       10.1. Normative References.................................11 
       10.2. Informative References...............................11 
    Author's Addresses............................................11 
    Intellectual Property Statement...............................12 
    Disclaimer of Validity........................................12 
    Copyright Statement...........................................13 
    Acknowledgment................................................13 
     
 1. Introduction 

    Multicast is an efficient way for forwarding data from one node or 
    multi-nodes to multi-nodes. mobility support becomes an inevitable 
    function of multicast technologies. The mobility support for IPv6 
    protocol[1] has specified two basic methods for mobile multicast: 1) 
    via a bi-directional tunnel from MN to its HA (Home Agent), which is 
    called MIP-BT (Mobile IP Bi-directional Tunnel); 2) via a (local) 
    multicast router on the foreign link being visited, which is called 
    MIP-RS (Mobile IP Remote Subscription). In MIP-BT, MN tunnels its 
    multicast group membership control packets to its HA, and the HA 
    forwards multicast packets down the tunnel to the MN [1]. In MIP-RS, 
    MN MUST use its care-of address and MUST NOT use the Home Address 
    destination option when sending MLD (Multicast Listener Discovery) 
    packets [1,4]. These two basic methods can retain multicast 
    communications when MN moves, but some issues still exist. 

    o  First, MIP-BT suffers from triangle route which is composed of MN-
       HA tunnel and HA-S multicast tree path. When the MN is far from 
       its HA, the data forwarding path of multicast becomes 
       deteriorative. 

  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 2] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    o  Second, multiple tunnels from a subnet to a HA are established in 
       MIP-BT, when some MNs that come from the same home link attach at 
       one AR (Access Router) in the subnet and these MNs join the same 
       multicast group at the same time. This case is called tunnels 
       congregation which will consume more network resources. 

    o  Third, although the multicast path in MIP-RS is optimal, frequent 
       handoffs of MN among subnets will produce much latency. Because 
       when MN handovers , it will leave and re-join the multicast tree 
       and multicast group frequently. 

    This document addresses these above problems. An approach named 
    Mobile IPv6 Multicast with Dynamic Multicast Agent is proposed. This 
    approach combines the advantages of MIP-BT and MIP-RS, selecting a 
    new multicast agent based on both movement and distance dynamically, 
    and the new selected agent is responsible for forwarding multicast 
    data to the MN. 

    Such a design optimizes the multicast routes and reduces handoff 
    frequency. Beside releasing triangle route problem and diminishing 
    the influence of handoff to multicast, it can also provide global 
    mobility without limitation on network topology. 

    In the following sections, we will first introduce the concepts and 
    framework of this approach. Then, we will describe the details of  
    Dynamic Multicast Agent switch procedure. 

     
 2. Concepts and Framework 

    In this document, two key roles are defined for Mobile IPv6 Multicast 
    with Dynamic Multicast Agent. 

         - MSA: Multicast Subnet Agent, which is the access router 
           running multicast protocols in a subnet and forwarding the 
           subscribed multicast data to the MN that visits the subnet. 

         - DMA: Dynamic Multicast Agent, which is the current MSA or one 
           of the previous MSAs of the MN acting as the leaf router in a 
           multicast delivery tree the MN subscribed and forwarding the 
           subscribed multicast data to the MN through its current MSA. 

    The whole procedure of this approach is shown in Figure1. 






  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 3] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
         MN             pMSA             nMSA            DMA 
         |                |                |              | 
         |                |<----request----|              | 
         |                |-----reply----->|              | 
         |                |                |              | 
         |---MLD query--->|                |              | 
         |<--MLD report---|                |              | 
         |                |                |              | 
         |            Disconnect           |              | 
         |                |                |              | 
         |------ Unsolicited report------->|              | 
         |                |       DMA handoff decision    | 
         |                |                |              | 
         |                |            connect            | 
         |                |                |------------->| 
         |                |                | Tunnel Setup | 
         |                |                |<-------------| 
         |<---------- MLD query------------|              | 
         |                |                |              | 
         |<=========deliver packets=======>|              | 
         |                |                |              | 
         |                |                |              | 
              Figure 1 Operation process of MSA and DMA 

    MSA is in charge of the local multicast group membership management 
    and maintenance in a subnet via MLD protocol. MSA periodically sends 
    regular MLD query messages to solicit regular MLD reports from the 
    MNs visiting the subnet. To learn address information of neighbor 
    MSAs, each MSA sends request message(e.g. PIM Hello message etc.) 
    periodically, receivers send reply message to the sender, informing 
    it their address information. 

    In this approach, tunnel between nMSA and DMA is setup after MN has 
    attached to nMSA. In order to shorten MN's handover latency, Fast 
    Handover protocol[6] and CARD(Candidate Access Router Discovery) 
    protocol[7] can be adopted. In these two approaches, tunnel is setup 
    before the handover process, so after MN attaches to the nMSA, it can 
    transmit data immediately, handover latency can be reduced 
    Dramatically. 

    When MN first subscribes a multicast group G, its current MSA becomes 
    its initial DMA, which runs multicast protocol and joins the 
    subscribed multicast delivery tree as a leaf router and then forwards 
    the subscribed multicast data to the MN. 

    Within an acceptable roaming distance, the DMA of a MN will not 
    change although its visited MSA changes if its visited MSA doesn't 
    yet have the group G membership in the subnet. When MN's current MSA 
    is different from its DMA, its current MSA receives the group G 
  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 4] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    multicast data from its DMA via a short tunnel, and then forwards 
    multicast data to the MN. 

    Beyond this acceptable roaming distance, the MN's DMA will be 
    switched to the new MSA that the MN currently is visiting. Then the 
    MSA will run  multicast protocol and operate as DMA. In this case, 
    multicast packets will be delivered from DMA directly to MN without 
    tunnel. 

    In this approach, not all visited MSA along MN's roaming path will 
    join the subscribed multicast delivery tree by introducing the 
    concept of DMA. only that selected as DMA need join the delivery 
    trees as a leaf router. 

    In comparison with other Agent selection approaches (e.g. MAP in 
    HMIPv6 [5]), this DMA selection method is quite distributed, so the 
    problem of performance bottleneck can be released. 

    In comparison with MIP-BT approach, this DMA approach optimizes 
    multicast transmission path by using shortest path from DMA to 
    multicast source. So disadvantages of MIP-BT such as triangle route, 
    large amount and long distance of tunnels can be avoided. 

    In MIP-RS, every MSA is a leaf router of the subscribed multicast 
    tree. once MN moves from the coverage of one MSA to another, it will 
    leave the old MSA and attach to new MSA, which will consume more 
    network resources. This DMA approach can reduce the frequency of 
    remote multicast subscription and that of multicast delivery tree 
    reconstructing dramatically, simplifying MN's signaling procedure, 
    network performance is enhanced. 

 3. Operation of MSA 

    MSA is in charge of the local multicast group membership management 
    and maintenance in a subnet via MLD protocol, including local hosts 
    and visiting mobile nodes. MSA periodically sends regular MLD query 
    messages to solicit regular MLD reports from the MN visiting the 
    subnet. 

    MSA maintains a Multicast Route Table used for receiving and 
    forwarding the subscribed multicast data. There are six components 
    kept in every entry of the Multicast Route Table: Group Address, 
    Filter Modes(INCLUDE or EXCLUDE mode), Source_Address List, 
    Tunnel_State, Tunnel_ID, and Egress Interface List. 

    o  Filter Modes defines host and router parts of the protocol 
       respectively to support the source filtering function. 


  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 5] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    o  Source_Address List records all source addresses which should be 
       included or excluded according to the filter modes. 

    o  Tunnel_ID is the identifier of a tunnel between MSA and DMA for 
       MSA to receive the multicast data of the Group from DMA. 

    o  Tunnel_State is a flag that represents whether Tunnel ID is valid 
       and whether MSA has created a tunnel for the Group and is 
       receiving the multicast data of the Group via the tunnel. 

    o  Egress Interface List composes all receivers’ egress interface of 
       this group. multicast data should be forward to these interfaces. 

    MSA also maintains a Visitor Table for support of DMA switch process. 
    There are two elements kept in every entry of the Visitor Table: MN 
    and DMA. 

    o  MN item records the IP address of a MN visiting the subnet and 
       being a multicast subscriber. 

    o  DMA item records the IP address of the MN's DMA. 

                     +------------------+ 
                     |  MN   |    DMA   | 
                     |------------------| 
                     |       |          | 
                     +------------------+ 
    On arriving at a new visited subnet, a MN obtains a new CoA (Care of 
    Address) and registers its current CoA with its Home Agent. Then the 
    MN immediately sends unsolicited report message to its current 
    subnet's MSA and the IP address of the previous subnet's MSA. The MSA 
    communicates with the MN's previous MSA to obtain the IP address of 
    the MN's previous DMA. When receiving the MLD group membership report 
    sent from a visitor for group G, the MSA operates as follows: 

    o  If there already is an entry for group G in the MSA's multicast 
       route table, the MSA adds the MN to the entry's ingress interface 
       list, and then examines the Tunnel_State. If the Tunnel_State is 
       'YES', it represents that the MSA has already created a tunnel for 
       the group and is receiving multicast data via the tunnel. In this 
       case, it simply forwards the MLD group membership report message 
       to the other end of the tunnel. 

         - If there already is an entry for the MN in the MSA's Visitor 
           Table, then the MSA keeps it. 

         - Otherwise, if there is no entry for the MN in the MSA's 
           Visitor Table, then the MSA creates a new entry for the MN. In 
  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 6] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
           order to optimize the delivery path, the DMA of the MN is 
           switched to the MSA itself. And then the MSA informs the 
           previous DMA to clear the states of the MN if available. 

    o  If there is no entry for group G in the MSA's multicast route 
       table, (i.e. the MN is the first group member of group G in the 
       subnet), then MSA creates a new entry for group G in its multicast 
       route table and adds the MN into the entry's outgoing interface 
       list. 

         - If there already is an entry for the MN in the MSA's Visitor 
           Table, and if the MSA itself is the DMA of the MN, the MSA 
           simply sends PIM Join messages to the multicast delivery tree. 
           But if the MSA itself is not the DMA of the MN, the MSA 
           creates a tunnel to the DMA of the MN, records the Tunnel_ID, 
           sets the Tunnel_State to 'YES', and forwards the MLD group 
           membership report message to the other end of the tunnel. 

         - If there is no entry for the MN in the MSA's Visitor Table, 
           the MSA creates an entry for the MN, and asks the MN's 
           previous DMA if it needs to be switched to the MSA itself. 

         - If the MN's DMA doesn't need to be switched to the MSA itself, 
           the MSA adds the MN's DMA into the entry, creates a tunnel to 
           the MN's DMA, records the Tunnel_ID, sets the Tunnel_State to 
           'YES', and forwards the MLD group membership report message to 
           the other end of the tunnel. If the MN's DMA needs to be 
           switched to the MSA itself, the MSA adds itself into the entry, 
           acts as the MN's DMA, and sends PIM Join messages to the 
           multicast delivery tree. 

    The MSA detects the MN's departure by the timeout of timer. When the 
    MSA detects that a MN is departing from the current subnet, it 
    deletes the entry for the MN in its Visitor Table. For each multicast 
    group which the leaving MN subscribed, the MSA deletes the MN from 
    the group's outgoing interface list. 

 4. Operation of DMA 

    DMA is in charge of joining the multicast delivery tree of the group 
    G that a MN subscribed via PIM-based protocol as a leaf router. It 
    receives the multicast data of group G and forwards the data to the 
    MN through the MN's current MSA. 

    When a MN first subscribes a multicast group G, its current MSA 
    becomes its initial DMA. Within an acceptable roaming distance, the 
    DMA of a MN will not change although its MSA changes if its MSA 
    doesn't yet have the group G membership in the subnet. So the DMA of 

  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 7] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    a MN may be its current MSA or one of its previous MSAs. At a time 
    only one DMA serves the MN for its subscribed multicast group G. 

    When receiving the MLD group membership report sent from its served 
    MN for a new group G, the DMA sends PIM Join messages to join the 
    multicast delivery tree of the group G as a leaf router. When DMA 
    switch happens or the MN leaves the group G, the DMA sends PIM Prune 
    messages to prune itself from the multicast delivery tree of the 
    group G. 

    DMA maintains a table called History-Table to record the MN's recent 
    attachment history, which is used for DMA to do DMA switch decision-
    making for the MN. There are three elements kept in every entry of 
    the Table: MN, MSA and Increment. 

    o  MN item records the IP address of the MN that the DMA serves; 

    o  MSA item records the IP address of the MSA in each subnet that the 
       MN recently roamed through; 

    o  Increment item records the path increment of each MSA. 

                     +------------------+ 
                     |  MN   |          | 
                     +------------------+ 
                     |  MSA  | Increment| 
                     |------------------| 
                     | DMA   |    1     | 
                     | MSA 1 |    2     | 
                     | MSA 2 |    1     | 
                     | ...   |   ...    | 
                     | MSA n |    3     | 
                     +------------------+ 
    The first MSA is the DMA itself, which creates the table, initiates 
    the MN item, creates an entry for the first MSA and puts itself in 
    the entry. 

    When a MN enters into a new subnet, the MSA in this subnet receives 
    the MLD group member report and the IP address of the MN's previous 
    MSA from the MN. The MSA communicates with the MN's previous MSA to 
    obtain the IP address of the MN's previous DMA. To maintain the 
    recent attachment history table of the MN, the MN's DMA operates as 
    follows: 

    According to the operation of MSA as described in Section 3, 

     
  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 8] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    o  If the DMA of the MN is switched to the MSA itself, the MSA 
       informs the previous DMA to clear the states of the MN if 
       available. Then the MSA acts as the MN's current DMA, creates and 
       initiates the recent attachment history table for the MN. The MN's 
       previous DMA deletes the recent attachment history table of the MN 
       and prunes itself from the multicast delivery tree of the group G. 

    o  If the DMA of the MN is not switched to the MSA itself, the MSA 
       communicates with the MN's previous DMA to ask whether it can 
       continue acting as the MN's DMA. The MN's previous DMA creates an 
       entry for the MSA in the recent attachment history table of the MN, 
       and then makes the decision according to the DMA switch decision-
       making algorithms in DMA as described in Section 5. 

         - If the decision is 'Yes', then the MSA acts as the MN's 
           current DMA, creates and initiates the recent attachment 
           history table for the MN. The MN's previous DMA deletes recent 
           attachment history table of the MN and prunes itself from the 
           multicast delivery tree of the group G. 

         - If the decision is 'No', the MN's previous DMA continues 
           acting as the MN's DMA. The MSA receives the group G multicast 
           data from the DMA via a tunnel and forwards the data to the MN. 

 5. DMA switch decision-making algorithm in DMA 

    In DMA, the key point is the algorithm of DMA switch decision-making 
    based on movement and distance. As described in Section 4, DMA 
    maintains a table to record the MN's recent attachment history 
    (namely History_Table), which is used for DMA to do DMA switch 
    decision-making for the MN. 

    The DMA switch decision-making algorithm could be simple or precise. 
    The main principle is that there should not be any DMA switch for an 
    MN within an acceptable roaming distance if the MN's visited MSA 
    doesn't yet have the group G membership in the subnet. 

    Here, we just provide a simple algorithm via checking the path 
    increment of the recently joined MSA. 

    When the path increment of MSAs in the DMA's History_Table reaches 
    the assigned threshold, DMA switch happens. So the DMA deletes the 
    recent attachment history table of the MN and prunes itself from the 
    multicast delivery tree of the group G. Meanwhile, the MN's current 
    MSA acts as its new DMA, which joins the multicast delivery tree of 
    the group G as a leaf router, creates and initiates the recent 
    attachment history table for the MN. 

    The path increment of a MSA can be defined as: 
  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                 [Page 9] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    1 + Minimum [Distance(MSA,DMA),Distance(DMA,MN)], where Distance[x] 
    is the minimum integer greater than or equal to x. For example, the 
    path increment of a MSA is 1 if the MSA itself is the MN's DMA. 

 6. Security Considerations 

    This specification introduces a new concept to Mobile IPv6, namely, a 
    Dynamic Multicast Agent that acts as a multicast agent. It is crucial that 
    the security relationship between the Multicast Source Agent and the DMA 
    is strong; it MUST involve mutual authentication, integrity 
    protection, and protection against replay attacks. Confidentiality 
    may be needed for payload traffic. The absence of any of these 
    protections may lead to malicious mobile nodes impersonating other 
    legitimate ones or impersonating a DMA. Any of these attacks will 
    undoubtedly cause undesirable impacts to the mobile node's 
    communication with all correspondent nodes. 

 7. IANA Considerations 

    See [9] for instructions on IANA allocation. 

 8. Conclusions 

    This document has discussed the delivering of IPv6 multicast traffic 
    to mobile nodes. The presented approach is a compromised approach 
    between MIP-BT and MIP-RS, using a Dynamic Multicast Agent to join 
    the multicast delivery trees instead of a static multicast agent. The 
    use of MSA and DMA is the key feature of the approach. The purpose is 
    to optimize the multicast path to MNs, and meanwhile reduce the 
    latency and the impact on multicast trees which result from the 
    roaming of MNs. By introducing the concept of DMA, it reduces the 
    frequent remote subscription and multicast delivery tree 
    restructuring, and avoids the long tunnels and the large number of 
    tunnels. 

 9. Acknowledgments 

    We would like to thank Thomas Schmidt, and Kishore Mundra for their 
    valuable comments and suggestions on this document. 









  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                [Page 10] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
 10. References 

 10.1. Normative References 

    [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins C., and Arkko, J., "Mobility Support in 
         IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004. 

    [2]  Zhang, J. Y. "Location Management in Cellular Networks". 2001. 

    [3]  Bar-Noy, A. Kessler, I. and Sidi, M. "Mobile Users: To update 
         or not to Update?", Wireless Networks Journal, 1995,1(2):175-86. 

    [4]  Deering, S., Fenner, W. and B. Haberman, "Multicast Listener 
         Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999. 

    [5]  Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El-Malki, K., Bellier, L. 
         "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management", draft-ietf-
         mipshop-hmipv6-04 (work in progress), December 2004. 

    [6]  Koodli, R., Ed., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC4068, 
         July 2005. 

    [7]  M. Liebsch, Ed., A. Singh, Ed.,H. Chaskar.,D. Funato.,E. Shim 
         "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068, July 2005. 

 10.2. Informative References 

    [8]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

    [9]  Kempf, J., "Instructions for Seamoby and Experimental Mobility 
         Protocol IANA Allocations", RFC 4065, July 2005. 

 Author's Addresses 

    Hong-Ke Zhang, Bo Shen, Bing-Yi Zhang 
    IP lab, Beijing JiaoTong Univ. 
    Beijing, China, 100044 
       
    Phone: +86 10 51685677 
    Email: hkzhang@center.njtu.edu.cn 
           bingyizhang@hotmail.com 
     






  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                [Page 11] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
    En-Hui LIU 
    Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
    Beijing, China, 100085 
       
    Phone: +86-10-82882495 
    Fax:+86-10-82882537 
    Email: LEH10814@huawei.com 
     
    Spencer Dawkins 
    Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
    TX, USA, 75075 
    Email: sdawkins@futurewei.com 
     

 Intellectual Property Statement 

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
    might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
    made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
    on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
    found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
    such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
    http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
    ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

 Disclaimer of Validity 

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
    "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
    OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
    ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
    INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
    INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 


  
  
 Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                [Page 12] 
 Internet-Draft     Mobile IPv6 Multicast with DMA         January 2007 
  
  
 Copyright Statement 

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007). 

    This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
    contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
    retain all their rights. 

 Acknowledgment 

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
    Internet Society. 

     


































     
     
    Hong-Ke Zhang et al.    Expires July 29, 2007                [Page 13] 
