 


Network Working Group                                       C. Jacquenet 
Internet Draft                                        France Telecom R&D 
Document: draft-jacquenet-qos-ext-bgp-00.txt               February 2001 
Category: Informational                                                  
 
 
   Quality of Service Extensions to the BGP4 Protocol: motivation and 
                               framework 
                   <draft-jacquenet-qos-ext-bgp-00.txt> 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This draft aims at proposing both a motivation and a framework for 
  specifying Quality of Service (QoS) extensions to the Border Gateway 
  Protocol version 4 (BGP4, [2]). 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   For almost the last decade, the deployment of value-added IP service 
   offerings over the Internet has raised among the service providers a 
   collection of concerns, as far as the quality associated to the 
   actual provisioning of such services is concerned. These issues have 
   been expressed in terms of (the check-list is not exhaustive): 
    
   - As far as the actual processing of the IP traffic is concerned, how 
    should the routers of an IP network behave whenever congestion is 
    experienced? 
    
   - How should a QoS policy be enforced to accurately reflect the fact 
    that some traffics deserve a better treatment than others, 
 
<Lastname>               Category - Expiration                 [Page 1] 
  

Internet Draft    QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol     February 2001 
                                     
                                     
    according to the different levels of quality customers may 
    subscribe to? 
    
  - How should the switching and transmission resources of an IP 
    network be designed so that they actively participate in honoring 
    the commitments of a service provider towards its customers, as far 
    as the perception of the actual quality of the service by the end-
    users is concerned? 
    
   - When considering the deployment of IP services worldwide, how an 
    end-to-end QoS policy could be enforced when considering that 
    multiple domains will be crossed by the traffic that characterizes 
    these QoS-based service offerings? 
    
   These questions yielded a dramatic development of the specification 
   effort ([3], [4]), as far as quality of service in IP networks is 
   concerned.  
    
   Nevertheless, providing end-to-end quality of service for the IP 
   traffic that crosses administrative domains still remains an issue, 
   mainly because: 
    
   - QoS policies may dramatically differ from one service provider to 
    another, 
   - The actual enforcement of a specific QoS policy may also differ 
    from one domain to another, although the definition of a set of 
    basic and common quality of service indicators may be shared 
    between the service providers. 
    
   This draft aims at providing an argumentation for the specification 
   and the development of QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol, so that 
   it may participate in addressing the above-mentioned inter-domain 
   issues.
    
   As such, this draft is organized according to the following sections: 
    
   - Section 3 aims at providing elaboration on the issues that may be 
    partially addressed by the use of the BGP4 protocol, as far as the 
    enforcement of an end-to-end QoS policy is concerned, 
    
   - Section 4 aims at describing what could be the framework related to 
    the definition and the specification of QoS extensions to the BGP4 
    protocol. 
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [5]. 
    
    

 
Jacquenet         Informational - Expires August 2001          [Page 2] 
  

Internet Draft    QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol     February 2001 
                                     
                                     
3. Quality of service issues in deploying cross-domain IP services and 
   motivation for adding QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol 
    
   The basic provisioning of an access to the Internet implies for 
   services providers that they establish BGP4 peering relationships 
   between themselves, so that their respective customers get the full 
   IP connectivity (i.e. communicate with the "outside" IP world). The  
   perceived quality of this kind of service by customers is often 
   qualified in terms of the variation of the response time that is 
   associated to a HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) request or the 
   retrieval of a given file via the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) 
   related to the access to the Internet has yielded the promotion of a 
   spectrum of levels of service, often compared to the Olympic medal 
   taxonomy, so that gold customers are supposed to benefit from harder 
   guarantees than the bronze customers, in terms of packet loss rate 
   for example. 
    
   While this kind of QoS policy can be enforced by means of mechanisms 
   like those being specified in [6], and that will be activated on the 
   routers that are managed by a given service provider, there is 
   obviously no guarantees (for the customers) that other service 
   providers will enforce this QoS policy the same way, so that the 
   commitments both the customer and the service provider have 
   contractually agreed upon rely on local agreement considerations, 
   i.e. the configuration information that is processed by the routers 
   of a given domain only.  
    
   Furthermore, value-added IP service offerings like IP VPNs (IP 
   Virtual Private Networks) that may be deployed across several domains 
   (whatever the underlying technology) often imply the negotiation and 
   the invocation of QoS requirements (like the contractual definition 
   of a one-way metric delay, the inter-packet delay variation, etc.) 
   between the customer and the provider, although the latter is 
   generally unable to honor such commitments whenever they imply the 
   crossing of several domains. 
    
   According to these two examples, the QoS issues related to the 
   deployment of IP services over multiple domains can be summarized as 
   follows:  
    
      For the purpose of enforcing an end-to-end QoS policy (assuming 
      that "end-to-end" means that the corresponding IP traffic will 
      have to cross several domains), there is a strong need of service 
      providers to exchange (if not agree on the meaning of) QoS-
      related information.  
    
   The QoS-related information can consist of (but is obviously not 
   limited to): 
    
   (1) Packet rate, i.e. the number of IP datagrams that can be 
      transmitted (or have been lost) per unit of time,   
   (2) One-way delay, as defined in [7], 
 
Jacquenet         Informational - Expires August 2001          [Page 3] 
  

Internet Draft    QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol     February 2001 
                                     
                                     
   (3) Inter-packet delay variation, as defined in [8], 
   (4) PHB Identifier, as defined in [9].  
    
   It is assumed that these QoS metrics are systematically associated to 
   the routes that lead to the destination prefix indicated in the 
   header of the IP datagrams, so that service providers can fully 
   benefit from the meaning of such information, possibly yielding the 
   refinement of routing policies, for example. 
    
   This draft therefore assumes that IP routers could gracefully and 
   actively participate in the exchange of such information, since they 
   are one of the key components of the IP networks that support such 
   QoS-based IP service offerings.  
    
4. A proposed framework for adding QoS extensions capabilities to the 
   BGP4 protocol 
    
   According to the above section, the use of the BGP4 protocol to 
   convey this QoS-related information between domains appears to be one 
   of the most natural choices, simply because of the systematic 
   activation of this routing protocol for the purpose of exchanging 
   reachability information between domains. 
    
   From this standpoint, the proposed framework of the corresponding 
   specification effort focuses on the use of the BGP4 attribute 
   machinery that has proven its great flexibility, and this proposal is 
   primarily reflected in the companion document [10] of this draft. 
    
    
5. Security Considerations 
    
   The need for exchanging QoS-related information between domains 
   thanks to the use of the BGP4 protocol yields security concerns that 
   are related to the preservation of the confidentiality of this 
   information. Although this draft does not explicitly change the 
   underlying security issues inherent in the existing BGP-4 protocol 
   specification [11], the upcoming versions of this document will 
   provide additional elaboration on this issue.  
    
    
6. References  
    
 
   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
       9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2]  Rekhter Y., Li T., "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 
       1771, March 1995. 
    
 


 
Jacquenet         Informational - Expires August 2001          [Page 4] 
  

Internet Draft    QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol     February 2001 
                                     
                                     
 
   [3]  Nichols K., Blake S., Baker F., Black D., "Definition of the 
       Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 
       Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998. 
    
   [4]  Goderis D., T'Joens Y., Jacquenet C., Memenios G., Pavlou G., 
       Egan R., Griffin D., Georgatsos P., Georgiadis L., 
       "Specification of a Service Level Specification (SLS) Template", 
       draft-tequila-sls-00.txt, Work in Progress, November 2000. Check 
       http://www.ist-tequila.org for additional information. 
    
   [5]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [6] Bernet Y. et al., "An Informal Management Model for Diffserv 
       Routers", draft-ietf-diffserv-model-06.txt, Work in Progress, 
       February 2001.  
    
   [7]  Almes G., Kalidindi S., "A One-Way-Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 
       2679, September 1999. 
    
   [8] Demichelis C., Chimento P., "IP Packet Delay Variation Metric 
       for IPPM", draft-ietf-ippm-ipdv-06.txt, Work in Progress, 
       February 2001.  
    
   [9]  Black D., Brim S., Carpenter B., Le Faucheur F., "Per Hop 
       Behavior Identification Codes", draft-ietf-diffserv-2839bis-
       01.txt, Work in Progress, February 2001. 
    
   [10] Jacquenet C., "Providing Quality of Service Indication by the 
       BGP-4 Protocol: the QOS_NLRI attribute", draft-jacquenet-qos-
       nlri-02.txt, Work in Progress, February 2001. 
    
   [11] Heffernan A., "Protection of BGP sessions via the TCP MD5 
       Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998. 
    
7. Acknowledgments 
                         
   Part of this work is funded by the European Commission, within the 
   context of the TEQUILA (Traffic Engineering for Quality of Service in 
   the Internet At Large Scale, [12]) project, which is itself part of 
   the IST (Information Society Technologies) research program. 
    
    
8. Author's Addresses 
    
   Christian Jacquenet 
   France Telecom R & D 
   DMI/SIR 
   42, rue des Coutures 
   BP6243 
   14066 Caen Cedex 04 
 
Jacquenet         Informational - Expires August 2001          [Page 5] 
  

Internet Draft    QoS extensions to the BGP4 protocol     February 2001 
                                     
                                     
   France 
   Phone: +33 2 31 75 94 28 
   Email: christian.jacquenet@francetelecom.fr 
    
    
9. Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
     


















 
Jacquenet         Informational - Expires August 2001          [Page 6] 
  
