
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking Working Group                Charles E. Perkins
INTERNET DRAFT                                     Nokia Research Center
14 July 2000                                          Elizabeth M. Royer
                                 University of California, Santa Barbara
                                                            Samir R. Das
                                                University of Cincinnati

                 IP Broadcast in Ad hoc Mobile Networks
                     draft-perkins-manet-bcast-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Mobile Ad Hoc Networking Working
   Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should
   be submitted to the manet@itd.nrl.navy.mil mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   An ad hoc mobile network is a collection of nodes, each of which
   communicates over wireless channels and is capable of movement.
   Nodes participating in such an ad hoc network communicate on
   a peer-to-peer basis.  Broadcast is often a desired form of
   communication in these networks, as it can enable both the
   dissemination of control information and the delivery of data
   packets.  This document describes a method for providing broadcast
   communication in ad hoc networks.









Perkins, Royer, Das           Expires 14 January 2001           [Page i]

Internet Draft       IP Broadcast in Ad hoc Networks        14 July 2000


1. Introduction

   This document makes a particular specification for a classical
   broadcast algorithm, as it can be used to disseminate IP packets
   across ad hoc networks.  Broadcast is needed in many circumstances;
   in particular, it is useful for the kind of route discovery
   operations that are required for on-demand route acquisition in
   several candidate manet protocols.

   This protocol specification works when the nodes sending broadcast
   packets ensure that each distinct broadcast packet that they send is
   tagged with a distinct value in the ident field of the IP header.

   This document uses conventional meanings [1] for capitalized words
   such as MUST, SHOULD, etc., to indicate requirement levels for
   various protocol features.


2. Broadcast

   When a node wishes to generate a broadcast, it sends the broadcast
   packet to address 255.255.255.255.  This document does not specify
   transmissions to any directed broadcast address.

   Every node maintains a list to keep track of which broadcast packets
   have already been received and retransmitted.  The list contains, for
   each distinct broadcast packet received, the source IP address and
   the IP ident value from the IP header of the broadcast packet.

   When a node receives a packet broadcast to address 255.255.255.255,
   it checks its list for the source IP address and the IP ident
   value of the broadcast packet's IP header [2].  If there is such a
   list entry with matching source IP address and IP ident field, the
   node silently discards the broadcast packet since it has already
   been received.  The node then checks to see whether it is enabled
   for retransmitting broadcast packets.  By default, all nodes in
   the ad hoc network are so enabled; however, this is not required
   (see section 3).  If the node is not enabled for retransmitting
   broadcasts, it takes no further action.  If there is no existing list
   entry containing the same source IP address and IP ident value, and
   if the node has been enabled to forward broadcast packets, the node
   retransmits the broadcast packet.

   List entries SHOULD be kept for at least BROADCAST_RECORD_TIME
   before the node expunges the record.  BROADCAST_RECORD_TIME
   is a configurable parameter, but it MUST be at least equal to
   NET_TRAVERSAL_TIME.





Perkins, Royer, Das           Expires 14 January 2001           [Page 1]

Internet Draft       IP Broadcast in Ad hoc Networks        14 July 2000


3. Selective Broadcast Retransmission

   By default, each node in the ad hoc network is enabled to retransmit
   each distinct broadcast packet that it receives.  However, in some
   cases, there may be additional control signaling in place that is
   used to reduce the number of nodes that perform this retransmission,
   in order to reduce the overall bandwidth consumption and congestion
   which can be caused by excessive broadcast.  This document does not
   specify any such control protocol to disable or enable such node
   selection.  However, an ad hoc network which employs such a node
   selection protocol can still be considered to be compliant with the
   broadcast protocol specified in this document.


4. Configuration Parameters

   This section gives default values for some important values
   associated with broadcast operations.  Mobile nodes in particular
   ad hoc networks may wish to change certain of the parameters, in
   particular the NET_DIAMETER and NODE_TRAVERSAL values.  Choice
   of these parameters may affect the robustness of the broadcast
   operation.

      Parameter Name          Value
      ----------------------  -----
      BROADCAST_RECORD_TIME   2 * NET_TRAVERSAL_TIME
      NET_DIAMETER            35
      NODE_TRAVERSAL_TIME     40
      NET_TRAVERSAL_TIME      3 * NODE_TRAVERSAL_TIME * NET_DIAMETER / 2



   NET_DIAMETER measures the maximum possible number of hops between
   two nodes in the network.  NODE_TRAVERSAL_TIME is a conservative
   estimate of the average one hop traversal time for packets and should
   include queuing delays, interrupt processing times and transfer
   times.  NET_TRAVERSAL_TIME is a conservative estimate of how long it
   should take for a message to traverse the entire ad hoc network.


5. Security Considerations

   This draft specifies a general mechanism for handling broadcast.
   It does not make any provision for securing the contents of the
   broadcast data, either to protect against tampering or to protect
   against unauthorized inspection of the data.






Perkins, Royer, Das           Expires 14 January 2001           [Page 2]

Internet Draft       IP Broadcast in Ad hoc Networks        14 July 2000


6. IPv6 consideration

   The method described in this draft for identifying broadcast packets,
   using the Ident field in the IP header, does not work.  A new packet
   identification method will have to be developed.


7. Acknowledgments

   This broadcast method is a codification of a well known algorithm
   which has been assumed for general use in various ad hoc protocols.
   Thus, the protocol specification in this draft should be considered
   the joint work of many engineers who have worked on producing ad hoc
   network protocols.  The authors of this draft hope that we have been
   able to faithfully and usefully represent the work of these many
   engineers.


References

   [1] S. Bradner.  Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels.  Request for Comments (Best Current Practice) 2119,
       Internet Engineering Task Force, March 1997.

   [2] J. Postel.  Internet Protocol.  Request for Comments (Standard)
       791, Internet Engineering Task Force, September 1981.


Author's Addresses

   Questions about this memo can be directed to:

      Charles E. Perkins
      Communications Systems Laboratory / Nokia Research Center
      313 Fairchild Drive
      Mountain View, CA 94303
      +1 650 625 2986
      +1 650 625-2502 (fax)
      charliep@iprg.nokia.com

      Elizabeth M. Royer
      Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
      University of California, Santa Barbara
      Santa Barbara, CA 93106
      +1 805 893 7788
      +1 805 893 3262 (fax)
      eroyer@alpha.ece.ucsb.edu





Perkins, Royer, Das           Expires 14 January 2001           [Page 3]

Internet Draft       IP Broadcast in Ad hoc Networks        14 July 2000


      Samir R. Das
      Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Computer
      Science
      University of Cincinnati
      Cincinnati, OH 45221-0030
      +1 513 556 2594
      +1 513 556 7326 (fax)
      sdas@ececs.uc.edu












































Perkins, Royer, Das           Expires 14 January 2001           [Page 4]
