



Network Working Group                                   S. Fujimoto, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                  Fujitsu Laboratories LTD
Intended status: Standards Track                              P. Niblett
Expires: September 13, 2018                   IBM United Kingdom Limited
                                                    S. Reina Ortega, Ed.
                          European Telecommunication Standards Institute
                                                          March 12, 2018


   A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for the oneM2M Partnership
                            Project (oneM2M)
                    draft-fujimoto-urn-onem2m-01

Abstract

   This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform
   Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the oneM2M
   Partnership Project (oneM2M). oneM2M defines and manages resources
   that utilize this URN name model.  Management activities for these
   and other resource types are provided by the oneM2M Secretariat.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 13, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          URN namespace for oneM2M              March 2018


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  URN Specification for the oneM2M Namespace Identifier (NID) .   2
   3.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Namespace considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Comunity considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   oneM2M is the global standards initiative that covers requirements,
   architecture, API specifications, security solutions and
   interoperability for Machine-to-Machine(M2M) and IoT technologies.
   This activity is supported by a membership composed of network
   operators, equipment vendors, and other suppliers to the M2M/IoT
   market.

   Some of the technologies being developed by oneM2M need URN
   namespaces that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.
   To assure that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a
   specific NID for use by oneM2m was deemed appropriate.  Therefore, a
   full and complete registration will follow the namespace
   specification process as defined in RFC 3406 [RFC3406].

2.  URN Specification for the oneM2M Namespace Identifier (NID)

   Namespace ID:

      1m2m

   Registration Information:

      registration version number: 1
      registration date: (TBD)

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Registering organization




Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          URN namespace for oneM2M              March 2018


         Name:

            oneM2M Partnership Project

         Address:

            ETSI
            650, route des Lucioles
            06921 Sophia-Antipolis Cedex
            France

      Designated contact

         Role: Technical expert
         Email: miguelangel.reinaortega@etsi.org

   Declaration of syntactic structure

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the
      "1m2m" NID will have the following structure:

         urn:1m2m:{onem2m-urn}

      where the "onem2m-urn" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the
      NSS(Namespace Specific String) Syntax described in RFC 2141
      [RFC2141] and defines a specific resource type.

   Relevant ancillary documentation

      oneM2M provides information on registration for each URN.  More
      information about oneM2M and the registration activities and
      procedures to be followed are available at:

         http://www.onem2m.org/urn


   Identifier uniqueness considerations

      oneM2M will manage resources using the "1m2m" NID and will be the
      authority for managing the "onem2m-urn" strings.  In the
      associated procedures, oneM2M will ensure the uniqueness of the
      strings themselves or shall permit secondary responsibility for
      management of well-defined sub-trees.
      oneM2M may permit use of experimental type values that will not be
      registered.  As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the
      same value for separate uses.  Unregistered type values will only
      be allowed in sub-namespaces clearly marked as experimental, to




Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          URN namespace for oneM2M              March 2018


      help implementers avoid "leaking" experimental values into real
      use.

   Identifier persistence considerations

      oneM2M will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of
      the "1m2m" NID.  This will be structured such that each "onem2m-
      urn", if needed, will have a separate description and registration
      table.
      The registration tables and information will be published and
      maintained by oneM2M on its web site.

   Process of identifier assignment

      oneM2M will provide procedures for registration of each type of
      resource that it maintains.  Each such resource may have three
      types of registration activities:

      1.  Registered values associated with oneM2M specifications or
          services
      2.  Registration of values or sub-trees to other entities
      3.  Name models for use in experimental purposes

   New Namespace Identifier (NID) labels

      The Entries in the registration table will be the following:
      onem2m-urn: the registered value; Description: description of the
      registered value; Reference: oneM2M Technical Specification that
      defines the value; Contact: person requesting the URN assignment.

   Process for identifier resolution

      The namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System
      (RDS), as this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence

      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
      RFC 2141 [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism

      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
      supported and maintained by oneM2M.



Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          URN namespace for oneM2M              March 2018


   Scope

      Global

3.  Examples

   The following examples are representative URNs that could be assigned
   by oneM2M.  They are not actual strings that are assigned.

      urn:1m2m:pro

         Defines the "onem2m-urn" to be used for "pro(tocol)" WG.

      urn:1m2m:model:sensor-a

         Defines the URN associated with the information model for some
         types of sensor devices identified by the name "sensor-a".

4.  Namespace considerations

   The oneM2M Partnership Project is developing technical specifications
   and reports to ensure M2M(Machine-to-Machine) devices can
   successfully communicate on a global scale.

   For proper operation, descriptions of the needed information must
   exist for the URNs and be available in a unique, reliable, and
   persistent manner.

   As oneM2M covers multiple technical areas, the possibility of binding
   to various other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical.
   Each object or description, as defined in oneM2M, could possibly be
   related to multiple different other namespaces, so further conflicts
   of association could occur.  Thus the intent is to utilize the oneM2M
   Secretariat as the naming authority for oneM2M-defined URNs and its
   descriptions.

5.  Comunity considerations

   The objects and descriptions produced by oneM2M are generally
   available for use by other organizations.  The oneM2M will provide
   access and support for name requests by these organizations.  This
   support can be enabled in a timely and responsive fashion as new
   objects and descriptions are produced.








Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          URN namespace for oneM2M              March 2018


6.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations other than those normally
   associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This section registers a new URN NID with the registration provided
   in Section 2.

   "onem2m-urn" strings are identified by label managed by oneM2M.
   Thus, creating a new label does not require any IANA action.

8.  Normative References

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, DOI 10.17487/RFC2141,
              May 1997, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2141>.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", RFC 3406, DOI 10.17487/RFC3406, October 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3406>.

Authors' Addresses

   Shingo Fujimoto (editor)
   Fujitsu Laboratories LTD
   Kamikodanaka 4-1-1
   Nakaharaku, Kawasaki
   JAPAN

   Email: shingo_fujimoto@jp.fujitsu.com


   Peter Niblett
   IBM United Kingdom Limited
   PO Box 41, North Harbour
   Portsmouth , Hampshire  PO6 3AU
   United Kingdom

   Email: peter_niblett@uk.ibm.com










Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          URN namespace for oneM2M              March 2018


   Miguel Angel Reina Ortega (editor)
   European Telecommunication Standards Institute
   650 Route des lucioles
   Sophia Antipolis  06921
   FRANCE

   Phone: 0033492944349
   Email: miguelangel.reinaortega@etsi.org











































Fujimoto, et al.       Expires September 13, 2018               [Page 7]
