Network Working Group                                         P. Hoschka

INTERNET DRAFT                                                April 1998

draft-hoschka-smil-media-type-00.txt                                  W3C





                        The application/smil Media Type

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
     areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
     distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     "work in progress."

     To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
     the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
     Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
     (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au

     (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
     (US West Coast).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document specifies the Media Type of the Synchronized Multimedia
   Integration Language (SMIL 1.0, pronounced "smile"). SMIL allows
   integrating a set of independent multimedia objects into a
   synchronized multimedia presentation.

1.  Introduction

   The World Wide Web Consortium has issued a Proposed Recommendation
[1],
   which defines version 1 of  the Synchronized Multimedia Integration
   Language. This memo provides information about the application/smil
   Media Type.

2.  Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language


   SMIL allows integrating a set of independent multimedia objects into
   a synchronized multimedia presentation. Using SMIL, an author can

   1.describe the temporal behavior of the presentation
   2.describe the layout of the presentation on a screen
   3.associate hyperlinks with media objects

   SMIL is defined using XML [2].






Expiration Date: October 1998                                    [Page
1]

INTERNET DRAFT          application/smil Media Type            April
1998



3.  Registration Information

       To: ietf-types@iana.org
       Subject: Registration of MIME media type application/smil

       MIME media type name: application

       MIME subtype name: smil

       Required parameters: charset

       smil is an XML-based language, and thus a character-based media
type.
       The charset parameter is required, because the default character
       set for XML (UTF-8) differs from the default character set
       defined in RFC 2046 (US-ASCII).

       Optional parameters: none

   Encoding considerations:

      "quoted-printable" encoding is recommended for use with transports
that
      are not 8-bit clean and smil documents that use a character set
such as
      UTF-8 in which the majority of characters are US-ASCII. base64 or
binary is
      recommended in all other cases.

   Security considerations:

       SMIL documents contain a construct that allows "infinite loops".
       This is indispensible for a multimedia format. However, SMIL
       clients should foresee provisions such as a "stop" button
       that lets users interrupt such an "infinite loop".

       As with HTML, SMIL documents contain links to other media
(images,
       sounds, videos, text, ...) and those links are typically
       followed automatically by software, resulting




Expiration Date: October 1998                                      [Page
2]

INTERNET DRAFT         application/smil Media Type                 April
1998


       in the transfer of files without the explicit request of the user

       for each one. The security considerations of each linked file are

       those of the individual registered types.

   Interoperability considerations:

       SMIL documents contain links to other media objects. The SMIL
       player must be able to decode the media types of these media in
       order to display the whole document. To increase
interoperability,
       SMIL has provisions for including alternate versions of a media
       object in a document.

   Published specification: see [1]

   Applications which use this media type:

       SMIL players

   Additional information:

       Magic number(s): none
       File extension(s): .smi, .smil
       Macintosh File Type Code(s): "TEXT"
       Object Identifier(s) or OID(s): none

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

       The author of this memo.

   Intended usage: COMMON

     Author/Change controller:

5.  References

   [1]  "Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL) 1.0
         Specification", Proposed Recommendation PR-smil-19980409,
        http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/PR-smil-19980409/, April 1998.

   [2]  "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0", W3C Recommendation
        REC-xml-19980210, http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/,
        February 1998.






Expiration Date: October 1998                              [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT        application/smil Media Type        April 1998


6.  Authors' Addresse

   Philipp Hoschka
   W3C/INRIA
   2004, route des Lucioles - B.P. 93
   06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 (0)492387771
   Fax:   +33 (0)493657765
   EMail: ph@w3.org





















Expiration Date: October 1998                                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT          application/smil Media Type       April 1998


7.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and

   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

