


Network Working Group                                      F. Ben Jemaa
Internet-Draft                                               G. Pujolle
Intended status: Standards Track            Computer Science Laboratory
Expires: January 4, 2014                                     of Paris 6
                                                            M. Pariente                                                         
                                                         Meteor Network
							   July 4, 2014

               Labels for common venue-based services
                   draft-benjemaa-vbs-urn-00


Abstract
	This document describes a service-identifying label that allows 
	venue-based services that are locally offered by the venue owner to 
	be identified. In particular, we define labels for the most known 
	and common venue services (e.g. mapping and printer). These labels 
	can be used by IEEE 802.11 and service discovery protocols to 
	discover the available services specific to the venue and 
	accessible via the Wireless LAN. 

Status of this Memo

	This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
	provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.
	
	Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
	Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute 
	working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
	Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

	Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
	months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
	documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
	as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
	progress."

Copyright Notice

	This Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as 
	the	document authors. All rights reserved. 
   
	This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
	Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
	(http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
	publication of this document. Please review these documents
			
     
      
Ben Jemaa, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Venue-based service URN            July 2014


	carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
	respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
	document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
	Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
	warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

	1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
	2.  Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
	3.  Venue-based services. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
	4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
	5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
	6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
    
1. Introduction

	Increasingly, local value-added services are deployed in airports, 
	shopping malls, and other public spaces to improve customer 
	experience. Although these services depend on the venue type and 
	the	specific user needs in this venue, there is a set of well-known
	and	common services often required by customers in such indoor area 
	(e.g. indoor mapping).
	
	To enable global and unique identification of such services, it is 
	useful to define a common set of terms, so that the same service is 
	labeled with the same identifier regardless of the actual service 
	deployment which may depends on the venue type.
	
	Availability of such venue service identifiers facilitates service 
	advertisement and discovery. Indeed, it allows network entities to 
	convey information about the available services to user devices 
	while ensuring consistency and compatibility between devices and 
	service providers. Thus, it allows a user device to recognize the 
	desired services among the received information according to the 
	defined user preferences. This allows for more automatism and 
	transparence relative to end-users. 
	
	In addition, these URN labels identify services independent of the 
	particular protocol using these identifiers. In particular, it may 
	appear in IEEE 802.11, service discovery, and mapping protocols. 
	For	example, for mapping service URNs to URLs, Location to Service 
	Translation Protocol (LoST) [RFC5222] could be used as a resolution 
	system based on geographic location.



Ben Jemaa, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Venue-based service URN            July 2014


	Finally, as URN identifiers are extensible, these venue service 
	identifiers may contain a hierarchy of sub-services that further 
	describe the service.

2.  Conventions used in this document
	
	The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
	"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
	this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.	Venue-based services

	In this section, we define new URN service labels to identify 
	venue-based services using the "service" URN namespace defined in 
	[RFC5031]. We propose to add a new top-level service label "vbs" 
	(referring to venue-based services).
	
	urn:service:vbs The generic "vbs" service type encompasses all of 
		the services offered by the venue.
		
	We define also additional sub-services corresponding to the most 
	well-known and common indoor venue services which are of general 
	public interest.
	
	urn:service:vbs:mapping The "mapping" service refers to indoor 
		localization and way finding using the venue map.

	urn:service:vbs:discount The "discount" service refers to discounts 
		and special deals proposed by the venue (e.g. discount offered 
		by a restaurant , promotions offered by a shopping mall, 
		special price reduction offered by an hotel).

	urn:service:vbs:printer The "printer" service refers to printing 
		services that can be offered by the venue such as hotel, 
		library, etc.

	urn:service:vbs:info The "info" service gives information related 
		or about the visited venue. For example, in a shopping mall, it
		gives the list of available shops, brands, restaurants in this 
		mall. Or in the airport, travelers could use this service to 
		access information about their fly.
		
	urn:service:vbs:video The "video" service refers to video streaming 
		or download service offered by a certain venues. For example,
		in a stadium, it gives exclusive in-venue content such as 
		replays and live video streaming.



Ben Jemaa, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Venue-based service URN            July 2014


4.	Security Considerations

	This document defines service-identifying labels for venue-based 
	services and this does not raise security issues.
	
5. 	IANA Considerations

	Services and sub-services are identified by labels managed by IANA, 
	according to the processes outlined in [RFC5226] in a registry 
	called "Service URN Labels". Thus, creating a new service requires 
	IANA action.
	
	This document defines new service URNs in the Service URN Labels 
	registry according to [RFC5031] for venue-based services as listed 
	in Section 3.
	
	[TO BE REMOVED: This registration should take place at the 
	following location: http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-serviceid
	-labels/urn-serviceid-labels.xhtml]
	
	The following table contains the initial IANA registrations for 
	venue-based services.
	
	Service 	Reference    Description
	-------------------------------------------------------------------
	vbs		RFC xxxx     Venue-based services
	vbs.mapping	RFC xxxx     Indoor mapping service
	vbs.discount	RFC xxxx     Discount offers
	vbs.printer	RFC xxxx     Printer service
	vbs.info	RFC xxxx     Venue-related information service
	vbs.video	RFC xxxx     Local video download or streaming service


6. 	References
6.1.	Normative References

	[RFC2119] 	Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
			Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.
	
	[RFC5031]	Schulzrinne, H., "A Uniform Resource Name (URN) for 
			Emergency and Other Well-Known Services", RFC 5031, 
			January 2008.
	
	[RFC5226]	Narten, T. and H.Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an 
			IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226, 
			May 2008.
					
	

Ben Jemaa, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Venue-based service URN            July 2014				
	
	
6.2.	Informative References

	[RFC5222]	Hardie, T., Newton, A., Schulzrinne, H., and H. 
			Tschofenig, "LoST: A Location-to-Service Translation 
			Protocol", RFC 5222, August 2008.
				
				
	Authors' Addresses
	
	Fatma Ben Jemaa
	University of Pierre & Marie Curie
	Computer Science Laboratory of Paris 6 
	4, Place Jussieu
	Paris 75005
	France
	Email: fatma.ben-jemaa@lip6.fr
	
	Guy Pujolle
	University of Pierre & Marie Curie
	Computer Science Laboratory of Paris 6 
	4, Place Jussieu
	Paris 75005
	France
	Email: guy.pujolle@lip6.fr
	
	Michel Pariente
	Meteor Network
	40, rue du general Malleret-Joinville
	Vitry-sur-Seine 94420
	France
	Email: mpariente@meteornetworks.com

	
	
	
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
		
	
Ben Jemaa, et al.          Expires January 4, 2015              [Page 5]