





Network Working Group                               Gargi Nalawade
Internet Draft                                      Pradosh Mohapatra
June 2006                                           Francois Le Faucheur
                                                    Ruchi Kapoor
                                                    Pranav Mehta
                                                    David Ward
                                                    Simon Barber
                                                    Cisco Systems

                                                    J. Wu
                                                    Y. Cui
                                                    X. Li
                                                    Tsinghua University



                     BGP Softwire Nexthop Attribute
                  draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt




1. Status of this Memo


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

2. Copyright Notice




draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 1]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  All Rights Reserved.

3. Abstract

   The current [MP-BGP] extensions carry routing information by
   associating the same network layer protocol with both the NLRI and
   the next hop. However, in certain scenarios, it is desirable or
   required to advertise next hop information associated with a
   different network layer protocol to the one associated with the NLRI.

   Similarly, when data traffic for a network layer protocol's NLRIs
   needs to be forwarded over an underlying tunnel, it is required to
   indicate the tunnel endpoint to be used for forwarding with the BGP
   update for a given NLRI.

   This document specifies a new BGP attribute, called the SW_NEXT_HOP
   attribute, which can optionally be used in a BGP Update message to
   advertise next hop information associated with a different network
   layer protocol than that of the NLRIs or convey information about the
   tunnel endpoint.

4. Introduction

   [MP-BGP] defines extensions to BGP-4 to enable it to carry routing
   information for multiple network layer protocols (e.g. IPv4-VPN,
   IPv6, IPv6-VPN). This is achieved by encoding the next hop and the
   NLRI as defined by the network layer protocol in an MP_REACH_NLRI
   attribute and including the network layer protocol identifiers. Since
   the same network layer protocol is associated with both the next hop
   information and the NLRI, [MP-BGP] extensions do not allow
   advertisement of next hop information from a different network layer
   protocol to the one of the NLRI.

   However, there are situations where the next hop information to be
   advertised is indeed from a different network layer protocol to the
   one of the NLRI.

   In a number of such situations, the [MP-BGP] limitation has been
   circumvented by mapping the actual nexthop to an encoded value so as
   to match the network layer protocol format of the NLRIs. [MPLS-VPN]
   is an example of this since it calls for advertisement of IPv4 next
   hop information with IPv4-VPN NLRI. This is achieved by prepending a
   Null Route Distinguisher to the IPv4 Next Hop address. [BGP-V6-TUNN]
   is another example that requires advertisement of IPv4 next hop
   information along with IPv6 NLRI. The next hop is encoded as an
   IPv4-mapped IPv6 address. [IPv6-VPN] is yet another example that
   requires advertisement of IPv4 or IPv6 next hop information along
   with IPv6-VPN NLRI, which is achieved by prepending a Null Route



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 2]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   Distinguisher to the next hop address and, when the meaningful next
   hop is IPv4, by encoding it as an IPv4-mapped IPv6 address.

   These workarounds do not suffice if the actual next hop address can
   not be embedded in the next hop information field as defined by the
   network layer protocol of the NLRIs. One such example is the need to
   advertise IPv6 next hop information with IPv4 NLRIs to be able to
   carry IPv4 islands routing information over a native IPv6 core.

   Also, in cases where the network layer protocols of the next hop and
   NLRI are different, the transport protocol is different from the
   payload. This calls for the payload to be tunneled through the ISP
   core. The establishment of the tunnels as well as the selection of
   the tunnel type(s) to be used from an ingress router to a given
   egress router can be statically controlled by configuration.
   Alternatively the tunneling capabilities and preferences as well as
   the individual tunnel attributes [BGP-TUN] can be dynamically
   established via various mechanisms such as the BGP IPv4/IPv6 Tunnel
   SAFI [BGP-TUN-SAFI] or IGP based discovery of TE tunnels [IGP-TE].

   In some cases, the same tunnel can be used for all NLRIs advertised
   by the egress router. The tunnel can then be selected by the ingress
   router based on its local configuration as well as the information
   that may have been advertised by the egress router about tunneling
   capabilities and preferences for example via [BGP-TUN-SAFI].

   In other cases, different NLRIs may need to be carried over different
   tunnels. For example, some NLRIs may require transport over IPsec
   tunnels while the other NLRIs may be more efficiently transported
   without IPsec protection over MPLS LSPs. In these cases there is a
   requirement for the egress router to advertise which tunnel ought to
   be used for a particular set of NLRIs. The ingress router needs an
   indication in the BGP update for these NLRIs, as to which tunnel to
   use to reach the egress router.

   This document describes a new BGP attribute, called SW_NEXT_HOP
   attribute that can be optionally carried in BGP Update messages to
   signal the actual next hop that is independent of the network layer
   protocol of NLRIs and to also signal which tunnel to use for a given
   set of NLRIs.


5. Softwire Nexthop Attribute

   An Optional transitive attribute is being defined. This attribute is
   meant to carry the nexthop address and the Tunnel information needed
   to reach this nexthop address of the remote peer.




draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 3]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   The attribute is encoded as shown below:



            +---------------------------------------------------------+
            | Address Family Identifier (2 octets)                    |
            +---------------------------------------------------------+
            | Subsequent Address Family Identifier (1 octet)          |
            +---------------------------------------------------------+
            | Length of Next Hop Network Address (1 octet)            |
            +---------------------------------------------------------+
            | Network Address of Next Hop (variable)                  |
            +---------------------------------------------------------+
            | TLVs (variable length)                                  |
            +---------------------------------------------------------+




   The use and meaning of these fields are as follows :

      Address Family Identifier (AFI):

         This field in combination with the Subsequent Address Family
         Identifier field identifies the Network Layer protocol
         associated with the Next Hop address. Presently defined values
         for the Address Family Identifier field are specified in
         RFC1700 (see the Address Family Numbers section).

      Subsequent Address Family Identifier (SAFI):

         This field in combination with the Address Family Identifier
         field identifies the Network Layer protocol associated with the
         Next Hop address.

      Length of Next Hop Network Address:

         A 1 octet field whose value expresses the length of the
         "Network Address of Next Hop" field as octets.

      Network Address of Next Hop:

         A variable length field that contains the Network Address of
         the Next Hop.

      TLV:

         The variable length TLV field of the Softwire Nexthop attribute



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 4]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


         contains one or more tuples of the form :



                   +----------------+------------------+
                   | Type (1 octet) | Length (1 octet) |
                   +----------------+------------------+
                   |  Value (as specified by Type)     |
                   +-----------------------------------+

            where,

            Type:   This field specifies the 'Type' of the data contained in the value field.

            Length: specifies the length of the 'Value' field.

            Value:  The contents and format of the value field are defined by
                    the Type field.


            Following 'Types' are being defined :


   Type 1 : indicates that the value field in the TLV contains a 2-octet Tunnel
            Identifier which uniquely identifies a Tunnel on the
            egress BGP router

   Type 2 : indicates that the value field in the TLV contains a 2-octet
            Multicast Tree Identifier which uniquely identifies a
            Multicast Tree on the advertising BGP router

6. Operation

   A BGP SPeaker may want to advertise itself as the router that should be
   used as the next hop to the destinations advertised in the NLRI field,
   or in the MP_NLRI field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute, and wants to
   advertise one of its Network Layer addresses for a Network Layer protocol
   which is different to the Network Layer protocol of the NLRI destinations.

   Alternately, a BGP Speaker may also want to explicitely advertise which
   tunnel to itself ought to be used for particular NLRI destinations.

   In both the above cases, a BGP Speaker supporting the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute,
   SHOULD include the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute to convey this Network Layer address.

   A BGP Speaker supporting the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute which receives a
   BGP advertisement containing a SW_NEXT_HOP attribute and which does
   not modify the next hop information, SHOULD propagate the received



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 5]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   SW_NEXT_HOP attribute unchanged.

   A BGP Speaker supporting the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute which receives a
   BGP advertisement containing a SW_NEXT_HOP attribute and which
   modifies next hop information MAY include an SW_NEXT_HOP
   attribute in the generated advertisement. When it does so, the
   Network Layer address contained inside the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute
   MUST be one of its own addresses. In other words, in the case where
   the BGP speaker modifies next hop information, it MUST NOT simply
   propagate the received SW_NEXT_HOP unchanged.

   When a BGP speaker supporting the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute receives a
   BGP advertisement with next hop information encoded both in the
   MP_REACH_NLRI and in the SW_NEXT_HOP, the BGP speaker SHOULD use the
   next hop information encoded in the SW_NEXT_HOP, unless configured
   to do otherwise.

   When a BGP Speaker sets itself as the nexthop and is advertising
   Optional Tunnel TLVs using the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute, it
   means that the BGP Speaker is terminating the Tunnels and is advertising
   itself as a Tunnel endpoint.

   Let us consider the case when an ingress router receives a BGP update
   for NLRIs which will receive data traffic (Eg. IPv4/6 unicast/multicast,
   VPNv4/6 etc). If this update contains SW_NEXT_HOP attribute carrying a
   Type, Tunnel-ID and Tunnel endpoint address, the ingress router will
   use this information in the following manner (Tunnel endpoint address is
   the address contained in the 'Network Address of Next Hop' field in the
   SW_NEXT_HOP attribute):

   The Tunnel/Tree-ID and the Tunnel endpoint address will be used to
   lookup the appropriate tunnel in the Tunnel database to establish data
   forwarding through this Tunnel. Data traffic for the NLRIs carried in
   this BGP update will now be forwarded through this Tunnel.

   Note that the Tunnels themselves are established by the respective Tunnel
   protocols (Eg. mGRE, IPSec, L2TP etc).

   As an example, if the BGP Tunnel SAFI is the mechanism used to discover
   the Tunnels, then the Tunnel-ID:Tunnel endpoint address will be the NLRI
   carried by the BGP Tunnel SAFI [BGP-TUN-SAFI] updates. The Tunnel
   encapsulations will be carried in the BGP Tunnel attribute [BGP-TUN]
   accompanying the BGP Tunnel SAFI update.

   On the other hand, if IGP-based discovery of TE tunnels [IGP-TE],
   the mechanism used to discover TE tunnels is used, then the Tunnel-ID and
   Tunnel endpoint address will identify the TE tunnel discovered
   through this mechanism.



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 6]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   Similarly this applies to other out of band Tunnel discovery mechanisms
   as well which includes static configuration.

7. Capability advertisement

   A new capability [BGP-CAP] code (TBD) is defined for the BGP SW_NEXT_HOP
   attribute. The Capability Length is set to zero. The SW_NEXT_HOP attribute
   can only be sent to peers that have advertised this capability.

8. Applicability Statement

8.1. VPNv4 unicast traffic over a Tunnel

   If VPNv4 unicast traffic has to be tunneled through an ISP core instead of
   being MPLS switched as per RFC 4364, then the ingress PE needs to know what
   Tunnel to connect to. The egress PE may use the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute to
   signal this information. The Tunnel encapsulation itself could be statically
   configured or discovered through various mechanisms such as IGP based
   discovery of TE tunnels [IGP-TE] or a BGP Tunnel SAFI [BGP-TUN-SAFI].

   If an ingress PE receives a BGP update for the VPNv4 prefix with a
   SW_NEXT_HOP attribute, it would be able to connect to the appropriate
   Tunnel. Using the Tunnel-ID and Tunnel endpoint address, the SW_NEXT_HOP
   attribute will indicate which Tunnel is to be used to reach the VPNv4
   destination.

   For an IPv4 core, the contents of the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute can be
   expressed as follows:

      Address Family Identifier: 1 (IP version 4)
      Subsequent Address Family Identifier: 1 (Unicast)
      Length of Next Hop Network Address: 4
      Network Address of Next Hop: IPv4 address of the egress PE
      TLVs:
         Type: 1
         Length: 2
         Value: Tunnel Identifier value as created by the egress PE

8.2. MVPN traffic over a default MDT Tunnel

   A Multicast tunnel is setup between the PEs in one or more VPN-Providers
   networks. Over the Multicast tunnel we create PIM neighbors. The IP
   address of the PIM neighbor that is seen over the Multicast tunnel
   depends on the configured address of the Tunnel endpoint. This can
   either be an unnumbered address from a different interface or a configured
   address on the Tunnel itself. The PE router that does an RPF check on a
   VPN source can find which Tunnel the source is on, but may not know what
   PIM neighbor to target on that tunnel. Therefore we need a way to connect



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 7]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   the BGP VPNv4 prefix to the PIM neighbor on the tunnel to allow the RPF
   check to succeed.

   Suppose PIM wants to join to a source that is behind another VPN site. We
   do an RPF lookup on the source address in the VPNv4 unicast table on
   this PE. The RPF lookup will return a connected next-hop and interface
   to use to reach the source. The returned next-hop may not be the neighbor
   on the Multicast tunnel. This can be due to the next-hop being rewritten
   by BGP Route Reflectors (RR) or crossing AS's. Therefore we don't know
   which PIM neighbor to target as an upstream neighbor in the PIM join.

   This can be achieved by using the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute to carry that
   information. The SW_NEXT_HOP attribute when carried with Type 2, will
   indicate what default MDT tunnel endpoint's IP address is.

8.3. Multicast VPN traffic over Label-switched or other Multicast Tunnels

   If a BGP Multicast Overlay SAFI [BGP-MOS] is used for signalling Multicast
   Join/Prune Binding information, the downstream PE needs to know what
   Multicast tree built by MLDP or what Tunnel to bind to. The Tunnel
   encapsulation information itself could be provided by MLDP when
   Multipoint LSPs are used in the core. Or the Tunnel encapsulation could
   be provided by TE, or through the BGP Tunnel SAFI [BGP-TUN-SAFI]. Either
   ways, the downstream PE needs to know which Tunnel to connect to in
   order to receive a Multicast stream corresponding to a given PIM Join.

   This can be achieved by the Upstream PE sending the Tunnel/P-MP LSP
   binding information through the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute.

8.4. IPv4 Forwarding over IPv6 Networks

   With the rapid deployment of IPv6 networks, there is a requirement for
   IPv6 backbones to provide packet transport service to existing IPv4
   access networks. One part of the control plane mechanism involves
   carrying IPv4 NLRIs with the IPv6 network layer address as the next hop.

   This can be achieved by the egress PE sending either an MP_REACH_NLRI
   or BGP-4 Update message with the IPv4 NLRIs that carries an SW_NEXT_HOP
   attribute containing the IPv6 next hop.

      Address Family Identifier: 2 (IP version 6)
      Subsequent Address Family Identifier: 1 (Unicast)
      Length of Next Hop Network Address: 16
      Network Address of Next Hop: IPv6 address of the egress PE
      TLVs:
         Type: 1
         Length: 2
         Value: Tunnel Identifier value as created by the egress PE



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 8]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


9. Route Reflector Considerations

   If Route Reflectors (RR) reflect routes from the BGP speakers supporting
   SW_NEXT_HOP attribute, they MUST support this new capability to be
   able to validate the nexthop.

   If the Route Reflectors are not in the forwarding path, they don't
   need to perform a nexthop resolution and so validating just network
   address portion of the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute is sufficient.  So, Route
   Reflectors not in the forwarding path may choose not to validate TLV
   fields carried inside the SW_NEXT_HOP attribute that provides
   additional information to resolve the nexthop.

   When data traffic for a network layer protocol's NLRIs needs to be
   forwarded over an underlying tunnel, there are two possible ways to
   carry nexthop information inside SW_NEXT_HOP attribute. The nexthop
   can be carried as a IPv4/IPv6 network address with additional tunnel
   end-point information carried inside a TLV field. Alternatively, the
   nexthop can be carried directly in the form of [BGP-TUN-SAFI] where
   the tunnel end-point information and the nexthop address are embedded
   together in the network address portion of the nexthop.  Alternately
   nexthop can be carried as a IPv4/IPv6 network address with additional
   tunnel end-point information carried inside a TLV field.  In case of
   Route Reflector partitioning, it is possible that tunnel end-point
   information [BGP-TUN-SAFI] is exchanged via different Route Reflector
   from the one carrying the NLRIs forwarded over those tunnels. To
   facilitate nexthop validation on such Route Reflectors, it is
   recommended to carry Nexthop information in the alternate TLV format.

10. IANA Considerations

   A BGP attribute code [BGP-4] and a Capability code [BGP-CAP] will be
   needed to be obtained from IANA.

11. Security Considerations

   This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues.

12. Acknowledgements

   This specification combines and extends prior work on "BGP-4 NEXTHOP-v2
   Attribute" by Francois Le Faucheur, Dan Tappan, and Gargi Nalawade, with
   prior work on "BGP Connector Attribute" by Gargi Nalawade, Ruchi Kapoor,
   and David Ward. The current authors wish to thank all these authors for
   their contribution.

   The authors would like to thank Dan Tappan, Chris Metz, Eric Rosen,
   Christian Cassar and Scott Wainner for their feedback, review and comments.



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                     [Page 9]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


13. Normative References

   [BGP-4]  Rekhter, Y. and T. Li (editors), "A Border Gateway Protocol
   4 (BGP-4)", Internet Draft draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-26.txt, April 2005.

   [BGP-CAP] Chandra, R., Scudder, J., "Capabilities Advertisement with
   BGP-4", draft-ietf-idr-rfc2842bis-02.txt, April 2002.

   [BGP-V6-TUNN] Ooms et al., Connecting IPv6 Islands across IPv4 Clouds
   with BGP, draft-ooms-v6ops-bgp-tunnel-00.txt, work in progress.

   [BGP-TUN] Kapoor R., Nalawade G., "BGPv4 Tunnel Encapsulation Attribute",
   June 2008, <draft-kapoor-nalawade-bgp-ssa-04.txt>, Work in Progress.

   [BGP-TUN-SAFI] Nalawade G., Kapoor R., Tappan T., Wainner S. "BGPv4
   Tunnel SAFI", June 2006,
   <draft-nalawade-kapoor-bgp-tunnel-safi-04.txt>, Work in Progress.

   [SW-MESH-FMWK] Metz, C. et al, "A Framework for Softwire Mesh
   Signaling, Routing and Encapsulation across IPv4 and IPv6 Backbone
   Networks", draft-wu-softwire-mesh-framework-00, June 2006.

   [BGP-MOS] Nalawade G., Bhaskar N., Mehta P. "Multicast PE-PE Signaling
   using BGP", June 2006,
   draft-nalawade-bgp-mcast-signaling-001.txt, Work in Progress.

   [MULTI-BGP] Bates et al, Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4, draft-
   ietf-idr-rfc2858bis-02.txt, work in progress.

   [IGP-TE] Vasseur J., Psenak P., Yasukawa S., "OSPF MPLS Traffic
   Engineering Capabilities", Feb 2004, Work in Progress.

   [BGP-VPN] Rosen E., Rekhter Y., "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private Networks
   (VPNs)", RFC 4364

14. Author's Addresses

   Gargi Nalawade
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: gargi@cisco.com

   Pradosh Mohapatra
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: pmohapat@cisco.com

   Francois Le Faucheur



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                    [Page 10]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Village d'Entreprise Green Side - Batiment T3
   400, Avenue de Roumanille
   06410 Biot-Sophia Antipolis
      France
   E-mail: flefauch@cisco.com

   Ruchi Kapoor
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: ruchi@cisco.com

   Pranav Mehta
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: ruchi@cisco.com

   David Ward
   408 St Peter Street, Hamm Bldg
   St Paul, MN, 55102
   E-mail: wardd@cisco.com

   Simon Barber
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   Email: sbarber@cisco.com

   Jianping Wu
   Tsinghua University
   Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   P.R.China
   Phone: +86-10-6278-5983
   Email: jianping@cernet.edu.cn

   Yong Cui
   Tsinghua University
   Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   P.R.China
   Phone: +86-10-6278-5822
   Email: cuiyong@tsinghua.edu.cn

   Xing Li
   Tsinghua University
   Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   P.R.China
   Phone: +86-10-6278-5983



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                    [Page 11]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   Email: xing@cernet.edu.cn


15. Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to rights
   in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


16. Full Copyright Statement


   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights."

   Additional copyright notices are not permitted in IETF Documents
   except in the case where such document is the product of a joint
   development effort between the IETF and another standards development
   organization or the document is a republication of the work of
   another standards organization.  Such exceptions must be approved on
   an individual basis by the IAB.

   "This document and the information contained herein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,



draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                    [Page 12]





Internet Draft draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                     June 2006


   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


17. Expiration Date

   This memo is filed as <draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt>, and
   expires December, 2006.









































draft-nalawade-softwire-nhop-00.txt                                    [Page 13]


