
Network Working Group                                      Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                                    Editor
                                                      Harvard University

               Bylaws for a Protocol Support Organization

                           DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT

                   <draft-iesg-bradner-pso-bl-00.txt>

1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested.  This
   document will expire before February, 1999. Distribution of this
   draft is unlimited.


2. Abstract
   The 'new IANA corporation' (referred to below as 'the Internet
   Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers' (ICANN)) assumes the
   existence of a 'Protocol Supporting Organization' (PSO).  This
   document is a draft set of bylaws for such an organization.

3. Preamble

   The "new IANA corporation" (referred to below as "the Internet
   Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers" (ICANN)) assumes the
   existence of a "Protocol Supporting Organization" (PSO) which has
   three essential functions:

      - providing funding (possibly nominal)
      - appointing three ICANN Board Members



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


      - creating a Protocol Council to advise ICANN

   As written, the ICANN by laws make it difficult for the IETF to
   function itself as the PSO, mainly because the PSO owes some duties
   to ICANN which are at variance with IETF autonomy and could make
   additional demands in the future if the board of ICANN decided to,
   and also because the PSO as described is open to more than one
   standards body if appropriate.

   Subject to approval by the IETF using its normal process, the IAB in
   agreement with the IESG and assisted by the ISOC, proposes to create
   a lightweight PSO to fulfil the above three functions. The intent is
   to create a PSO such that the IETF can continue in practical terms to
   both use the services of the IANA and influence its policies, without
   excluding any other open standards body from the process.

   In the following draft please concentrate on Articles I, II, IV, XI
   and XII.  All the rest is borrowed legal text which has not been
   subject to legal review for this purpose, and may need extensive
   change according to the jurisdiction chosen for the PSO. There is no
   presumption about the jurisdiction except that it needs to be one
   where it is cheap and easy to create non-profit organizations.

    --------------------

4. Draft Bylaws

          DRAFT BYLAWS FOR THE PROTOCOL SUPPORT ORGANIZATION FOR THE
             INTERNET CORPORATION FOR ASSIGNED NAMES AND NUMBERS

                   A Not For Profit Membership Organization

   ARTICLE I: PURPOSE OF ORGANIZATION

      Section 1. PURPOSE OF THE ORGANIZATION

         The purpose of the Protocol Support Organization (PSO) is to:

         a) Provide financial support for the Internet Corporation for
            Assigned Names and Numbers.

         b) Select nominees as required for the board of the Internet
            Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.

         c) Appoint a Protocol Council to advise the Internet
            Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.

      Section 2. LIMITS ON THE ORGANIZATION



Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         The Organization shall not execute any function not directly
         related to its purpose as stated above, shall strive to avoid
         expenditure, and in particular shall not:

         a) Develop policies to be recommended to the board of the
            Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.

         b) Suggest, specify, regulate, oversee or otherwise interfere
            with contracts for services between the Internet Corporation
            for Assigned Names and Numbers and individual technical
            standards or technical specifications development
            organizations, or any other contracts not with the PSO
            itself. Any such contracts are between the parties and not
            under the jurisdiction of the PSO.

         Technical standards, technical specifications or organizational
         procedures developed by individual technical standards or
         technical specifications development organizations are not
         subject to review by the PSO or by Internet Corporation for
         Assigned Names and Numbers.

   ARTICLE II: CLASSES OF MEMBERSHIP

      The Organization shall have four classes of membership:

      a) Class 1: Open, international voluntary technical standard and
         technical specification development organizations which
         contract all or essentially all of the assignment and
         management of protocol parameters, such as port numbers,
         enterprise numbers, and other technical parameters and related
         subjects for all standards produced by the standards
         organization to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
         Numbers.

         An organization shall be considered open and international if
         its standards and specifications development process is open to
         any person of any nationality on equitable terms and if its
         resulting standards and specifications are freely available via
         the Internet. It shall be considered voluntary if it makes no
         claim to compel use of its standards and specifications.

      b) Class 2: Other technical standards and technical specification
         development organizations.

      c) Class 3: Other organizations.

      d) Class 4: Interested individuals.




Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


   ARTICLE III: TRANSPARENCY AND PROCEDURES

      Section 1. GENERAL

         The PSO shall operate to the maximum extent feasible in an open
         and transparent manner and consistent with procedures designed
         to ensure fairness. In addition to the specific procedures set
         forth in these Bylaws, the Initial Board shall investigate the
         development of additional policies and procedures designed to
         provide information about, and enhance the ability of
         interested persons to provide input to, the Board. Any such
         policies and procedures shall be widely publicized by the Board
         in draft form on a publicly-accessible Internet World Wide Web
         site maintained by the PSO (the "Web Site"). Any such policies
         and procedures may be adopted only after a process for
         receiving and evaluating comments and suggestions has been
         established by the Board, and after due consideration of any
         comments or suggestions received by the Board.

      Section 2. ACCESS TO INFORMATION

         The Board shall publish, at least annually, a report describing
         its activities and including an audited financial statement and
         describing any payments made by the PSO to Directors (other
         than reimbursements of expenses). All minutes of meetings of
         the Board and any Committees of the Board shall be made
         publicly available immediately following approval on the Web
         Site and otherwise. Minutes shall be made available immediately
         following approval by the Board; provided, however, that
         minutes relating to personnel or employment matters, legal
         matters (to the extent the Board determines is necessary or
         appropriate to protect the interests of the PSO), matters that
         the PSO is prohibited by law or contract from disclosing
         publicly and other matters that the Board determines are not
         appropriate for public distribution shall not be disclosed. For
         any matters that the Board determines not to disclose, the
         Board shall describe in generic terms the reason for such
         nondisclosure.

      Section 3. NOTICE AND COMMENT PROVISIONS

         The Board shall post on the Web Site (i) periodically a
         calendar of scheduled meetings for the upcoming year, and (ii)
         in advance of each Board meeting, a notice of the fact and time
         that such meeting will be held and, to the extent known, an
         agenda for the meeting. If reasonably practicable the Board
         shall post notices of special meetings of the Board at least
         fourteen (14) days prior to the meetings.



Bradner                                                         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


      Section 4. BOARD RECONSIDERATION

         The Board shall adopt policies and procedures through which a
         party affected by an action of the Board can seek
         reconsideration of any Board action. These policies and
         procedures may include threshold standards or other
         requirements to protect against frivolous or non-substantive
         use of the reconsideration process. The Board may, in its sole
         discretion, provide for an independent review process by a
         neutral third party.

   ARTICLE IV: POWERS

      Section 1. GENERAL POWERS

         a) Except as otherwise provided in these Bylaws the powers of
            the PSO will be exercised, its property controlled and its
            business and affairs conducted by or under the direction of
            the Board. Unless otherwise provided herein or by law, the
            Board, may act by a majority vote of Directors present at
            the meeting, subject to the quorum requirements in Section
            17 of Article 5. Any references herein to a vote of the
            Board shall consider only those members present at the
            meeting unless otherwise provided herein by reference to
            "all of the members of the Board."

         b) The PSO shall not develop or adopt technical standards or
            technical specifications.

         c) The PSO shall not apply its standards, policies, procedures
            or practices inequitably or single out any particular party
            for disparate treatment unless justified by substantial and
            reasonable cause.

         d) The PSO will select nominees as required for the Board of
            the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.

         e) The PSO will appoint a Protocol Council to advise the
            Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.


      Section 2. MEMBERSHIP FEES

         All members will pay annual membership fees for the support of
         the PSO including the support of any fees charged to the PSO by
         the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.  Fees
         for each class of membership shall be set annually by the Board
         at the lowest level consistent with the goals of fully



Bradner                                                         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         recovering the expected costs of the operation of the PSO for
         the coming year and establishing or maintaining reasonable
         reserves for future expenses and contingencies reasonably
         related to the legitimate activities of the PSO for the
         following year.

         The fees to the individual membership classes should not exceed
         an amount commensurate with the ability of the average member
         of the specific class to pay.

   ARTICLE V: STRUCTURE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

      Section 1. NUMBER OF DIRECTORS AND ELECTION OF CHAIR

         a) The authorized number of Directors shall be not less than
         three (3).

         b) The Board shall elect a Chair from among the Directors.

      Section 2. QUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS

         a) The Board shall be comprised of individuals nominated by
            Class 1 members.

         b) Each Class 1 member, using procedures of its own choosing
            shall nominate three (3) Directors.

      Section 3. CONFLICT OF INTEREST

         The Board shall require a statement from each Director not less
         frequently than once a year setting forth all business and
         other affiliations which relate in any way to the business and
         other affiliations of the PSO. Each Director shall be
         responsible for disclosing to the PSO any matter that could
         reasonably be considered to make such Director an "interested
         director" within the meaning of Section 5233 of the California
         Nonprofit Public Benefit PSO Law ("CNPBCL"). In addition, each
         Director shall disclose to the PSO any relationship or other
         factor that could reasonably be considered to cause the
         Director to be considered to be an "interested person" within
         the meaning of Section 5227 of the CNPBCL. The Board may adopt
         a policy specifically addressing Director and Officer conflicts
         of interest. No Director shall vote on any matter in which he
         or she has a material and direct interest that will be affected
         by the outcome of the vote.

      Section 4. DUTIES OF DIRECTORS




Bradner                                                         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         Directors shall serve as individuals who have the duty to act
         in what they reasonably believe are the best interests of the
         PSO and not as representatives of a specific Class 1 member,
         employers or any other organizations or constituencies.

      Section 9. ELECTION AND TERM

         a) Directors shall be elected at each annual meeting of the
            Board to hold office until the end of their terms pursuant
            to the procedures described in this Section. If an annual
            meeting is not held or the Directors are not elected at the
            annual meeting, they may be elected at any special meeting
            of the Board held for that purpose. Each Director, including
            a Director elected to fill a vacancy or elected at a special
            meeting, shall hold office until expiration of the term for
            which elected and until a successor has been elected and
            qualified.

         b) Each Class 1 member shall (i) select the Board members to be
            nominated by that Class 1 member using procedures of its own
            choosing and (ii) notify the Board and the Secretary of the
            PSO in writing of those selections at least 30 days prior to
            the date on which the Board votes on such nominee(s). The
            Board shall elect as Directors the persons properly
            nominated by the Class 1 members.

         c) The regular term of office of a Director shall not exceed
            three (3) years. The three Directors nominated by each Class
            1 member shall each be elected for a term of one (1) year,
            two (2) years, or three (3) years, with each term considered
            to have begun on December 1, 1998, or the anniversary of
            that date, regardless of when those Directors actually take
            office, so as to maintain a total of three (3) Directors per
            Class 1 member.

      Section 10. RESIGNATION

         Subject to Section 5226 of the CNPBCL, any Director may resign
         at any time, either by oral tender of resignation at any
         meeting of the Board (followed by prompt written notice to the
         Secretary of the PSO) or by giving written notice thereof to
         the President or the Secretary of the PSO. Such resignation
         shall take effect at the time specified, and, unless otherwise
         specified, the acceptance of such resignation shall not be
         necessary to make it effective. The successor shall be elected
         pursuant to Section 9 of this Article.

      Section 11. REMOVAL OF A DIRECTOR



Bradner                                                         [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         Any Director may be removed following notice and a two-thirds
         (2/3) majority vote of all members of the Board; provided,
         however, that the Director who is the subject of the removal
         action shall not be entitled to vote on such an action; and
         provided further, that each vote to remove a Director shall be
         a separate vote on the sole question of the removal of that
         particular Director. A Director nominated by a Class 1 member
         can be recommended for removal by that Class 1 member through
         procedures adopted by that Class 1 member. Upon such
         recommendation for removal, the Board shall vote to remove such
         Director. If the Board seeks to remove more than one Director
         nominated by a Class 1 within a four-month period, the Board
         must show reasonable cause for its action.

      Section 12. VACANCIES

         A vacancy or vacancies in the Board of Directors shall be
         deemed to exist in the case of the death, resignation or
         removal of any Director, if the authorized number of Directors
         is increased, if a Class 1 member shall fail to nominate its
         Directors in accordance with Section 9 of this Article, or if a
         Director has been declared of unsound mind by a final order of
         court or convicted of a felony or incarcerated for more than 90
         days as a result of a criminal conviction or has been found by
         final order or judgment of any court to have breached a duty
         under Sections 5230 et seq. of the CNPBCL. Any vacancy
         occurring on the Board of Directors shall be filled in
         accordance with Section 9 of this Article at any meeting of the
         Board occurring after such vacancy. A Director elected to fill
         a vacancy on the Board shall serve for the unexpired term of
         his or her predecessor in office and until a successor has been
         selected and qualified. The replacement need not hold the
         office, if any, of the removed Director. No reduction of the
         authorized number of Directors shall have the effect of
         removing a Director prior to the expiration of the Director's
         term of office.

      Section 13. ANNUAL MEETING OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

         Annual meetings of the Board will be held for the purpose of
         electing Directors, Officers and for the transaction of such
         other business as may come before the meeting. The first annual
         meeting will be held during December 1998 or on such other date
         as may be set by the Board. Each annual meeting will be held at
         a date and location chosen to avoid additional travel and
         expense for Board members. The annual meeting will be open to
         the public to the extent practicable.




Bradner                                                         [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


      Section 14. REGULAR MEETINGS

         To avoid travel and expense there will be no regular meetings
         except the annual meeting.

      Section 15. SPECIAL MEETINGS

         Special meetings of the Board may be called by or at the
         request of one-third (1/3) of the members of the Board or by
         the Chairperson of the Board. A call for a special meeting will
         be made in writing by the Secretary of the PSO.

      Section 16. NOTICE OF MEETINGS

         Notice of time and place of all meetings will be delivered
         personally or by telephone or by electronic mail to each
         Director, or sent by first-class mail (air mail for addresses
         outside the United States) or facsimile, charges prepaid,
         addressed to each Director at the Director's address as it is
         shown on the records of the PSO. In case the notice is mailed,
         it will be deposited in the United States mail at least
         fourteen (14) days before the time of the holding of the
         meeting, and the Secretary of the PSO shall cause each Director
         to be notified by telephone or electronic mail within four (4)
         days after the notice is mailed. In case the notice is
         delivered personally or by telephone or facsimile or electronic
         mail it will be delivered personally or by telephone or
         facsimile or electronic mail at least seven (7) days before the
         time of the holding of the meeting. Notwithstanding anything in
         this Section 16 to the contrary, notice of a meeting need not
         be given to any Director who signed a waiver of notice or a
         written consent to holding the meeting or an approval of the
         minutes thereof, whether before or after the meeting, or who
         attends the meeting without protesting, prior thereto or at its
         commencement, the lack of notice to such Director. All such
         waivers, consents and approvals shall be filed with the
         corporate records or made a part of the minutes of the
         meetings.

      Section 17. QUORUM

         At all annual and special meetings of the Board, a majority of
         the total number of Directors then in office shall constitute a
         quorum for the transaction of business, and the act of a
         majority of the Directors present at any meeting at which there
         is a quorum shall be the act of the Board, unless otherwise
         provided herein or by law. If a quorum shall not be present at
         any meeting of the Board, the Directors present thereat may



Bradner                                                         [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         adjourn the meeting from time to time to another place, time or
         date. If the meeting is adjourned for more than twenty-four
         (24) hours, notice shall be given to those Directors not at the
         meeting at the time of the adjournment.

      Section 18. ACTION BY TELEPHONE MEETING

         Members of the Board or any Committee of the Board may
         participate in a meeting of the Board or Committee of the Board
         through use of conference telephone or similar communications
         equipment, provided that all Directors participating in such a
         meeting can speak to and hear one another. Participation in a
         meeting pursuant to this Section constitutes presence in person
         at such meeting. The PSO shall be required to make available at
         the place of any meeting of the Board the telecommunications
         equipment necessary to permit members of the Board to
         participate by telephone.

      Section 19. ACTION WITHOUT MEETING

         Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Board or a
         Committee of the Board may be taken without a meeting if all of
         the Directors entitled to vote thereat shall individually or
         collectively consent in writing to such action. Such written
         consent shall have the same force and effect as the unanimous
         vote of such Directors. Such written consent or consents shall
         be filed with the minutes of the proceedings of the Board.

      Section 20. ELECTRONIC MAIL

         Communication by electronic mail shall be considered equivalent
         to any communication otherwise required to be in writing. The
         PSO shall take such steps as it deems appropriate under the
         circumstances to assure itself that communications by
         electronic mail are authentic.

      Section 21. RIGHTS OF INSPECTION

         Every Director shall have the right at any reasonable time to
         inspect and copy all books, records and documents of every
         kind, and to inspect the physical properties, if any, of the
         PSO. The PSO shall establish reasonable procedures to protect
         against the inappropriate disclosure of confidential
         information.

      Section 22. COMPENSATION

         The Directors shall receive no compensation for their services



Bradner                                                        [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         as Directors. The PSO will strive to avoid expenditure and will
         not normally reimburse expenses. The Board may, however, in
         exceptional circumstances authorize the reimbursement of actual
         and necessary reasonable expenses incurred by Directors
         performing duties as Directors if an only if they have no other
         source of such reimbursement.

      Section 23. PRESUMPTION OF ASSENT

         A Director present at a Board meeting at which action on any
         corporate matter is taken shall be presumed to have assented to
         the action taken unless his or her dissent or abstention is
         entered in the minutes of the meeting, or unless such Director
         files a written dissent or abstention to such action with the
         person acting as the secretary of the meeting before the
         adjournment thereof, or forwards such dissent or abstention by
         registered mail to the Secretary of the PSO immediately after
         the adjournment of the meeting. Such right to dissent or
         abstain shall not apply to a Director who voted in favor of
         such action.

      Section 24. RULES OF PROCEDURE

         The rules of procedure at meetings of the Board and committees
         of the Board shall be rules contained in "Roberts' Rules of
         Order on Parliamentary Procedure," newly revised, so far as
         applicable and when not inconsistent with these Bylaws, the
         Articles of InPSO or any resolution of the Board.

      Section 25. ANNUAL BUDGET

         The Board shall prepare an annual budget, which shall be
         published on the Web Site.

   ARTICLE VI: COMMITTEES

      The PSO shall have no committees.

   ARTICLE VII: OFFICERS

      Section 1. OFFICERS

         The officers of the PSO will include a Treasurer and Secretary.
         At the discretion of the Board, a General Counsel, one or more
         Vice Chairs, one or more Assistant Secretaries, and one or more
         Assistant Treasurers. Any person may hold more than one office,
         except that the Chairperson of the Board may not serve
         concurrently as the Secretary or the Treasurer.



Bradner                                                        [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


      Section 2. ELECTION OF OFFICERS

         The officers of the PSO will be elected annually by the Board.
         Each such officer shall hold his or her office until he or she
         resigns, is removed, is otherwise disqualified to serve, or his
         or her successor is elected.

      Section 3. REMOVAL OF OFFICERS

         Any Officer may be removed, either with or without cause, by a
         two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of all the members of the Board.
         Should any vacancy occur in any office as a result of death,
         resignation, removal, disqualification or any other cause, the
         Board may delegate the powers and duties of such office to any
         Officer or to any Director until such time as a successor for
         the office has been elected.

      Section 4. CHAIR OF THE BOARD

         The Chair of the Board will be in charge of all of the
         activities and business of the PSO. All other officers and any
         staff shall report to the Chair or his or her delegate. The
         Chair shall report annually to the Board on the current state
         of the PSO and plans for the future. The Chair shall submit to
         the Board the annual budget of the PSO for the next fiscal year
         at least three (3) months prior to the commencement of the
         fiscal year. The Chair will be empowered to call special
         meetings of the Board as set forth herein, and shall discharge
         all other duties as may be required by these Bylaws and from
         time to time may be assigned by the Board.

      Section 5. SECRETARY

         The Secretary shall keep or cause to be kept the minutes of the
         Board in one or more books provided for that purpose, will see
         that all notices are duly given in accordance with the
         provisions of these Bylaws or as required by law, and in
         general perform all duties as from time to time may be
         prescribed by the Board.

      Section 6. TREASURER

         The Treasurer shall be the chief financial officer of the PSO.
         The Treasurer shall have charge and custody of all the funds of
         the PSO and shall keep or cause to be kept, in books belonging
         to the PSO, full and accurate amounts of all receipts and
         disbursements, and shall deposit all money and other valuable
         effects in the name of the PSO in such depositories as may be



Bradner                                                        [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         designated for that purpose by the Board. The Treasurer shall
         disburse the funds of the PSO as may be ordered by the Board
         and, whenever requested by them, shall deliver to the Board an
         account of all his or her transactions as Treasurer and of the
         financial condition of the PSO. The Treasurer shall be
         responsible for the PSO's financial planning and forecasting
         and shall assist the Chair in the preparation of the PSO's
         annual budget. The Treasurer shall coordinate and oversee the
         PSO's funding, including any audits or other reviews of the
         PSO. The Treasurer shall be responsible for all other matters
         relating to the financial operation of the PSO.

      Section 9. COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES

         The Directors and Officers shall receive no compensation for
         their services as Officers. The PSO will strive to avoid
         expenditure and will not normally reimburse expenses. The Board
         may, however, in exceptional circumstances authorize the
         reimbursement of actual and necessary reasonable expenses
         incurred by Officers performing duties as Directors or Officers
         if and only if they have no other reasonable source of such
         reimbursement.

   ARTICLE VIII: INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS, OFFICERS EMPLOYEES AND
      OTHER AGENTS

      It is not expected that the PSO will have any direct employees but
      the PSO shall, to maximum extent permitted by the CNPBCL,
      indemnify each of its agents against expenses, judgments, fines,
      settlements and other amounts actually and reasonably incurred in
      connection with any proceeding arising by reason of the fact that
      any such person is or was an agent of the PSO. For purposes of
      this Article, an "agent" of the PSO includes any person who is or
      was a Director, Officer, employee or any other agent of the PSO;
      or is or was serving at the request of the PSO as a Director,
      Officer, employee or agent of another PSO, partnership, joint
      venture, trust or other enterprise. The Board may adopt a
      resolution authorizing the purchase and maintenance of insurance
      on behalf of any agent of the PSO against any liability asserted
      against or incurred by the agent in such capacity or arising out
      of the agent's status a such, whether or not this PSO would have
      the power to indemnify the agent against that liability under the
      provisions of this Article.

   ARTICLE IX: GENERAL PROVISIONS

      Section 1. CONTRACTS




Bradner                                                        [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         The Board may authorize any Officer or Officers, agent or
         agents, to enter into any contract or execute or deliver any
         instrument in the name of and on behalf of the PSO, and such
         authority may be general or confined to specific instances. In
         the absence of a contrary Board authorization, contracts and
         instruments may only be executed by the following Officers:
         Chair, or the Treasurer. Unless authorized or ratified by the
         Board, no other Officer, agent or employee shall have any power
         or authority to bind the PSO or to render it liable for any
         debts or obligations.

      Section 2. DEPOSITS

         All funds of the PSO not otherwise employed will be deposited
         from time to time to the credit of the PSO in such banks, trust
         companies or other depositories as the Board may select.

      Section 3. CHECKS

         All checks, drafts or other orders for the payment of money,
         notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued in the name of
         the PSO will be signed by such Officer or Officers, agent or
         agents, of the PSO and in such a manner as shall from time to
         time be determined by resolution of the Board.

      Section 4. LOANS

         No loans will be made by or to the PSO and no evidences of
         indebtedness will be issued in its name unless authorized by a
         resolution of the Board. Such authority may be general or
         confined to specific instances; provided, however, that no
         loans will be made by the PSO to its Directors or Officers.

   ARTICLE X: ACCOUNTING YEAR AND TAX AUDIT

      Section 1. ACCOUNTING

         The fiscal year end of the PSO shall be determined by the
         Board.

      Section 2. AUDIT

         At the end of the fiscal year, the books of the PSO will be
         closed and audited by certified public accountants. The
         appointment of the fiscal auditors will be the responsibility
         of the Board.

      Section 3. ANNUAL REPORT AND ANNUAL STATEMENT



Bradner                                                        [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


         The Treasurer shall cause the annual report and the annual
         statement of certain transactions as required by the CNPBCL to
         be prepared and sent to each member of the Board and to such
         other persons as the Board may designate, no later than one
         hundred twenty (120) days after the close of the PSO's fiscal
         year. The annual report and annual statement will also be made
         publicly available, on the Web Site and otherwise.

   ARTICLE XI: SELECTING NOMINEES TO THE BOARD OF THE INTERNET
      CORPORATION FOR ASSIGNED NAMES AND NUMBERS AND APPOINTING THE
      PROTOCOL COUNCIL

      a) The PSO shall nominate individuals for Directors of The
         Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.

      b) Such nominations shall be done whenever there is a vacancy in
         the set of Directors to be nominated by the PSO.

      c) When one or more vacancies occur the Board of the PSO will
         notify each Class 1 member of the vacancies.

      d) Within 30 days each Class 1 member will nominate a person for
         each vacant position using procedures of its own choosing.

      e) The list of nominees will be posted on the PSO Web Site for
         public comment for a period of not less than 30 days.  A
         mailing address shall be maintained to receive any comments.
         This mailing list is private and may only be viewed by the
         Board of the PSO.

      f) Using secret ballot the Board selects nominees to be forwarded
         to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers from
         among the nominations received.

      g) If there are more than one vacancy and the terms of the
         vacancies differ the selected nominee with the most votes will
         be assigned the longer term, the one with the next highest vote
         shall be assigned the next longer term, etc.  A coin toss will
         be used to select the term length in the case of a tie vote.

      h) Each Class 1 member will appoint not more than thirteen (13)
         members to the Protocol Council by a procedure of its own
         choosing and shall notify the Board of the PSO of such
         appointments as and when they are made or expire. The PSO shall
         communicate the resulting membership of the Protocol Council to
         the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers as and
         when it changes. The Protocol Council shall elect its own
         chairperson and adopt its own procedures.



Bradner                                                        [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                 PSO Bylaws                 September 1998


   ARTICLE XII: ICANN PROTOCOL COUNCIL

      From time to time the ICAN Board will ask the ICANN Protocol
      Council to review and comment on proposals before the ICAN Board.
      In these cases the Protocol Council shall solicit input from all
      members of the PSO and take into account their responses in
      forming the Protocol Council's response to the ICANN Board.

   ARTICLE XIII: AMENDMENTS

      Except as otherwise provided in the Bylaws the Bylaws of the PSO
      may be altered, amended, or repealed and new Bylaws adopted only
      upon action by two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of all members of
      the Board, except that these Bylaws shall not be amended until the
      earlier of (i) June 1, 1999, further provided that any provision
      requiring a vote of more than two-thirds (2/3) of all members of
      the Board shall be changed only by such larger vote. These Bylaws
      will be reviewed at least annually, or more often if deemed
      necessary.

5. Acknowledgements

   Much of the boilerplate for these bylaws was borrowed from the draft
   bylaws for the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.

6. Security Considerations

   This type of non-protocol document does not directly effect the
   security of the Internet.

7. Editor's Address

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   1350 Mass Ave, rm 876
   Cambridge, MA
   02138
   USA

   phone: +1 617 495 3864
   sob@harvard.edu










Bradner                                                        [Page 16]
