


Mobility Optimizations: MIPSHOP WG                             W. Haddad
Internet-Draft                                               S. Krishnan
Expires: January 9, 2008                               Ericsson Research
                                                               F. Dupont
                                                                   CELAR
                                                            July 8, 2007


                     Mobility Signaling Delegation
                  draft-haddad-mipshop-mobisig-del-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 9, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).












Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


Abstract

   This memo describes a mechanism which delegates the exchange of
   mobility signaling messages between the mobile and correspondent
   nodes to the network infrastructure.  Goals outlining the proposed
   delegation are to further reduce the IP handoff latency and to
   relieve the mobile node from exchanging a considerable amount of
   signaling messages with correspondent nodes while retaining full
   control on the critical ones.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Suggested Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  New Options and Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13



























Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


1.  Introduction

   Optimized Mobile IPv6 (OMIPv6) protocol (described in [OMIPv6])
   provides a mechanism, which allows significant reduction in the
   amount of signaling messages generated by the Mobile IPv6 protocol
   ([MIPv6]), a shorter handoff latency and a better overall security.
   However, a care-of address (CoA) test exchange between the mobile
   node (MN) and each correspondent node (CN) remains a compulsory step
   prior to exchanging critical mobility signaling messages between
   them, namely binding updates (BU) and acknowledgments (BA) messages.
   The CoA reachability test involves two mobility signaling messages
   (CoTI/CoT) and is unaffected by the optimization introduced by OMIPv6
   protocol.

   This memo describes a mechanism which delegates the exchange of
   mobility signaling messages between the MN and CN(s) to the network
   infrastructure, as part of the ongoing work on designing an
   optimization to the IPv6 secure neighbor discovery (described in
   [SeND]) protocol.  Goals outlining the proposed delegation are to
   further reduce the IP handoff latency and to relieve the MN from
   exchanging a considerable amount of signaling messages with each CN
   while retaining full control on the BU/BA messages.





























Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [TERM].














































Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


3.  Motivation

   OMIPv6 protocol achieves three different goals: it alleviates the
   mobility signaling messages load, improves the overall security and
   reduces the IP handoff latency.

   The latency reduction caused by OMIPv6 is mainly due to eliminating
   the MN's home address reachability test, which requires a signaling
   message exchange through the MN's Home Agent (HA).  Another set of
   factors (excluding the link layer), e.g., network detection, network
   prefix discovery and IP address configuration are still among the
   main contributors to the handoff latency.  These factors remain
   totally unaffected by using OMIPv6.

   In addition, OMIPv6 still require a CoA reachability test with each
   CN, prior to updating them with its new CoA (nCoA), i.e., exchanging
   BU/BA messages.  Consequently, such exchange guarantees a residual
   latency and additional mobility signaling messages.

   Furthermore, it is important to mention that a fast growing class of
   mobile devices tend to have very limited battery power.  Thus, the
   available energy must be meticulously controlled and consumed, i.e.,
   not to be wasted on exchanging non-critical signaling messages.  Such
   requirement becomes more challenging when the MN is talking to
   different CNs at the same time (which may probably be a very common
   case) while moving fast.

   In fact, it has been shown that the wireless transmission of one bit
   can require over 1000 times more energy than a single 32-bit
   computation [EALDC].  Consequently, a fast moving MN communicating
   with multiple CNs will have to dedicate a significant amount of its
   available energy to exchange only mobility signaling messages with
   the CNs.

   OMIPv6 provides a credit-based Authorization (CBA) mechanism, which
   aims to reduce further the latency caused by the care-of address test
   exchange.  However, such mechanism has two drawbacks: the CN may not
   provide this feature, in which case the latency problem remains
   unsolved, and it consumes battery power in both scenarios due to
   exchanging signaling messages (i.e., as they get only delayed).
   Note that the suggested protocol does not prevent both endpoints from
   using the CBA mechanism on top of the suggested protocol.

   On the other side, the Optimized Secure Neighbor Discovery protocol
   (described in [OptiSeND]) is an ongoing work, which aims to better
   adapt the requirements for securing the IPv6 neighbor discovery to
   low computation and battery power devices (e.g., mobile devices and
   sensors).  OptiSeND enables fixed/mobile nodes to avoid using



Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


   expensive RSA signatures to secure neighbor discovery messages
   exchange by providing a mechanism to quickly share a long lifetime
   symmetric key with the AR(s).  On the infrastructure side, OptiSeND
   enables ARs to use one-way hash chains to authenticate the Router
   Advertisement (RtAdv) messages sent to the fixed/mobile node(s)
   attached to the same link.













































Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


4.  Suggested Solution

   Our proposal delegates the task of performing CoA reachability
   test(s) to the network infrastructure, which in turn enables
   eliminating the residual latency due to the CoA rechability test,
   ensures that the messages exchanged are authenticated and optimizes
   the battery power consumption by relieving the MN from performing CoA
   reachability tests.  In fact, our protocol adopts another approach to
   perform reachability tests, which consists on testing the
   reachability of the new MN's 64-bit subnet prefix only instead of
   testing the reachability of the whole nCoA, and thus relies on two
   new messages to perform such test.

   For these purposes, the MN must securely send to the access network
   infrastructure necessary information (called mobility package) to
   enable performing the CoA reachability test(s) on its behalf and to
   forward the mobility package to potential new ARs (nARs).  To achieve
   this goal, a new message called "Router Mobility Solicitation"
   (RtMoSol) is used by the MN to send its mobility package to its
   current AR(s).  The RtMoSol message MUST carry all CNs'IPv6 addresses
   and the MN's IPv6 home address(es) (HoAs) and MUST be authenticated
   with the shared key obtained from OptiSeND.

   Upon receiving a valid RtMoSol message, the selected AR SHOULD reply
   with an authenticated unicast "Router Mobility Acknowledgment"
   (RtMAck) message.  The RtMoSol message content SHOULD be forwarded to
   neighboring ARs and should be stored together with data obtained from
   running OptiSeND protocol.
   The RtMoSol message is also used by the MN to add or delete entries
   from a mobility package stored in the AR cache memory.  For example,
   when the MN establishes a session with a new CN, it SHOULD send a
   RtMoSol message to its current AR and SHOULD set a new bit (called
   Add "A" bit) to request the AR to forward the new CN's IPv6 address
   to potential new AR(s).  Similarily, the MN MAY also set another bit
   (called Suppress "S" bit) to request the AR(s) to remove an existing
   CN's IPv6 address from its list.

   In order to eliminate the residual latency due to performing the CoA
   reachability test, the nAR SHOULD perform the test immediately after
   receiving a first hint (e.g., on layer 2) indicating an attachment of
   the MN (e.g., when using [FRD]) and SHOULD forward the message(s)
   sent by the CN(s) to the MN after it attaches to the nAR.  For this
   purpose, the nAR SHOULD use its source address, which includes the
   prefix advertised on the link and MUST authenticate the message with
   a mobility signaling key (Kms).  We call such message "Prefix Test
   Init" (PreTI).  In addition, the PreTI message MUST carry the MN's
   HoA to allow the CN to fetch/generate the Kms associated with the
   corresponding Binding Cache Entry (BCE) in order to validate the



Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


   message authenticity.

   Upon receiving a valid PreTI message, the CN computes a prefix keygen
   (prekey) token from the prefix used in the IPv6 source address and
   the long lifetime shared secret (i.e., kbmperm) generated from using
   OMIPv6 protocol.  After computing the token, the CN SHOULD send back
   an acknowledgment message called "Prefix Test" (PreT), which carries
   the prekey token to the same IPv6 source address carried in the PreTI
   message.  The PreT message MUST also carry the MN's HoA and MUST be
   authenticated with Kms.

   The Prekey token MUST be computed by the CN in the following way:

   Prekey Token = First [64, SHA1 (SA_Prefix | nonce | SHA1 (Kbmperm))]

   Where SA_Prefix is the 64-bit prefix included in the IPv6 source
   address sent in the PreTI message and Kbmperm is the long lifetime
   shared secret generated by the CN when running OMIPv6 protocol.

   As mentioned above, the prefix reachability test SHOULD be
   authenticated with Kms. In order to do so, Kms SHOULD be computed
   from using the symmetric key generated from running OptiSeND protocol
   and the MN's HoA, and MUST be send encrypted to each CN.  One way to
   achieve a confidential transmission of Kms is to send it encrypted in
   the first BU message sent by the MN.  In such scenario, the MN will
   use its Kbm (computed from running the return routability procedure)
   to encrypt Kms. Finally, Kms will be carried in a new option called
   signaling delegation (SID).

   Upon receiving a BU message carrying a SID option, the CN decrypts
   Kms and stores it in the MN's corresponding BCE.  All subsequent
   reachability test messages SHOULD be sent by the MN's current AR on
   behalf of the MN and SHOULD be authenticated with Kms.


















Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


5.  New Options and Messages

   TBD
















































Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


6.  Security Considerations

   This draft proposes a scheme to delegate mobility signaling from the
   mobile node to the network infrastructure.  Since the network
   infrastructure nodes are well known and trustworthy, it makes
   firewalling easier at the administrative boundaries.  Also, since the
   network infrastructure nodes are likely to have more resources than
   mobile nodes, this scheme will allow us to use higher strength crypto
   to protect the signaling.  This draft does not introduce any new
   security holes into existing route optimization solutions.









































Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [MIPv6]    Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [OMIPv6]   Vogt, C., Arkko, J., and W. Haddad, "Enhanced Route
              Optimization for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, June 2006.

   [SeND]     Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfield, B., Zill, B., and P.
              Nikander, "Secure Neighbor Discovery (SeND)", RFC 3971,
              March 2005.

   [TERM]     Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, BCP , March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [EALDC]    Barr, K. and K. Asanovic, "Energy Aware Lossless Data
              Compression", ACM Proceedings of MobiSys, May 2003.

   [FRD]      Choi, J., Shin, D., and W. Haddad, "Fast Router Discovery
              with L2 Support", Internet
              Draft, draft-ietf-dna-frd-01.txt, June 2006.

   [OptiSeND]
              Haddad, W., Krishnan, S., and J. Choi, "Secure Neighbor
              Discovery (SeND) Optimization: The OptiSeND Protocol",
              Internet Draft, draft-haddad-mipshop-optisend-03.txt,
              July 2007.




















Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Wassim Haddad
   Ericsson Research
   Torshamnsgatan 23
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 8 4044079
   Email: Wassim.Haddad@ericsson.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson Research
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900
   Email: Suresk.Krishnan@ericsson.com


   Francis Dupont
   CELAR

   Email: Francis.Dupont@fdupont.fr

























Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Mobility Signaling Delegation            July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Haddad, et al.           Expires January 9, 2008               [Page 13]

